Gut microbiome variation modulates the effects of dietary fiber on host metabolism

There is general consensus that consumption of dietary fermentable fiber improves cardiometabolic health, in part by promoting mutualistic microbes and by increasing production of beneficial metabolites in the distal gut. However, human studies have reported variations in the observed benefits among individuals consuming the same fiber. Several factors likely contribute to this variation, including host genetic and gut microbial differences. We hypothesized that gut microbial metabolism of dietary fiber represents an important and differential factor that modulates how dietary fiber impacts the host.

We examined genetically identical gnotobiotic mice harboring two distinct complex gut microbial communities and exposed to four isocaloric diets, each containing different fibers: (i) cellulose, (ii) inulin, (iii) pectin, (iv) a mix of 5 fermentable fibers (assorted fiber). Gut microbiome analysis showed that each transplanted community preserved a core of common taxa across diets that differentiated it from the other community, but there were variations in richness and bacterial taxa abundance within each community among the different diet treatments. Host epigenetic, transcriptional, and metabolomic analyses revealed diet-directed differences between animals colonized with the two communities, including variation in amino acids and lipid pathways that were associated with divergent health outcomes.

This study demonstrates that interindividual variation in the gut microbiome is causally linked to differential effects of dietary fiber on host metabolic phenotypes and suggests that a one-fits-all fiber supplementation approach to promote health is unlikely to elicit consistent effects across individuals. Overall, the presented results underscore the importance of microbe-diet interactions on host metabolism and suggest that gut microbes modulate dietary fiber efficacy.

Video abstract video file.(138M, mp4)

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s40168-021-01061-6.

Humans harbor diverse and dynamic microbial communities in their intestines that span the three domains of life [1, 2]. These microbes play key roles on host biology, including breakdown of complex dietary components, vitamin production, energy harvesting, immune system maturation, and protection against pathogens [2–4]. While many microbial functions are shared among gut communities from unrelated individuals, large interpersonal differences have also been reported [1]. Factors such as genetics, environment, and lifestyles contribute to these differences [5, 6]. Identifying the consequences of this variation as it relates to host immune responses, drug effectiveness, and metabolism is key to better understand how microbes modulate human biology and for successful implementation of precision medicine and personalized nutritional strategies.

The studies described above suggest that interindividual differences in the gut microbiota may influence host metabolic responses to dietary fiber in humans. We sought to further examine this hypothesis using a tractable animal model and defined dietary fiber interventions. We colonized genetically identical germ-free (GF) mice with two distinct human fecal communities and fed them isocaloric diets containing different types of fiber. We found that the two transplanted communities elicited divergent metabolic epigenetic and transcriptional responses to the same dietary fiber. Furthermore, differences between mice colonized with these two communities varied depending on the type of fiber the animals consumed. Lastly, we identified candidate taxa and metabolites associated with these host phenotypes.

We sought to identify two human gut communities that upon engraftment in mice exhibit significantly distinct metabolic capacities. We used fecal specimens from a cohort of previously analyzed samples obtained from adults in their mid-seventies [38]. We initially selected eight fecal samples that showed significant compositional differences (Fig. S1A, B) and used them to colonize eight groups of adult male GF C57BL/6 mice (n = 2–4/fecal sample). Mice were fed a semi-purified diet containing an assortment of diverse, commonly consumed, commercially available fibers (i.e., assorted fiber) that included resistant starch (RS) type 2 and 4, short-chain fructo-oligosaccharides (scFOS), inulin, and pectin (total fiber content 10% w/w; Table S1). This diet—as well as all the other diets used in this study, were formulated to mimic human consumption while maintaining a defined and reproducible composition. We used 10% w/w dietary fiber and 35% kcal derived from fat as it is comparable to the intake level of dietary fiber in US adults from 2001 to 2010 based on the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) data [39, 40]. This was calculated by gram of fiber per 1000 kcal intake estimated for humans and adjusted to typical mouse caloric consumption. Animals were placed on this diet 1 week prior to colonization and maintained for two additional weeks after inoculation. Comparison of 16S rRNA gene analysis of cecal samples obtained from transplanted animals clustered by donor (Fig. S1C). Transplanted bacterial communities were more similar to that of their donor than to any other human sample in the dataset (Fig. S1D). Recovery of genera of at least 0.02% relative abundance in at least one of the samples associated with each human subject (i.e., donor and mouse fecal pellets) was 59.2% ± 10.8 (Fig. S1E) and accounted for 85 ± 14% of the relative abundance of the community from the donor (Fig. S1F). The transplanted communities also exhibited differences in alpha diversity (Fig. S1G). Furthermore, as expected from this variation, transplanted communities also differed in their capacity to produce SCFAs (Fig. S2). There was a ~ 4-fold range in the levels of cecal butyrate among the eight groups despite all animals consuming the same diet (Fig. S2A). Butyrate is known to vary widely among humans and has been linked with beneficial health effects on the host [41, 42]. Additionally, we used PICRUSt2 to predict the functional profiles of the 8 transplanted communities using 16S rRNA gene data [43, 44]. Principal coordinates analysis (PCoA) using Bray Curtis dissimilarity (Fig. S3) shows clear separation among most communities suggesting distinct functional capabilities of engrafted microbiomes. Following these analyses, we selected two markedly different communities: samples 1 and 8, from here on referred as SubA (i.e., fecal community from subject A) and SubB (i.e., fecal community from subject B) respectively, based on differences in alpha diversity, predicted metabolic properties, and capacities to produce butyrate, to examine how variation in gut community composition modulate host responses to different types of fiber. The donors of these samples are overweight (BMI = 30), have no history of type II diabetes, cancer, or heart disease, and have self-reported consumption of a standard western-type diet.

Six- to eight-week-old male GF C57BL/6 mice were placed on the assorted fiber diet described above for 1 week, and subsequently colonized via oral gavage with fecal communities SubA or SubB (n = 30–36 mice/community, n = 66). Mice colonized with these two communities were maintained on the same diet for 2 weeks to allow the engrafted microbiomes to stabilize. After this stabilization period, mice colonized with each community were divided into four treatments (Fig.
1) and received one of four isocaloric diets (n = 7–10 mice/community/diet) that differed on the type of fiber they contained: (i) cellulose (non-fermentable fiber), (ii) inulin, (iii) pectin, or (iv) assorted fiber described above (Fig.
1). We selected cellulose as a source fiber that is mostly not accessible to microbes in the mouse gut. This diet served as a control, to define baseline differences between mice colonized with the two communities that were independent of interactions with MACs. We chose inulin and pectin as the former is commonly used as a prebiotic in the USA, while the latter has been proven to support growth of a wide variety of gut microbes [45], and it is commonly used as a dietary supplement. We also chose these two dietary fibers due to their distinct structures, including differences in basic units, linkages, and degree of polymerization. We colonized all mice in the same diet (assorted fiber diet) to favor consistent engraftment of mice inoculated with the same community. Furthermore, the assorted fiber diet has the same total amount of dietary fiber as the rest of the treatment groups used in this study, but with more diversity in fermentable substrates, which we reasoned would support engraftment of taxa relevant to all dietary treatments. Inclusion of this group in the experimental phase of the study also served as a control to inform whether this diet used during the colonization period drives major differences between mice colonized with the two communities used in the study.

We compared metabolic phenotypes of animals colonized with the two different communities consuming each of the diets described above (Table S2). We found significant effects of diet, gut community, and their interaction on host adiposity as determined by epididymal fat pad weight (normalized by body weight) (two-way ANOVA P < 0.01). Diet and community, but not their interaction, also showed significant effect on liver triglycerides (TG) (two-way ANOVA P < 0.05), whereas diet and its interaction with gut community showed a significant effect on serum glucose levels (two-way ANOVA P < 0.05; Table S2). Remarkably, while the pectin diet had an overall beneficial effect on metabolic phenotypes relative to non-fermentable cellulose (i.e., reduced adiposity and liver TG) for SubA-colonized mice, this diet was less favorable for SubB-colonized animals, which showed the strongest benefits on the inulin fiber (Fig.
2, Table S2). We also assessed whether there were significant differences in these phenotypes between mice colonized with the two different communities that were exposed to the same diet through pairwise comparisons using Wilcoxon rank sum test. In the cellulose diet, SubB-colonized mice showed lower levels of adiposity compared to mice colonized with SubA, whereas there were no statistical differences in the levels of liver TG and fasting serum glucose between these groups (Fig.
2). In the inulin diet, mice inoculated with SubB showed decreased adiposity, decreased liver TG, and lower serum levels of fasting glucose relative to animals colonized with SubA. In contrast, pectin-fed mice colonized with SubB accumulated more fat mass relative to SubA-colonized counterparts (Fig.
2a), whereas serum glucose and liver TG were comparable between the two community groups. Lastly, mice colonized with SubB showed significantly lower levels of adiposity than those colonized with SubA in the assorted fiber diet, whereas serum glucose and liver TG were comparable between the two groups (Fig.
2). Altogether, these results underscore the importance of microbe by dietary fiber interactions on host metabolism and suggest that gut microbes modulate responses to dietary fiber.

16S rRNA gene sequences were generated from cecal samples collected from the mice described above (Tables S3 and S4). PCoA of unweighted UniFrac distances—a metric sensitive to taxonomic phylogenetic distances that does not consider abundance—of these samples show a clear clustering by donor community (Fig.
3a) and less by diet, supporting the notion that all four diets support colonization of similar assemblages for both communities. In all diets, mice colonized with the same donor preserved a core of common species that differentiated it from mice colonized with the other community (Fig. S4A). Nevertheless, there were concomitant subtle richness and pronounced abundance variations within each donor community across the different fiber treatments (Fig. S4). PCoA of weighted UniFrac distances between both communities in the four different diet treatments (Fig.
3b) shows that SubA and SubB post-intervention microbiomes (i.e., microbiome in each diet) cluster separately; however, the inulin diet appeared to be the treatment that separated the two communities the most (Fig. S5). Furthermore, the two communities shifted consistently in response to the same fibers (Fig.
3b), suggesting that related taxa from both communities are responding similarly to a given diet and that the different fibers have distinct effects on abundance of the taxa. PERMANOVA on weighted and unweighted UniFrac distances between engrafted microbiomes derived from the two communities for each dietary fiber intervention showed that these are different in all four diet comparisons (P < 0.05). Each diet resulted in a unique set of differences between the two microbial communities and included phyla-level variations. Remarkably, the Firmicutes:Bacteroidetes (F/B) ratio was significantly increased in SubB-colonized mice consuming inulin and assorted fiber relative to SubA-colonized animals in these diets respectively, whereas the F/B ratio was higher in animals colonized with SubA consuming the cellulose diet relative to SubB counterparts, and there was no difference in this ratio between the two communities for mice consuming the pectin diet (Fig. S6A, B).

SubA and SubB were selected based on their distinct abilities to produce butyrate when transplanted to mice fed the assorted fiber diet (Figs. S2 and S9B). While previous work suggests that butyrate has a protective role against metabolic disease [40, 51], comparisons of cecal butyrate levels between mice colonized with the two communities for each diet tested did not fully explain differences in the observed metabolic phenotypes, suggesting that butyrate is not a major contributor to the phenotypic differences observed between SubA- and SubB-colonized mice (Fig. S9B, Fig.
2). However, Pearson correlation analysis across all mice in the study revealed that cecal levels of butyrate were negatively associated with adiposity (r = − 0.4682 P = 0.003); similar results were seen for cecal levels of acetate (r = − 0.3595 P = 0.0266) and total SCFA (r = − 0.3226 P = 0.0483). No significant associations were detected between any of the SCFAs and the other phenotypes measured. These results suggest that while butyrate and potentially acetate may influence adiposity, there are likely other microbial, community-specific, fiber type-dependent metabolites or microbial signals that modulate their effects on this phenotype.

We sought to evaluate the potential mediating role of post-intervention microbiomes in the SubA/B community effects on metabolic outcomes (adiposity, liver TG, and serum glucose) within each diet group. We focused this analysis on the cellulose, inulin, and pectin dietary fiber interventions, as these included a single type of fiber, as opposed to the assorted fiber which included a mixture of several fibers (RS type 2 and 4, scFOS, inulin, and pectin). We first performed association tests between post-intervention microbiomes (beta-diversity) and host metabolic phenotypes using PERMANOVA. In the inulin diet, post-intervention microbiomes showed differences in beta-diversity associated with changes in liver TG (P < 0.05) and glucose phenotypes (P < 0.01), whereas differences between the two microbiomes in pectin-fed mice were associated with variation in the adiposity phenotype (P < 0.05). We then assessed the mediation effect of the gut microbiome in the relationship between communities and host metabolic phenotypes. The distance-based mediation test showed significant mediation effect of overall diversity of microbiome for the glucose outcome in the inulin-fed group (unweighted UniFrac and Jaccard P < 0.05). To identify mediator taxa, we applied a causal mediation model on each internal node of the taxonomy tree (Table S5). For the adiposity outcome, we found the Proteobacteria phylum, the Bacteroidales order, and the Christensenellaceae family as mediators in pectin-fed mice (P < 0.05). For the serum glucose outcome, we found Clostridiales order in inulin-fed mice (P < 0.05). Altogether, these analyses further support the notion that dietary fiber-microbe interactions modulate metabolic phenotypes and highlight potentially relevant taxa.

Gut microbes influence host metabolism at least in part by modulating nutrient availability and through the production of a myriad of metabolites, many of which reach systemic circulation [14–17]. We sought to examine whether the gut microbial differences described above between mice colonized with SubA and SubB in the four diets resulted in changes in host metabolism as assessed by metabolomics of serum samples. We applied ultrahigh-performance liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectroscopy (UPLC–MS/MS) to quantify 774 compounds in serum from the 8 groups of mice described above (6 samples/community/diet) (Table S6). Two-way ANOVA analysis between SubB- and SubA-transplanted mice, identified 1 serum metabolite in the cellulose diet, 235 in the inulin diet, 160 in the pectin diet, and 19 in the assorted fiber diet that showed significant differences between the two communities (P < 0.05, false discovery rate (FDR) adjusted-P < 0.1). A large fraction of these metabolites also showed a significant diet by community interaction (P < 0.05; Table S6). For the purpose of generating hypotheses, all metabolites showing P < 0.05 were used for further analyses. Animals consuming inulin and pectin diets showed the largest number of significant changes in biochemicals between the two communities. Inspection of the differentially abundant biochemicals within each diet revealed diet-specific changes in metabolites related to amino acids and lipid metabolic pathways, including alanine-aspartate, histidine, lysine, tyrosine, leucine-isoleucine-valine, urea cycle: arginine and proline, methionine-cysteine-taurine, fatty acids, endocannabinoid, and sphingolipid metabolic pathways (Fig.
4, Table S6). These results support the notion that consumption of dietary fiber elicits individual responses on blood metabolites that are influenced by differences in the gut microbiome.

We tested whether levels of serum metabolites were associated with host metabolic outcomes. We used the dynamic tree cut method in weighted correlation network analysis (WGCNA, Fig. S10; Table S7) to define modules of tightly correlated serum metabolites. The associations between these modules and host metabolic phenotypes are shown in Fig.
5a. Candidate biochemicals that belong to these enriched pathways are listed in Table S6. The turquoise module is positively correlated with adiposity (r = 0.66, P = 8e−07), liver TG (r = 0.43, P = 0.003), and serum glucose (r = 0.45, P = 0.002), whereas the blue module yielded negative correlations with adiposity (r = − 0.47 P = 0.001) and liver TG (r = − 0.38 P = 0.01). The red module showed highest association with the glucose phenotype (r = 0.46 P = 0.002). Pathway enrichment analysis revealed significant over-representation of metabolites related to sphingomyelins, phosphatidylcholine (PC), and hexosylceramides pathways in the turquoise module whereas the blue module was enriched for metabolites in the gama-glutamyl amino acid, branched-chain amino acid (BCAA), urea cycle, glutamate, lysine and tryptophan pathways and the red module in fatty acid metabolism (acyl glycine), purine metabolism ((Hypo)Xanthine/Inosine containing), and acetylated peptides (Fig.
5b).

BCAAs were also enriched in the blue module and detected at higher levels in SubB-colonized mice in the inulin diet compared to SubA-colonized animals. Previous reports indicated that BCAAs upregulate glucose transporters and activate insulin secretion [57, 58]. However, there is also evidence that leucine and isoleucine have a negative impact on metabolic health [59, 60], and several studies have suggested that excessive intake of amino acids could lead to inhibition of insulin signaling [61]. Additionally, the bacterial metabolite derived of tryptophan, indolepropionate [62], which we detected at significantly higher levels in mice colonized with the SubB community consuming inulin relative to SubA counterparts, has been previously associated with increased dietary fiber intake and linked to reduced risk of low-grade inflammation [63] and improved glucose homeostasis [64]. Mice fed the cellulose diet showed virtually no differences in the metabolites enriched in this module. Gamma-glutamyl amino acids were also highly enriched in the blue module. Gamma-glutamyl dipeptides are also involved in glutathione (GSH) metabolism, which plays an important role in antioxidant defense, and are produced when gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase catalyzes the transfer of the gamma-glutamyl moiety of glutathione to amino acids. Gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase is expressed in several mammalian tissues and in bacteria [65, 66]. While the role of these metabolites on metabolic health remains poorly understood, a recent study showed gamma-glutamyl amino acids γ-glutamyl cysteine and γ-glutamyl valine inhibit TNF-α signaling in intestinal epithelial cells and reduce inflammation [67]. Overall, these results suggest that circulating levels of sphingolipids, amino acids, and gamma-glutamyl dipeptides are impacted by interactions between microbes and dietary fibers. Interestingly, these circulating metabolites also showed significant correlations with cecal levels of acetate and butyrate (Fig. S11). While further studies are needed to assess the role of these two SCFAs in modulating the abundance of systemic metabolites, both acetate and butyrate are known to impact many facets of metabolism via interactions with G-protein coupled receptors present in the gut and in the periphery [20].

To identify bacterial taxa associated with metabolites, we applied a log-contrast model with metabolites as the response. The association analysis linking taxa and metabolite super-pathways show that the Firmicutes phylum is involved in most associations, followed by Bacteroidetes (Fig.
6). Interestingly, the genus Anaerotruncus is negatively associated with metabolites of the lipid super-pathway that includes fatty acids (long-chain saturated and unsaturated, and branched), lysophospholipids, and monacylglycerol. This genus is also positively associated with metabolites of the amino acid and the nucleotide super-pathways, including lysine, glycine, arginine-proline metabolism, and the purine and pyrimidine. Ruminococcus (Ruminococcaceae) is negatively associated with metabolites of the amino acid and the lipid super-pathways, including BCAA, glutamate and tryptophan metabolism, fatty acids, purine, and gamma-glutamyl amino acid, whereas Parabacteroides is negatively associated with metabolites in the arginine-proline and dihydroxy fatty acid pathways. Interestingly, Anaerotruncus and Ruminococcus (Ruminococcaceae), along with Parabacteroides, showed significantly higher relative abundance in mice colonized with the SubA community in the inulin diet, which exhibit higher adiposity, liver TG, and glucose compared to mice in the same diet colonized with the SubB community (P < 0.01; Fig. S8).

The Rikenellaceae family showed a strong positive association with tryptophan and tyrosine metabolism and a negative association with BCAA metabolism. Interestingly, Rikenellaceae and Ruminococcaceae were also positively correlated with cecal levels of BCFAs—the end products of bacterial BCAA catabolism (Fig. S12). The relative abundance of Rikenellaceae was significantly increased in SubA-colonized mice consuming cellulose, inulin, and assorted fiber and in SubB-colonized mice consuming pectin, which exhibited worse metabolic outcomes relative to the other community in their respective diets. This is consistent with previous reports describing increased abundance of Rikenellaceae in leptin-resistant obese and diabetic mice [68, 69]. Moreover, we found this family was positively associated with genes in the glycerophospholipid metabolic process, which generates lipids that can be packed in very low-density lipoproteins [70]. The Bacteroides genus showed a strong negative correlation with gamma-glutamyl amino acids, and it was detected at significantly higher levels in SubA-colonized animals except when animals were fed pectin (P < 0.05). Eubacterium was negatively associated with plasmalogens and positively associated to purine metabolism. As discussed above, this genus was also more abundant in SubA-colonized mice consuming inulin diet relative to SubB-colonized counterparts, and in SubB-colonized mice consuming pectin diet relative to SubA-colonized animals in the same diet. In both cases, the increased levels of Eubacterium were associated with less favorable metabolic outcomes (Fig.
2 and Fig. S8). Altogether, these results link changes in levels of bacterial taxa differentially represented in the two communities across the different diets with alterations in systemic levels of metabolites and host metabolic phenotypes.

The liver receives a large fraction of its blood supply through the portal circulation, which is the direct venous outflow of the intestine. As such, the liver is continuously exposed to gut microbial-derived products, including SCFAs and bacterial toxins [71]. Differences in abundance of microbial metabolites, including SCFAs, have been linked to changes in global host epigenetic states and gene expression [72]. Epigenetic states of chromatin are reflected in the covalent post-translational modifications (PTMs) on histone proteins. We found that colonization of mice with SubA and SubB communities affected covalent post-translational modifications (PTMs) on histone proteins (Supporting information, Figs. S13 and S14). To test directly whether these differences were linked to changes in hepatic gene expression, we performed RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) analysis. Tests of differential gene expression yielded larger number of significantly regulated genes between the two communities for the inulin and pectin dietary interventions (Fig.
7), while cellulose-fed mice showed the least number of differences. Only 26 genes were differentially expressed between the two communities in cellulose-fed mice, compared to 228 genes in inulin, 123 in pectin, and 48 in the assorted fiber diets (P < 0.05 and FDR adjusted-P < 0.05; Fig.
7a, Table S9).

In the pectin diet, mice colonized with SubB expressed higher levels of genes involved in cofactor, vitamins, and nucleotide metabolism; fatty acid metabolism, oxidoreductase activity, carbohydrate and valine, leucine and isoleucine metabolism (Fig.
7b, Table S10). These include six genes encoding cytochrome P450, some of which are known to play important roles in the synthesis of steroid hormones (Cyp2a4, Cyp17a1) and xenobiotic metabolism (Cyp2a5) [73, 74]. Surprisingly, SubA-colonized animals in the pectin diet—which show lower levels of adiposity (Fig.
2a) relative to SuB-colonized mice—exhibited higher levels of expression of genes involved in immune system process, inflammatory response, phagocytic cup and vesicle cellular component, cytokine receptor activity and binding, and infection pathways. Previous work has shown that the overall health effects of consumption of MACs such as inulin and pectin can be context dependent. Long-term consumption of pectin or inulin by Toll-like receptor 5 (TLR5) KO mice, which show innate immune deficiencies and gut microbiome alterations, results in liver inflammation and hepatocellular carcinoma [75]. Altogether, these results suggested that the gut microbiome is a differential factor that modulates hepatic gene expression. Furthermore, data suggests that the impact of the gut microbiome on liver gene expression is influenced by the type of dietary fiber consumed.

WGCNA was applied to the normalized read count data obtained from RNA-Seq analysis. Fourteen gene modules, each clustering highly co-expressed genes, were identified (each module was assigned a different color; Fig. S15, Table S11). We performed correlation analysis between the phenotypic data and the calculated eigengene—defined as the first principal component of the expression matrix of the corresponding module—for each module identified (Fig.
8a). The blue module and adiposity showed the strongest association (r = 0.74, P = 2e−07). We narrowed down possible relevant genes contributing to this module by performing biological process GO and KEGG pathway analysis enrichment (Fig.
8b, c). In total, 614 out of the 677 transcripts in the blue module mapped into biological process gene ontology. These showed significant enrichment in several processes including the fatty acid metabolic process, acute inflammatory response, long-chain fatty acid, and unsaturated fatty acid metabolic process (P < 0.05 and FDR adjusted-P < 0.05). Pathway enrichment analysis of 266 genes with KEGG annotation in this module yielded significant enrichment in pathways that included PPAR signaling, inflammatory mediator regulation of transient receptor potential (TRP) channels, fatty acid degradation, and linoleic acid metabolism (P < 0.05 and FDR adjusted-P < 0.05).

When only considering genes in the blue module with significant positive association to each phenotype, we observed 209, 151, and 107 genes for adiposity, liver TG, and glucose, respectively (P < 0.05). The GO biological process analysis for this set of genes in the blue module showed that throughout the measured phenotypes, the fatty acid metabolic process was the gene ontology with more gene counts, followed by long-chain fatty acid metabolic process, xenobiotic metabolic process, and epoxygenase P450 pathway. The statistically significant (P < 0.05 and FDR adjusted-P < 0.05) enriched KEGG pathways associated with the measured phenotypes were retinol metabolism, chemical carcinogenesis, PPAR signaling pathway, steroid hormone biosynthesis, linoleic acid metabolism, biosynthesis of unsaturated fatty acids, and fatty acid elongation. Nucleoside, ribonucleoside and purine nucleoside bisphosphate metabolic process, and fatty acid degradation are the GO terms and KEGG pathways that were enriched in the association with adiposity and liver TG (Fig. S16), whereas inflammatory mediator regulation of TRP channels and pyruvate metabolism pathways are enriched among the genes associated with glucose levels.

The association analysis linking taxa and liver gene expression modules showed that the Firmicutes phylum is involved in most associations, followed by Bacteroidetes (Fig.
9). Interestingly, Anaerotruncus cluster has the highest number of gene associations (334), followed by Alistipes (105), Butyricimonas (58), and Christensenellaceae (49) (Table S12). This association network revealed an overall positive association between Anaerotruncus with genes belonging to the lipid metabolic process, and a negative association with genes belonging to purine ribonucleotide and nucleoside metabolic process, cholesterol biosynthetic process, cellular lipid, fatty acid and phospholipid biosynthetic process, and response to cytokines. Interestingly, serum metabolomics data shows an overall negative association of this genus with metabolites of the lipid super-pathway (Fig.
6), suggesting that these taxa may play a role in host lipid metabolism. Alistipes was positively associated with genes in the lipoprotein biosynthetic process clustered in the turquoise module, whereas Butyricimonas was overall negatively associated with immune system processes. Previous work has found the Anaerotruncus and Alistipes genera enriched in genetically obese (ob/ob) mice exhibiting severe glycolipid metabolism disorders relative to wild type and ob/ob mice consuming inulin with improved metabolic parameters [76, 77]. Abundance of these two genera was also linked with consumption of high-fat diets in humans [78–80]. Altogether, these studies suggest that Anaerotruncus and Alistipes may directly or indirectly contribute to the metabolism of dietary fats and fiber types and community context influence this dynamic. Furthermore, the strong correlations between intestinal microbes, hepatic gene expression, and host metabolic phenotypes provide potential connections between dietary fiber-microbes-health that warrant further examination.

Human and mouse studies encompassing genetically diverse populations have shown that host’s genetic variation impacts all facets of physiology including responses to diet [81]. However, it is now clear that these populations also contain a significant amount of genetic variation derived from their largely individual associated microbiomes. Previous work in humans showed that dietary supplementation of resistant starch increases fecal butyrate levels, but with remarkable interindividual variation [50]. Furthermore, a recent study suggested that individual gut microbiota differences can be used to predict post-prandial glycemic responses to specific foods [82]. While these studies provide strong support to the notion that the gut microbiome is a major source of variability that influences responses to diet, dissecting the effects of microbial vs. host genetic variation while controlling environmental exposure is practically impossible to achieve in human studies. Modeling this variation in GF mice provides the opportunity to unravel the effects of host genetics from environmental and microbial exposures allowing the discovery of causal relationships between microbes and host phenotypes [76, 77]. Using this approach, we demonstrate that consumption of the same dietary fiber by genetically identical mice harboring different human-derived microbiomes can lead to different host metabolic outcomes (Fig.
2). Remarkably, these phenotypic responses varied as a function of the type of fiber present in the diet and were associated with changes in cecal and blood metabolites, and hepatic gene expression.

A major limitation of the study is that only two communities were compared. While these showed clear organismal and functional differences (Figs. S1 and S3) and elicited distinct host metabolic phenotypes, they likely capture a small fraction of the variability observed among human gut microbiomes. Expanding this study to include a wider range of communities, including samples from subjects with extreme diets, markedly different lifestyles, or different health status may expand the range of responses to dietary fiber mediated by gut microbes. Additionally, our study did not characterize the degree to which each of the fibers was metabolized by the two communities. Identifying gut signatures associated with desired health outcomes in response to specific fibers may reveal biomarkers of beneficial diet-microbiome interactions that guide personalized nutrition approaches. In conclusion, the present study underscores the importance of the gut microbiome as a differential factor that contributes to individual variation in metabolic responses to dietary fiber.

The four diets used during this study contained 35% kcal fat, 20% kcal protein, 45% kcal carbohydrate, and different fiber type which equals 10% weight. A non-fermentable fiber, cellulose (Solka Floc), was used as control while inulin [Oliggo-Fiber Inulin instant (100010911); Cargill, Minneapolis, MN], pectin (PE1006; Gojira Fine Chemicals, LLC, Bedford Height, OH), and a formulation of assorted fibers which contained 23.4 g/kg inulin, 21.5 g/kg short-chain fructooligosaccharide (i.e., scFOS, NUTRAFLORA®, Ingredion Inc., Westchester, IL), 33.3 g/kg resistant starch type 2 (HI-MAIZE® 260, Ingredion Inc., Westchester, IL), 23.5 g/kg resistant starch type 4 (Fibersym®, MPG, Atchison, KS), 23.5 pectin, as sources of fermentable fibers (Table S1). Experimental diets were manufactured and sterilized via irradiation by Envigo (10% cellulose diet; TD.170720, 10% inulin diet; TD.170721, 10% pectin diet; TD.170725, and assorted fiber diet; TD.170726).

All experiments involving gnotobiotic mice were performed under protocols approved by the University of Wisconsin-Madison Animal Care and Use Committee. All germ-free (GF) C57BL/6 mice were maintained in a controlled environment in plastic flexible film gnotobiotic isolators under a strict 12-h light/dark cycle and received sterilized water and chow (LabDiet 5021; LabDiet, St. Louis, MO) ad libitum. A week prior to colonization, mice were switched to the assorted fiber diet. GF status of mice was confirmed prior to starting the experiment using culture-dependent methods. No turbidity was observed when feces collected from the mice were inoculated in a panel of rich media and incubated at 37 °C aerobically and anaerobically for a week.

Richness and diversity metrics (i.e., alpha and beta) obtained from previous publication [38] plus Faith’s phylogenetic diversity (calculated using QIIME 2 [86]) were used to describe 8 Wisconsin Longitudinal Study (WLS) samples selected for this study [87]. All donors were adults between 70 and 82 years old, (6 men, 2 women) with reported body mass index interval was between 23 and 38. Fecal suspensions were prepared under anaerobic conditions in Hungate tubes. A ~ 0.5-cm piece of frozen fecal aliquot straw technique (FAST) straw material were resuspended in 5 ml mega media as previously described [16, 88]. Adult 6–8-week-old male C57BL/6 GF mice (total n = 23) were inoculated by oral gavage with ~ 200 μl of fecal suspension (n = 2–4 mice/sample), after being fed with an assorted fiber diet (see below) for a week in sealed positive pressure individually ventilated cages (IVCs; Allentown). Each cage contained 2–4 mice. Upon inoculation, mice were maintained on the same assorted fiber diet for 2 more weeks. Cecal contents were collected for SCFAs and 16S rRNA gene sequencing analysis from each of the 8 gnotobiotic groups.

The two fecal communities exhibiting the highest (SubB) vs. lowest (SubA) butyrate-producing activity were then selected for subsequent experiments. Both samples belonged to individuals of the same sex (males), similar age (76.5 ± 1 years old), BMI = 30, and with no history of diabetes, cancer, or heart disease. Three-day diet recall indicates that both subjects consumed a typical western diet. Fecal samples from SubA and SubB were inoculated into 7–9-week-old GF male mice (n = 30–36 mice/community) consuming assorted fiber diet as described above. All gnotobiotic mice continued with the same irradiated assorted fiber diet for two more weeks (stabilization period). Bedding and wires with food were exchanged between cages of mice colonized with the same community to minimize cage effects. Mice were then switched to one of the four diets described above: cellulose, inulin, pectin, and assorted fiber (n = 7–10 mice/community/diet), and maintained in these diets for another 4 weeks. Animals were euthanized after 4 h of fasting.

Cecal levels of SCFAs were measured as previously described [19]. Briefly, a mixture of 10 μl of internal standards (200 mM for mice and 20 mM for human each; acetic acid-D4, Sigma-Aldrich no. 233315; propionic acid-D6, Sigma-Aldrich no. 490644; and butyric acid-D7, CDN isotopes no. D-171) was subsequently added, followed by 20 μl of 33% HCl and 1 ml diethyl ether. The vials were sealed, vortexed vigorously for 3 min, and then centrifuged (4000g, 10 min). The upper organic layer was transferred to another vial and a second diethyl ether extraction was performed. After combining the 2 ether extracts, a 60 μl-aliquot was removed, combined with 2 μl N-tert-butyldimethylsilyl-N-methyltrifluoroacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich no. 394882) in a GC auto-sampler vial with a 200 μl glass insert, and incubated for 2 h at room temperature. Derivatized samples (1 μl) were injected onto an Agilent 7890B/5977A GC/MSD instrument with an Agilent DB1-ms 0.25 mm × 60 m column with a 0.25-μm bonded phase. A discontinuous oven program was used starting at 40 °C for 2.25 min, then ramping at 20 °C min−1 to 200 °C, then ramping at 100 °C min−1 to 300 °C and holding for 7 min. The total run time was 18.25 min. Linear column flow was maintained at 1.26 ml min−1. The inlet temperature was set to 250 °C with an injection split ratio of 15:1. Acquisition B.07.02.1938. The m/z values of monitored ions in mice cecal measurements were as follows: 117 (acetic acid), 120 (acetic acid-D4), 131 (propionic acid), 136 (propionic acid-D6), 145 (butyric acid), and 152 (butyric acid-D7). Concentrations were normalized to milligrams of cecal contents.

Levels of BCFA were quantified in cecal samples collected from mice exposed to the four different diets used in the study (n = 66; n = 7–10 per community/dietary fiber intervention) using the headspace GC analysis method. Frozen, weighed samples (~ 70 mg) were added to chilled 20-ml headspace vials (Restek, Bellefonte, PA) containing 2.0 g NaHSO4, distilled water (300 μl—sample weight), and 1.0 ml of 60 μM 2-butanol (internal standard; added just prior to the sample). Vials were crimp sealed immediately after sample addition and vortexed periodically to disperse and mix the contents. Headspace GC analyses were performed using a Shimadzu (Columbia, MD) HS-20 headspace sampler connected to a Shimadzu GC-2010 Plus GC equipped with a SH-Stabilwax column (30 m, 0.25 mm ID, 0.10 μm df) linked to a FID. Samples were equilibrated with shaking to 80 °C for 20 min, pressurized to 80 kPa for 3 min prior to column injection (2 ml injection loop, load time 0.2 min, sample and transfer line temperature 150 °C, 1:15 split ratio, N2 column flow 1.2 ml/min), with a column temperature program starting at 40 °C/2 min, increased to 200 °C (20 °C/min), held 2 min, decreased to 120 °C (20 °C/min), decreased to 40 °C (40 °C/min), and stabilized 1 min prior to the subsequent injection. The GC cycle time was approximately 23 min. Standard mixtures were prepared and analyzed by the same method, and peak areas determined using Shimadzu Lab Solution software (version 5.92), with adjustment for fecal sample size.

Blood was collected via cardiac puncture of anesthetized mice following a 4-h fast. Serum was obtained by centrifugation and stored at − 80 °C. Cecal contents, liver, and gonadal fat pads were collected at the time of euthanasia, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at − 80 °C until analysis. Glucose was measured using ultrahigh-performance liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectroscopy (UPLC–MS/MS) by Metabolon.

Liver triglycerides (TG) were quantified as previously described [19, 89]. Briefly, between 30 and 40 mg of frozen liver tissue was homogenized in 30 ml of 2:1 chloroform:methanol and disrupted using a bead beater (BioSpec Products, Barlesville, OK; maximum setting for 6 min at room temperature). Samples were incubated overnight at 4 °C with gentle agitation and 1 ml of 4 mM MgCl was added for phase separation. The organic solvent (500 μl) was left to evaporate overnight and the dried lipids were reconstituted in 200 μl butanol:triton- × 114 mix (3:2 vol:vol). TG content was determined by colorimetric assay from Sigma (Sigma, F6428), according to the manufacturer’s instructions and expressed in nanomole per gram of wet tissue for final concentration.

To assess differences on metabolic phenotypes measured between microbiota communities within each dietary intervention and between the same microbiota across different diets, we performed a nonparametric test and use permutation approach to obtain the P value for two-group comparison through Wilcoxon rank sum test. Homogeneity of variance was tested using Levene’s test (P > 0.05) previous to performing a two-way ANOVA to investigate the effect of dietary intervention, transplanted microbiota community, and their interaction on each phenotype (P < 0.05).

Genomic DNA was extracted from cecal contents using a bead-beating protocol [76]. Briefly, ~ 50 mg of fecal pellet sample were resuspended in a solution containing 500 μl of extraction buffer [200 mM Tris:HCl (pH 8.0), 200 mM NaCL, 20 mM EDTA], 210 μl of 20% SDS, 500 μl phenol:chloroform:isoamyl alcohol (pH 7.9, 25:24:1) (Invitrogen 15593-049), and 500 μl of 0.1-mm diameter zirconia/silica beads. Samples were mechanically disrupted using a bead beater (BioSpec Products, Barlesville, OK; maximum setting for 3 min at room temperature), followed by centrifugation, recovery of the aqueous phase with 60 μl 3 M NaAcetate, and precipitation with isopropanol. QIAquick 96-well PCR Purification Kit was used to remove contaminants. Isolated DNA was eluted in 10 mM Tris (pH 8.0) buffer and was stored at − 20 °C until further use.

PICRUSt2 was used to predict functional content or microbiome 16S rRNA genes [43, 44] using QIIME2 generated data. An even sampling depth of 3,919,286 gene counts was used to rarefy all samples to further analyze diversity using Bray Curtis analysis.

Untargeted mass spectrometry data was collected at Metabolon Inc from 100 μl serum samples of 6 randomly selected mice in each treatment. The 48 samples were prepared using the automated MicroLab STAR system (Hamilton Company). Recovery standards were added and protein, dissociate small molecules bound to protein or trapped in the precipitated protein matrix were removed. To recover chemically diverse metabolites, proteins were precipitated with methanol under vigorous shaking for 2 min (Glen Mills GenoGrinder 2000) followed by centrifugation. The resulting extract was divided into five fractions: two for analysis by two separate reverse-phase UPLC–MS/MS methods with positive ion mode electrospray ionization (ESI), one for analysis by reverse-phase UPLC–MS/MS with negative ion mode ESI, one for analysis by HILIC/UPLC–MS/MS with negative ion mode ESI, and one sample was reserved for backup. Samples were placed briefly on a TurboVap (Zymark) to remove the organic solvent. The sample extracts were stored overnight under nitrogen before preparation for analysis.

All methods utilized a Waters ACQUITY ultra-performance liquid chromatography system and a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive high-resolution/accurate mass spectrometer interfaced with a heated ESI source and an Orbitrap mass analyzer operated at 35,000 mass resolution. The sample extract was dried and then reconstituted in solvents compatible to each of the four methods. Each reconstitution solvent contained a series of standards at fixed concentrations to ensure injection and chromatographic consistency. One aliquot was analyzed using acidic positive ion conditions, chromatographically optimized for more hydrophilic compounds. In this method, the extract was gradient eluted from a C18 column (Waters UPLC BEH C18-2.1 × 100 mm, 1.7 μm) using water and methanol, containing 0.05% perfluoropentanoic acid and 0.1% formic acid. Another aliquot was also analyzed using acidic positive ion conditions; however, it was chromatographically optimized for more hydrophobic compounds. In this method, the extract was gradient eluted from the same aforementioned C18 column using methanol, acetonitrile, water, 0.05% perfluoropentanoic acid, and 0.01% formic acid and was operated at an overall higher organic content. Another aliquot was analyzed using basic negative ion optimized conditions using a separate dedicated C18 column. The basic extracts were gradient eluted from the column using methanol and water, amended with 6.5 mM ammonium bicarbonate at pH 8. The fourth aliquot was analyzed via negative ionization following elution from a HILIC column (Waters UPLC BEH Amide 2.1 × 150 mm, 1.7 μm) using a gradient consisting of water and acetonitrile with 10 mM ammonium formate, pH 10.8. Raw data was extracted, peak-identified, and QC processed using Metabolon’s hardware and software. Compounds were identified by comparison to library entries of purified standards or recurrent unknown entities based on retention time/index, mass to charge ratio (m/z), and chromatographic data, and peaks were quantified using area-under-the-curve.

The dataset comprises a total of 774 biochemicals. Metabolic profiles were quantified in terms of relative abundance and median scaled to 1. Following log transformation and imputation of missing values, if any, with the minimum observed value for each compound, two-way ANOVA contrast were used to identify biochemicals that differed significantly between experimental groups. An FDR adjusted-P value (i.e., q-value) is calculated to take into account the multiple comparisons that normally occur in metabolomic-based studies, and all metabolites with q-value < 0.05 were included.

Mouse liver tissue samples were submitted to the University of Wisconsin Biotechnology Center (UWBC) Gene Expression Center for total RNA extraction. In a 96-well format, tissue samples were lysed using QIAzol Lysis Reagent (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) and the TissueLyser. Following phase separation by centrifugation, the aqueous phase was recovered, ethanol was added, and the solution was added to an RNeasy 96 Universal Tissue plate. Plate was processed following the RNeasy 96 Universal Tissue protocol. An on-column DNase treatment step was included. RNA was eluted in nuclease-free water. Each sample was quantified and analyzed on a NanoDrop One Spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and Agilent 2100 Bioanalzyer (Santa Clara, CA, USA) for purity and integrity, respectively.

High-quality reads were obtained after removal of adaptor sequences and high content of unknown bases. Filtered reads were mapped to mouse genome reference GRCm38.p6 from Ensemble (release 97) database using Spliced Transcripts Alignment to Reference tool (STAR, v2.7.2a). Further quantification of mapped transcript reads to the reference was performed using featureCounts tool (v1.6.4). Readcount data was analyzed for differential gene expression using edgeR Bioconductor package (version 3.28.0) performing the generalized linear model quasi-likelihood F-test from empirical Bayes methods to estimate gene-specific biological variation [96]. Quasi-likelihood method accounts for uncertainty in dispersion estimation, therefore, gives stricter error rate control which makes it ideal for differential expression analyses of our RNA-seq data [96]. Filtering of low expressed genes was performed by keeping counts in a minimum number of samples computed through the built-in function “filterByExpr”. Normalization for RNA composition effect was performed in order to compare relative changes in expression levels between conditions using trimmed mean of M-values (TMM) between each pair of samples [97]. Biological and technical variability estimation was performed by analyzing sample replicates. Negative binomial generalized linear models were fitted and tagwise dispersion estimates were obtained using Cox-Reid profile-adjusted likelihood method in order to determine differential expression. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were obtained after filtering by logarithmic fold-change 1 and − 1, P value 0.05, and false discovery rate (FDR adjusted-P) 0.05, yielding 55,573 genes in total. Gene Ontology (GO) functional enrichment analysis for biological process (BP), cellular component (CC), molecular function (MF), and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways was obtained as part of the downstream procedure to interpret the differential expression of genes. We performed Gene Ontology and KEGG pathways enrichment analyses for the differentially expressed genes. The resulting gene representation data was then filtered to include only GO terms or KEGG pathways with at least 10 annotated genes; a minimum of 5 genes that were significantly regulated and a P value (≥ 5).

Tissue fractionation and histone acid extraction was performed using previously published protocols [72, 98]. Briefly, 50–100 mg of frozen mice liver tissue (n = 32, 4 samples per treatment) was dounce-homogenized on ice in a hypotonic lysis buffer containing histone deacetylase and protease inhibitors, followed by the centrifugation to pellet nuclei. Histones were acid extracted, and a Bradford assay was performed to quantify protein yield. In total, 5 μg of dried histone extract was then subjected to hybrid chemical derivatization [99] using heavy acetic anhydride. This procedure was followed by trypsinization for 4 h and derivatization of newly generated peptide N-termini with phenylisocyanate (PIC). Finally, labelled histones were desalted using C18 stage tips.

For each sample, derivatized histone peptides were injected onto a Dionex Ultimate3000 nanoflow HPLC with a Waters nanoAcquity UPLC C18 column (100 m × 150 mm, 3 m) coupled to a Thermo Fisher Q-Exactive mass spectrometer at 700 nL/min. Mobile phase consisted of water + 0.1% formic acid (A) and acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid (B). Histone peptides were resolved with a 2-step linear gradient of 2 to 25% mobile phase B over 60 min followed by 25 to 40% mobile phase B over 15 min. Data was acquired using data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode. The mass spectrometer was operated with a MS1 scan at resolution = 35,000, automatic gain control target = 1 × 106, and scan range = 390–910 m/z, followed by a DIA scan with a loop count of 10. DIA settings were as follows: window size = 10 m/z, resolution = 17,500, automatic gain control target = 1 × 106, DIA maximum fill time = AUTO, and normalized collision energy = 30. For each cycle, one full MS1 scan was followed by 10 MS2 scans using an isolation window size of 10 m/z.

EpiProfile 2.0 was used for quantification of histone PTMs [100]. The R script provided by Denu lab (https://github.com/DenuLab/HistoneAnalysisWorkflow) was used to perform data cleaning, normalization, statistical analysis, and visualization.

For the taxa that were unclassified at the genus level, their identities at higher levels were used. We combined all ASVs belonging to the same genus and filtered out the genera that appear in fewer than 20% of total samples, leaving 5 phyla, 11 classes, 11 orders, 25 families, and 45 genera. For the metabolome data, we normalized biochemicals by using inverse normal transformation and transformed variables that did not follow a normal distribution (Shapiro-Wilk test P < 0.05) were removed, resulting in 712 biochemicals. The RNA-seq data were normalized with voom methodology [101]. The voom method estimates the mean-variance relationship and computes appropriate observation-level weights to transform count data to log2-counts per million. We used median absolute deviation to measure the variability of each gene because two genes without notable variance between samples will be highly correlated. As a heuristic cut-off, the top 5000 most variant genes had been used in the downstream analysis.

In order to group the biochemicals that were highly correlated, we built the co-expression network using WGCNA [102]. The WGCNA is an efficient and robust method in grouping metabolomic and transcriptomic data [103, 104] and allowed us to summarize each module by its module eigenvalue. A one-sided Fisher test was used to determine if a pathway was enriched within the turquoise and blue modules in metabolomic data. P values were then adjusted using Benjamini-Hochberg method, and a cut-off of P < 0.05 and FDR adjusted-P < 0.05 were chosen to determine if a pathway was significantly enriched. We used Pearson’s correlation between expression profile of each gene and module eigenvalue to identify module membership. Using the module eigenvalue, the module-traits relationships were estimated by calculating Pearson’s correlations between the module eigenvalue and the traits of interest. We considered 0.90 as a correlation cut-off to choose soft-thresholding power and set the minimal module size as 20. For metabolome, the metabolites were clustered into 8 modules plus 43 unclustered metabolites. The transformed values of the unclustered metabolites were combined with standardized module eigenvalues in the following analysis. For the transcriptome data, 14 modules (defined as clusters of highly interconnected genes) were identified by using DynamicTree Cut algorithm. WGCNA led to 14 different modules by using DynamicTree Cut algorithm. Over-representation of genes in the blue module was characterized based on gene ontology biological process and KEGG pathways using clusterProfiler [105].

We applied the sparse linear log-contrast model [106] to pinpoint important genera that are associated with individual metabolite/gene. In this model, the host omics variable is the response and the genus-level microbial taxa are compositional covariates. The sparse linear log-contrast model respects the compositional nature of the microbiome data and avoids choosing an arbitrary reference taxon, in which the unit-sum constraint on the compositional vector is translated into the zero-sum constraint on the association coefficients across taxa in log ratio scale. In our analysis, we used 10-fold cross validation to choose the tuning parameter. To obtain stable selection results, we generated 100 bootstrap samples and used the same cross validation procedure to select the genera. We also followed the stability selection approach [107] to assess the stability of the selected genera, where 100 subsamples of half sample size were taken to compute the selection probabilities. In the association network (Figs.
6 and
9), we kept genera with stability selection probability larger than 0.85 and filter out the lowly associated genera which the absolute value of coefficient is less than 0.1.

We performed mediation analyses to investigate how the post-intervention gut microbiome/metabolites/gene expressions may mediate the effect of fecal colonization on various phenotypes (adiposity, liver TG, glucose) under a given diet. We employed the causal mediation model with batch effects as confounder, SubA/B microbial communities as exposure, and different phenotypes as outcome. All the mediation effect hypotheses were tested by using the resampling method. Below we described two approaches for testing microbiome mediation effects on the global community level and on the subcompositions defined on the taxonomy tree. For the metabolites and genes, we applied mediation analysis to the corresponding WGCNA modules.

For beta-diversity distance matrices, we performed the distance-based mediation test by using the MedTest package in R language [108]. The Jaccard and unweighted UniFrac distance matrices were calculated based on the rarefied genus-level abundance matrix (rarefied to the minimum sequence depth) to reduce potential sequence depth-dependent bias.

We used maximum round error 0.5 to replace 0 [109] in full-composition abundance matrix, then calculated the sub-composition relative abundance matrix for each high-rank internal node. We removed extremely rare taxa (only detected in 10% of the observations or less). We selected the most abundant taxa in the relative abundance matrix as the reference taxa and took additive logarithm transformation on the compositional data so that the transformed data could be considered as multivariate variables. Finally, we applied the causal mediation model on each high-rank internal node in the taxonomy tree.

In order to identify the microbial community status effect on different phenotypes which were transmitted through the metabolite modules/gene modules, we applied causal mediation model by considering the corresponding WGCNA modules as multiple independent mediators.



Publisher’s Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Sofia M. Murga-Garrido, Qilin Hong, and Tzu-Wen L. Cross are co-first authors; order determined by relative overall contributions.

