Increasing Comparability and Utility of Gut Microbiome Studies in Parkinson’s Disease: A Systematic Review

Gut microbiota have been studied in relation to the pathophysiology of Parkinson’s disease (PD) due to the early gastrointestinal symptomatology and presence of alpha-synuclein pathology in the enteric nervous system, hypothesized to ascend via the vagal nerve to the central nervous system. Accordingly, sixteen human case-control studies have published gut microbiome composition changes in PD and reported over 100 differentially abundant taxa covering all taxonomic levels from phylum to genus or species, depending on methodology. While certain findings were replicated across several studies, various contradictory findings were reported. Here, differences in methodologies and the presence of possible confounders in the study populations are assessed for their potential to confound the results of gut microbiome studies in PD. Gut microbiome studies in PD exhibited considerable variability with respect to the study population, sample transport conditions, laboratory protocols and sequencing, bioinformatics pipelines, and biostatistical methods. To move from the current heterogeneous dataset towards clinically relevant biomarkers and the identification of putative therapeutic targets, recommendations are derived from the limitations of the available studies to increase the future comparability of microbiome studies in PD. In addition, integration of currently available data on the gut microbiome in PD is proposed to identify robust gut microbiome profiles in PD. Furthermore, expansion of the current dataset with atypical parkinsonism cohorts, prodromal and treatment-naïve de novo PD subjects, measurements of fecal microbial concentrations and multi-omics assessments are required to provide clinically relevant biomarkers and reveal therapeutic targets within the gut microbiome of PD.

Parkinson’s disease (PD) is clinically defined as a movement disorder characterized by motor symptoms related to dopaminergic degeneration of the substantia nigra [1]. Non-motor symptoms precede the motor symptoms by years in a majority of cases [2]. Different non-motor symptoms such as idiopathic REM sleep behavior disorder (iRBD), hyposmia, depression and constipation, are associated with an increased risk of PD [3]. Combined, they can be used to identify probable prodromal PD subjects with over 80% certainty [3]. The longest prodromal period, up to 20 years, has been suggested for constipation [4].

Despite the large societal impact of PD, the cause of PD remains elusive and only symptomatic treatments exists. In addition, the clinical diagnosis of PD poses a clear diagnostic challenge and is rejected in 20% of the cases [14]. There is furthermore a need for biomarkers that would allow identification of PD already in the prodromal period [15]. To further elucidate the pathophysiological significance of gut microbiome composition changes in PD and to assess their potential as a marker for PD risk, diagnosis, stratification and prognosis, it is essential to assess whether microbiome composition changes specific for PD can be discerned. Here, a systematic review of the currently available fecal gut microbiome composition studies in PD is provided, which are compared based on their methodologies and results. To overcome the current inconsistencies and move towards clinical applications, recommendations are made to increase the quality and comparability of future microbiome studies in PD.

Original studies published in peer-reviewed journals were searched in the PubMed database using the search string “Parkinson” AND “Microbiome” OR “Microbiota” OR “Dysbiosis” NOT “Review”. Publications were included based on the following criteria: Parkinson’s disease is the phenotype of interest; Human case-control studies; Analysis of gut microbiome composition; Use of fecal samples; Original microbiome data; Written in English. Sixteen case-control studies concerning original gut (fecal) microbiome data were identified, including the recently accepted study by Aho et al., a follow-up study on the first gut microbiome case-control cohort in PD of Scheperjans et al. [16–31]. An overview of the selection process of eligible publications is provided in Fig. 1.

Study populations varied in sample size from 10 to 197 PD subjects and 10 to 130 healthy control subjects (HC). All studies represented a total of seven different countries. The mean age was similar between the PD and HC groups for all studies except for one study with a control group that was on average fifteen years younger [25]. The proportion of females, however, varied considerably between the PD and HC groups in nine studies with at least ten percent difference, the highest difference being 34%. In three studies, the samples were frozen immediately after collection and remained frozen until DNA extraction. Other studies used either a nucleotide stabilizer before freezing (n = 4), shipped the samples at ambient temperatures within a certain timeframe (n = 3), shipped the samples on ice (n = 1) or did not report on the sample shipment conditions before freezing (n = 5). Almost all studies used different DNA extraction kits with only the PSP Stool DNA Plus Kit and the QIAamp DNA Stool Mini Kit being used in multiple studies: four and two, respectively. Two studies used targeted measurements of the abundance of selected taxa, whereas all other studies used amplicon sequencing. Of these, thirteen characterized the bacterial community structure, possibly supplemented with the archaeal community structure, through 16S rRNA gene sequencing, whereas one used shotgun metagenomic sequencing to also include microbial eukaryotes, viruses and bacteriophages. An overview of the study characteristics, including demographic data and the procedures for sample collection, DNA extraction and sequencing, is provided in Table 1.

Differences in microbial community composition can be described in terms of fecal microbial concentration, alpha and beta diversity, and relative abundances in the form of sequence counts or proportions. Microbial concentrations were reported in one study, showing a decreased abundance of microbes in the feces of PD compared to HC. Out of thirteen studies using amplicon sequencing methods in original study populations, alpha diversity indices were reported in eleven studies of which three reported higher alpha diversity in PD, six reported no difference, one reported lower alpha diversity in PD and one did not report on the direction of the found difference. Beta diversity was reported in all studies that performed 16S rRNA gene sequencing or metagenomic sequencing, all of which reported a difference between PD and HC. An overview of the microbial concentrations, alpha- and beta-diversity results in fifteen original study populations is provided in Table 2.

In addition to case-control comparisons, eleven studies assessed gut microbiome differences in relation to PD clinical variables, including clinical subtypes, disease duration and motor symptom burden, of which disease duration had the most consistent association with gut microbiome composition. Notably, in the only follow-up study using amplicon sequencing in PD, beta diversity did not differ between timepoints, but did differ between patients and controls at both timepoints [30]. PD-associated changes in microbiome composition therefore outweighed temporal intra-subject variability.

Since the first publication on gut microbiome differences in PD by Scheperjans et al. [16], several findings, such as an increase of Verrucomicrobiaceae and Akkermansia, and a decrease of Prevotellaceae were robustly replicated. Nonetheless, most findings could not be replicated and various contradictory findings were reported, hampering the extrapolation to PD as a whole or to specific subtypes. Examples of frequently reported taxa with contradictory results are Lactobacillaceae and Bacteroidetes. Four studies reported a statistically significant increase of Lactobacillaceae in PD, whereas two other report a statistically significant decrease. Bacteroidetes were significantly increased in one study, whereas two other reported a significant decrease.

Though, to a certain degree, different findings can be attributed to the inherent intra- and inter-subject variability of gut microbiome composition [32], methodological inconsistencies between gut microbiome case-control studies in PD might contribute to the heterogeneity of the results. Here, differences in study population, sample collection, laboratory procedures and sequencing of the fifteen studies concerning original study populations are discussed and assessed for their potential to confound the results of gut microbiome studies in PD.

Despite large differences in sample size, ranging from 10 to 197 PD subjects, all studies reported statistically significant differences between PD and HC. Nonetheless, the inability to replicate previous findings could be attributed in some cases to the low sample size of less than 50 PD subjects and controls found in nine studies. On the contrary, the two largest studies, with 193 and 197 PD subjects, also did not replicate findings from previous studies. Other variables within the study population should therefore be assessed for their confounding influence, including differences in geographical background, age and sex distributions, PD disease status, medication use and the occurrence of gastrointestinal determinants of gut microbiome composition.

A variety of gastrointestinal determinants of gut microbiome composition have been identified in population-based cohort studies, including gastrointestinal disease and/or surgery, constipation, and dietary influences [35, 36]. First, gastrointestinal disease and/or surgery were used as exclusion criteria in the microbiome studies in PD with varying stringency. Second, constipation is a known determinant of gut microbiome composition and a common non-motor symptom in PD, with objective measures revealing a prolonged stool transit time in up to 80% of patients [35, 36, 44, 45]. No direct comparison with idiopathically constipated subjects was performed. However, constipation was assessed in five microbiome studies in PD using questionnaires or an interview, which can underestimate its prevalence [44]. Where the most objective measurement, using radio-opaque markers [44], can be unattainable for large-scale microbiome studies, more objective measurements of stool frequency and consistency can be obtained through a stool diary and the Bristol Stool Chart [45, 46]. Also, moist content of the fecal sample can be used as a marker for stool transit time and consistency [47]. Last, various nutrients exert an influence on gut microbiome composition [35, 36]. Dietary habits were included as covariate in five studies, with different emphasis such as protein consumption and fruit-vegetable consumption. To minimize recall bias and provide a complete assessment of nutrient intake, food diaries can be used in combination with food frequency questionnaires to obtain more reliable and complete information on dietary habits [48].

Sampling procedures can introduce bias during sampling itself or during transportation and storage [49, 50]. During sampling, contact with urine and toilet water should be avoided to not dilute and contaminate the sample. Commercially available paper fecal collectors minimize the risk of contact of urine and water with the stool. Not all studies reported the usage of a fecal collector, but it can be assumed that all studies used similar collectors, as a fecal microbiome study would otherwise become too impractical for most participants, in particular PD subjects who might have impaired fine motor skills. Correct usage of the collector was not assessed by means of, for instance, questionnaires, nor were samples assessed for moist content in relation to stool type to red flag possibly contaminated samples.

From the fifteen PD microbiome studies in original populations, only three immediately froze the sample, whereas others transported the sample on ice, used a preservative or shipped the sample at ambient temperatures. Five studies did not report the use of a preservative and/or the transportation conditions. Only Hill-Burns et al., who shipped samples without preservative at ambient temperatures, reported on sample shipping time [17]. Shipping time was identified as a significant contributor to microbiome composition changes, which was adjusted for during modeling [17]. Inadequate adjustment for microbial shifts due to sample transportation conditions can therefore be a potential source for both intra- and inter-study differences.

All phases during the library preparation, from DNA extraction to sequencing, can potentially introduce bias through differences in reagent quality, usage of different kit production batches during the same project, changes to protocols and/or lab personnel during the project, and contamination between batches [51, 53]. Various DNA extraction kits are available for fecal samples that rely on chemical lysis, possibly in combination with mechanical lysis [51]. Different lysis methods yield different microbial DNA based on the effectiveness with which the cell wall can be broken down [51]. Besides the method of lysis, which will be the same for case and control samples in studies, contamination of reagents can introduce batch effects that might drive artificial differences between PD and HC [53]. Most notably in this respect is the paper by Salter et al. who analyzed a blank control parallel to a pure culture of Salmonella bongori using four widely used DNA extraction kits, three of which were used in microbiome studies in PD [53]. All kits showed contamination, which led to the notion of a “kitome” that should be corrected for [51]. This kitome might also differ between kits from the same manufacturer depending on production batch and laboratory procedures. As DNA extraction of all case and control samples together in a single batch using the same DNA extraction kit and manufacturing batch is often not feasible, Salter et al. provide concrete recommendations to mitigate the risk and effects of reagent contamination. They suggest the use of high biomass samples to avoid a predominant effect of the contaminants; to use technical controls for each DNA extraction and PCR kit; and to randomize samples both before DNA extraction and library preparation for sequencing, to avoid batch effects [53]. Failure to do so might lead to misleading results that represent technical batch effects that can exceed a biological effect and should be corrected for in silico [53].

At least ten different DNA extraction kits were used in the microbiome studies in PD, that deployed different methods of chemical and mechanical lysis, with some only relying on chemical lysis. Different yields for different microbes might contribute to the heterogeneity of results between studies. In addition, only Heintz-Buchart and the follow-up of Scheperjans et al. by Aho et al. reported the implementation of the recommendations made by Salter et al. [26, 30] Instead of mere inter-study differences due to a different scope resulting from lysis efficiency, this might introduce artificial results that do not reflect any PD related effect and can potentially lead to contradictory results between studies.

The scope of the microbiome studies in PD is primarily determined by the sequencing method and can be divided into three groups. Hasegawa et al. and Unger et al. resorted to direct quantification of selected microbes which obviously limits the scope to the selected taxa. Only Bedarf et al. used shotgun metagenomic sequencing which is based on all available DNA fragments and therefore includes microbial eukaryotes and viruses besides bacteria and archaea [10]. All other studies sequenced one or more of the variable regions of the 16S rRNA gene which evolutionary conservation is often used for the taxonomic classification of bacteria and can also be used to classify archaea if dedicated primers are used [10]. Minor variations in the discriminative power of the variable regions exist, but do not exceed inter-individual variance [54]. The possibility of bias introduced by sequencing different variable regions is further reduced as only two out of thirteen studies using 16S sequencing did not include the V4 variable region. Nonetheless, different discriminative abilities between the variable regions and PCR primers could account for failed replication of specific taxa, especially on lower taxonomic levels [55]. Non-replication of differences in the abundance of Bifidobacteria can for instance be attributed to the different variable regions used and primer choice [55]. Notably, Aho et al. picked up differences in Bifidobacteria abundance when resequencing the baseline samples of Scheperjans et al. using the V3-V4 variable regions rather than V1-V3 [30].

With the exception of Hasegawa et al. and Unger et al., all microbiome studies in PD report on microbial abundances relative to the abundance of other microbes. Though relative microbiome profiling (RMP) is common practice in microbiome studies across phenotypes, the biological interpretation is limited without information on the fecal concentration of microbes [47]. For instance, a direct influence of fecal microbial concentration on the phenotype of interest is neglected and no accurate estimates of metabolite concentrations can be made [47]. Moreover, Vandeputte et al. showed how fecal microbiome concentrations are a determinant of microbiome diversity and suggest the use of flowcytometry and/or qPCR of the 16S rRNA gene to adjust for the confounding effect of fecal microbiome concentrations [47]. Only one microbiome study in PD reported on the fecal microbial concentration, showing a decreased concentration of microbes in the feces. Fecal microbiome concentrations could therefore introduce an unexplored bias between PD and HC.

Microbiome studies are notorious for the large variety of methodologies [51]. Gut microbiome studies inPDare no exception, as different methodologies were found in all phases, including sample collection, laboratory procedures, sequencing and adjustment for confounders within the study populations. An overview of the differences in study populations and methodologies between gut microbiome studies in PD is provided in Fig. 2. Although technical differences might introduce bias, practical considerations to obtain sufficient sample size can justify the deviation from “gold standard” practices. Here, the potential confounding effects of various technical, phenotypical and environmental determinants of gut microbiome composition were assessed. From this, recommendations can be derived to standardize and increase the utility of future microbiome studies in PD, which are listed in Box 1.

In parallel, integration of the currently available microbiome data in PD would allow for the discovery of robust microbial associations and confounder adjustment necessary to address the current variability of the results. Currently, a meta-analysis of differentially abundant taxa in PD is hampered by the lack of descriptive statistics and an overemphasis on statistically significant results, ignoring the effect estimates of previously reported taxa. To adequately assess effect sizes and their respective degree of uncertainty, results on differentially abundant taxa should include all previously reported taxa, regardless of effect size or statistical significance. Nonetheless, the variety of bioinformatic and analytical tools used in microbiome studies can still impact inter-study comparability due to different annotation pipelines, clustering cut-offs and compositional metrics, as well as statistical methods. Ideally, raw sequencing data should be made publicly available to aid meta-analyses using standardized analytical pipelines. A meta-analysis of sequencing data from different variable regions of the 16S rRNA gene is possible through closed-reference operational taxonomic unit (OTU) picking [54]. Even though this will not resolve differences in the resolution of the variable regions, the predominant use of the V4 region in twelve out of fourteen 16S studies in PD, including the re-sequenced baseline samples of Aho et al., increases the inter-study comparability. More importantly, the increase in sample size would allow for more robust conclusions on the gut microbiome composition of PD subjects: a total sample size of 874 PD and 665 HC subjects could be achieved through integration of the raw sequencing data of all PD microbiome studies using 16S sequencing data. In addition, disclosure of per sample technical, phenotypical and environmental data would aid adjusting for confounders that could possibly not be adjusted for within a given study due to low sample size. As public availability of subject information might be restricted due to privacy and confidentiality legislation, sample metadata can still be made available upon request. Currently, seven studies have made their raw sequencing data publicly available.

Exploitation of gut microbiome changes for early PD diagnosis or as a possible prognostic marker is not only dependent on standardization of case-control studies and the integration of data to achieve sufficient sample sizes to identify robust markers of disease. Different practical applications require different control settings and study cohorts. Moreover, clinical applications will likely depend on rapid quantification of selected taxa.

Microbial changes to differentiate PD and its subtypes from other clinical entities can vary in complexity from different quantities of specific taxa or metabolites to complex microbial signatures. Current microbiome study procedures are time consuming and require extensive and specialized bioinformatic and statistical expertise [10]. Clinical applications of microbiome signatures will therefore ideally rely on rapid quantification of selected taxa using established methods such as qPCR. To facilitate the shift from microbiome studies based on relative abundance to clinically applicable quantification methods, microbiome studies should report on the fecal microbial concentration of samples through for instance flow cytometry or qPCR of the 16S rRNA gene [47]. From this, taxa of interest can be quantified using the already available data [47].

To move towards gut microbial interventions in PD, integration of gut microbiome data in PD can aid the identification of putative causative or protective microbes by means of mendelian randomization (MR) [60]. Moreover, expansion of microbiome data with a multi-omics assessment will provide insight into microbiome-host interactions in PD [61].

Putative causal relationships, derived from data mining efforts of gut microbiome studies in PD, should still be assessed for their pathophysiological implications in relation to other determinants of the enteric pathology in PD, including intestinal wall permeability, inflammation, alpha-synuclein aggregation and gastrointestinal dysfunction. Mucosal microbiome composition was assessed by Keshavarzian et al. using sigmoid biopsies and revealed less marked differences compared to fecal samples, indicating not all differently abundant taxa in feces to interact with the intestinal mucosa [25]. To reveal relevant interactions in the multifactorial pathogenesis of PD, integration of various determinants of the enteric pathology in PD can be achieved using human intestinal organoids (HIOs), besides regularly used in vitro and preclinical models [64]. HIOs are 3D cellular models of the human intestine established through differentiation of induced pluripotent stem cells, which can be reprogrammed from patient-derived material [64]. Co-culture with enteric nervous system tissue and gut microbiota allows for a patient specific integrative assessment to elucidate significant contributions of gut microbiota to the pathophysiology of PD and reveal putative therapeutic targets [65, 66].

In light of the possible etiological implications of gut microbiota in PD, microbiome data in PD has rapidly accumulated in the past few years. Several findings could be replicated in various studies, such as an increase of Verrucomicrobiaceae and Akkermansia, and a decrease of Prevotellaceae. However, there is currently no consensus on PD specific changes in microbiome composition and their pathophysiological implications due to inconsistent results, differences in methodologies and unaddressed confounders. Standardization of study protocols and the collection and publication of possible confounders and results, regardless of statistical significance within one’s own dataset, could lead to the homogenization of results needed to identify relevant taxa. In this respect, public availability of raw sequencing data and sample metadata would allow for an integrative dataset of PD microbiome studies that could address various possible confounders. Expansion of the current dataset with atypical parkinsonisms, prodromal and treatment-naïve de novo PD subjects, quantitative data on fecal microbial concentration and multi-omics assessments are required to provide clinically relevant biomarkers and reveal therapeutic targets within the gut microbiome of PD.

JMB has no conflicts of interest to report. PABP, VTEA, and FS have a patent FI127671B issued, a patent US10139408B2 issued, a patent US16/186,663 pending, and a patent EP3149205 pending.

FS is founder and CEO of NeuroInnovation Oy, has received a grant from Renishaw, consulting fees from Herantis Pharma and Orion, lecture fees from Abbvie, UCB, Zambon, and Orion, travel support from Abbvie, Herantis Pharma, Global Kinetics, UCB, NordicInfu Care, Zambon, and Medtronic. He is member of the scientific advisory boards of Axial Biotherapeutics and LivaNova.

