Comparative biology of germ-free and conventional poultry

Interaction between the host and the enteric microbiome is highly complex. Microbial involvement in certain pathologies is moderately well established, but the contribution of the microbiome to animal welfare, behavior, sustainability, immune development, nutritional status, physiology, and maturation is less clear. A valuable experimental model to enable scientists to explore the role of the microbiome in various domains is to compare various phenotypes of a conventionally reared (CV) cohort with those in a germ-free (GF) state. A GF animal is one that is devoid of any detectable microbial life including bacteria, viruses, protozoa and parasites. The GF state is different from gnotobiotic animals where the microbiome is fully described, or ‘specific pathogen free’ (SPF) animals where a moderately normal microbiome is present but devoid of pathogenic microorganisms. Pioneering GF research in poultry in the late 1940s and 1950s has its origin in a need understand the mode of action of antibiotics. Early researchers quickly established that GF chicks responded differently to antibiotics than CV counterparts. The GF experimental model has since been exploited in many divergent fields including pathology, immunology, metabolism, anatomy, physiology, and others. The absence of a microbiome presents the host with a range of advantages and disadvantages. For example, GF chicks often grow more quickly and have lower feed conversion ratio (FCR) than their CV counterparts but may be less resilient to external stress and have a compromised immunological maturation rate. This review will summarize the literature on GF animal research with a special emphasis on poultry. The objective of the review is to establish a frame of reference to understand the extent of the role of the microbiome in animal health, welfare, nutrition, and growth, to provide opportunities for targeted modulation of the microbiome to achieve desired phenotypic responses whilst simultaneously minimizing unintended collateral effects.

In ruminants the enteric microbiome has co-evolved with the host and is central to the capacity of the animal to survive on feed with a relatively low energy density and high fiber concentration. In nonruminant animals such as poultry and swine, the enteric microbiome has a more nuanced role in nutrient recovery and partitioning and the net value of the microbiome to the host is difficult to fully calculate. Cohendy (1912) and Balzam (1937) were the first to successfully rear GF chicks for use in animal experimentation. However, GF chicken research was not widely used until the pioneering research of Reyniers and colleagues from the University of Notre Dame (Reyniers et al., 1950). Subsequently, the GF chick model has been used extensively to explore the mode of action of antibiotics (Forbes and Park, 1959; Coates et al., 1963), nutrient digestion and absorption (Edwards and Boyd, 1963; Boyd and Edwards, 1967; Campbell et al., 1983), coccidiosis (Radharkrishnan and Bradley, 1973; Gaboriaud et al., 2021), gastrointestinal development (Cook and Bird, 1973; Ford, 1974; Corring et al., 1981; Philips and Fuller, 1983; Furuse and Yokota, 1984a; Furuse and Okumura, 1994), protein metabolism (Salter and Coates, 1971; Salter et al., 1974; Coates et al., 1977; Okumura et al., 1978; Furuse and Yokota, 1985; Furuse et al., 1985; Muramatsu et al., 1985; Muramatsu et al., 1987; Yokota et al. 1989; Muramatsu et al., 1993b), metabolic rate (Harrison and Hewitt, 1978; Muramatsu et al., 1988), energy metabolism (Coates et al., 1981; Hedge et al., 1982; Furuse et al., 1991b,c; Muramatsu et al., 1992) and feed additive efficacy (Furuse et al., 1991a; Muramatsu et al., 1993a; Langhout et al., 2000; Drew et al., 2003; Cheled-Shoval et al., 2014). The entire body of work from 1950 to 2022 (approximately 40 independent studies) on germ-free chickens gives considerable insight into the role of the microbiome in development of the intestine and support organs, the ability of the chick to extract nutrients from the feed, development of immune function, retention of protein and nonprotein nitrogen (N), energy metabolism, metabolic rate, and disease resilience. Additionally, complementary germ-free work in pigs and mice exploring differential gene expression, metagenomics and biomarkers (Chowdhury et al., 2007; Tlaskalova-Hogenova et al., 2011; Sun et al., 2018; Mishima et al., 2020; Diviccaro et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2021) confirms several important observations around the central role of the microbiome in host immunity, growth, the gut-brain axis and N cycling. The present review will summarize key observations from germ-free research in poultry, supported with work in pigs and rodents, to create a foundational framework for ongoing initiatives to leverage microbiome modulatory technologies to achieve desirable end points in poultry nutrition, veterinary health, live production, and environmental sustainability.

With respect to the microbiome, animals may be classified into 4 distinct groups (adapted from Furuse and Okumura, 1994).

The GF experimental model was developed in the 1950s and was initially used mainly to explore the interaction between the host animal and therapeutic antibiotics (Reyniers et al., 1950). The GF chick is hatched from sterilized eggs, reared in a sterile environment, and typically fed an irradiated diet and double distilled drinking water, sometimes treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics. The GF state is subsequently confirmed via microscopic examination of fecal smears and culture of excreta samples. A helpful summary of the procedure can be found in Langhout et al. (2000) and Guitton et al. (2020).

A summary of the growth performance of GF and CV chicks is presented in Table 1. The early work by Reyniers et al. (1950) has been excluded from this summary as the authors were optimizing the GF experimental model and the GF chicks used were variably vitamin deficient and consequently had poor growth, feather development and overall health.

The growth rate and feed efficiency (FCE) of GF chicks is typically higher than of CV counterparts though there are several important exceptions. Overall, across 31 experiments from 20 independent peer-reviewed papers, GF chicks returned a 9.7% performance advantage over their CV counterparts. However, this effect was not consistent and ranged from 45.7% (Furuse and Yokota, 1984b) for chicks fed on a semisynthetic, low protein diet, to −44.3% (Furuse and Yokota, 1984b) for chicks fed a semisynthetic, high protein diet. Generally, CV chicks out-perform GF chicks under 2 dietary conditions. First, if the diet contains a high concentration of fiber or fermentable carbohydrate and/or, second, when the diet contains a high nutrient density (high crude protein [CP], or apparent metabolizable energy [AME]). Alternatively, GF chicks outperform CV chicks on highly digestible, low fiber diets and especially so when the diets are formulated to be marginal in AME. Whilst these conclusions are generally true, there may be a threshold in AME and digestible amino acid concentration below which CV chicks have an advantage over GF chicks for example, in very high fiber diets or in a fasted state. Unfortunately, many of the growth performance advantages of GF over CV chicks reported in the literature may be artefacts created by the over-reliance on semisynthetic diets based on isolated soy protein, maize starch, casein, and vegetable oil. Despite these caveats, there is clear evidence from multiple controlled experiments that GF chicks usually have more rapid growth rate and feed efficiency than CV chicks and so it can be reasonably concluded that the microbiome is involved in regulation of growth rate and metabolic efficiency. The extent to which the microbiome influences growth rate compared with feed efficiency is not clear as many studies only reported body weight. However, the presence of a microbiome appeared to suppress growth and feed efficiency indiscriminately. These data suggest that zootechnical or pharmaceutical feed additives designed to elicit beneficial modification to the enteric microbiome in poultry may have differential effects depending on diet nutrient density, nutrient bioavailability or fermentable carbohydrate concentration. For example, unintended negative consequences of microbial modulators may occur if modification of the microbiome results in a reduced capacity of the host to extract energy from fiber (Muramatsu et al., 1992), especially if the diet contains a high fiber concentration and/or a low AME density. It may therefore be important to monitor microbially expressed cellulases and hemicellulases in the ileum and caecum when designing a microbiome modulator to overcome an adjacent challenge to gut health. It is inadvisable to inadvertently reduce the capacity of the enteric microbiome to ferment fiber. The gut microbiome also influences the consequences of ingestion of antinutrients on host growth rate. In a series of 3 experiments, Coates et al. (1970) observed that CV chicks fed raw soy meal had a 20% lower body weight than GF chicks fed the same diet whereas the body weight differential was only 8.9% when heated soy meal was fed. This suggests that the enteric microbiome may modify the antinutritional potential of trypsin inhibitors or hemagglutinins (or potentially other antinutrients). In this specific case, raw soy had a reduced antinutritional consequence on GF relative to CV chicks. These interactions and additional putative reasons for the growth headwind associated with the microbiome will be discussed in detail later.

Growth-promoting effects of antibiotics in poultry have been appreciated for decades although the mode of action is not fully understood (Dibner and Richards, 2005). Removal of antibiotic growth promoters in poultry production generates increases in mortality and FCR (typically 1%–3%; Dibner and Richards, 2005). These effects are muted relative to the delta change between GF and CV chicks, suggesting that the presence of a microbiome per se is influential at a more fundamental level than can be approximated by feeding antibiotics. Recently, via 16S and shotgun metagenomic sequencing and untargeted metabolomics, further insights into the effect of specific antibiotics on the composition and function of the microbiome in poultry has been presented (Plata et al., 2022 ). These authors noted that antibiotic treatment had profound effects on N cycling in the caeca, enteric bile salt and fatty acid concentrations, gut antioxidant status, carbohydrate metabolism, mucin degradation and inflammation. Many of these areas have previously been explored using GF animal models and the importance will be discussed in subsequent sections.

Cook and Bird (1973) were the first authors to specifically publish a peer-reviewed paper on role of the microbiome on intestinal morphology in chickens although several groups had previously published similar work in rodents and Coates et al. (1970) presented some preliminary data on the dry weight of selected intestinal segments in GF and CV chicks. Cook and Bird (1973) demonstrated that GF chicks (reared from hatch to d7) had significantly lower villus (37.4 vs. 63.0 mm2 × 10−3 at d7) and lamina propria (8.5 vs. 14.0 mm2 × 10−3 at d7) area, than CV chicks. Furthermore, the crypt depth in GF chicks was lower than those in the CV cohort. These effects became significant from d4 to 5 and the differences between the CV and GF chicks grew as the chicks aged. The crypt pool size was 54% lower in GF compared with CV chicks and there was a significant decrease in epithelial cell migration. These results indicate a role of the microbiome in maturation of villi and in migration rate of epithelial cells with a profound consequence on absorptive area.

Chowdhury et al. (2007) noted that the enteric microbiome induces a state of chronic inflammation in the host and that this may be necessary to maintain tight junction integrity and ensure active maturation of the epithelium. More recently, Cheled-Shoval et al. (2014) explored the efficacy of mannan-oligosaccharides in GF and CV chicks. These authors observed that GF chicks have lower neutral and acidic goblet cell number and density, absence of sialylated goblet cells and reduced MUC2 mRNA expression, compared with CV chicks. These are symptoms of a poorly developed mucosa and immature mucin architecture. Interestingly, whilst there were fewer goblet cells in the small intestine of GF chicks compared with CV chicks, the opposite occurred in the cecum. This may be a result of entry of digestive enzymes, notably proteases, from the pancreas of the host into the cecum of the GF chick. Sun et al. (2018) recently explored transcriptomes of GF and CV pigs from the same litter. More than 70% of pig transcriptomes were microbially regulated and especially those involving host immunity and response to external stressors. Interferon-associated genes were downregulated in GF piglets. Additionally, the spleen and liver were underdeveloped in GF animals. Thus, while GF animals may benefit from lower maintenance energy requirements, they lack a fully functional intestinal tract, especially the lamina propria, spleen, and liver.

When it comes to energy metabolism, as far as the host is concerned, the microbiome is both a blessing and a curse. On one hand the microbiome can assist the host to extract energy from fiber and other dietary nutrients with an inherently low digestibility. However, the presence of the microbiome in the intestinal tract generates a substantial increase in basal metabolic rate, energy requirement and compromises bile integrity and fat digestion.

Harrison and Hewitt (1978) measured the deep body temperature of GF and CV chicks. They noted that deep body temperature of chicks rose gradually from hatch to d16 in both CV and GF birds. However, the core body temperature of CV chicks was approximately 0.3ºC lower than in GF chicks and rose less quickly, especially in the first week post-hatch. Core body temperature is related to metabolically active mass and the more rapid rise in body temperature in GF compared with CV chicks may be associated with more efficient conversion of yolk to metabolically active tissue. The higher body temperature of GF chicks was confirmed by Muramatsu et al. (1988) who reported a core body temperature for GF and CV chicks of 41.5 and 40.7ºC respectively without noting a difference in plasma thyroxin (3.5 vs. 3.5 µg/100ml of plasma). These authors suggested that the higher body temperature in GF chicks may be related to higher loss of endogenous nitrogen (this will be considered in a later section). Muramatsu et al. (1993b) noted that in a fasted state, energy loss from the carcass was lower in CV chicks compared with GF chicks. The microbiome may assist the host in times of low/no nutrient intake by recycling endogenous protein and energy sources. However, as energy intake increases the microbiome exerts an increasing metabolic cost on the host, competes with the host for nutrients and negatively influences metabolic rate. Finally, the microbiome may directly influence the hypothalamus, prostaglandin production and body set-point temperature, perhaps in response to microbiome-host interactions via secondary metabolites (Huus and Ley, 2021). The potential to modify the microbiome to adjust host deep body temperature to control heat stress or to disadvantage certain pathogenic microorganisms is a rich area for future study.

One of the most significant roles of the enteric microbiome is N cycling. Salter and Coates (1971) explored the role of the enteric microbiome in protein digestion and N cycling using a GF experimental model and radiolabeled 14C unheated or heated egg white. There were few differences between GF and CV chicks in terms of distribution of 14C or N in different intestinal segments or tissues though the heated egg white diet resulted in a substantial increase in the N concentration in the cecum of both groups. However, there was less urea N in the distal gut and cecum of CV compared with GF chicks (14 µg vs. 70 µg respectively) and this was especially the case in the group that received the diet based on damaged egg white. On the other hand, uric acid N concentration was higher in the cecum of CV chicks and uric acid formed a higher proportion of total N in the excreta of CV, compared with GF, chicks. These results may be explained by the action of microbial urease and some absorption of ammonia in the CV birds. Nucleic acid N was also higher in CV compared with GF chicks. A summary of the composition of nitrogenous material in the excreta of CV and GF chicks fed the 14C labeled heat damaged egg white can be found in Table 2. Salter et al. (1974) explored the effect of feed a range of protein sources of divergent quality to GF and CV chicks. There was no difference in net protein utilization between GF and CV chicks. However, uric acid excretion tended to be higher in CV chicks compared with GF counterparts, supporting previous observations by Salter and Coates (1971). Endogenous N excretion was higher in GF compared with CV chicks (9.33 vs. 7.59 mg/g of feed) suggesting that the microbiome may be involved in recycling endogenous N in the distal gut. Thus, the microbiome may not be centrally involved in protein digestibility in the small intestine but could play an important role in N cycling (especially nonprotein N) in the large intestine and cecum.

Drew et al. (2003) fed methionine or L-2-hydroxy-4-methylthiobutanoic acid to GF and CV chicks. On d21, residual L-2-hydroxy-4-methylthiobutanoic acid in the distal ileum was lower in GF than CV chicks (4.7 vs. 10.2%) whereas there was no difference between the 2 groups for methionine. Methionine may be absorbed from the intestine more quickly than L-2-hydroxy-4-methylthiobutanoic acid, reducing the involvement of the microbiome in Met metabolism. Furthermore, not all bacteria can utilize L-2-hydroxy-4-methylthiobutanoic acid. Hegedus et al. (1993) observed that Lactobacillus plantarum, Leuconostoc mesenteroides, and Lactobacillus casei could utilize methionine but not L-2-hydroxy-4-methylthiobutanoic acid. Thus, modulation of the microbiome via feed additives may influence the capacity of the microbiome to process certain forms of dietary amino acids and this should be considered, especially if nonspecific or broad-spectrum modulators are used.

Most of the focus of GF work in chickens has been on growth, organ development and, protein and energy metabolism. However, a selection of additional relevant work did not fit conveniently into these categories. For example, Edwards and Boyd (1963) noted that following oral delivery of Ca47, GF had higher tibia and whole blood calcium (Ca) than CV birds, but no such differences were evident when the Ca47 was administered intraperitoneally. This work suggests that the microbiome may play a role in Ca metabolism, perhaps via changes in intestinal pH, absorption, solubility or via indirect mechanisms involving vitamin D or phosphatase and phosphorus absorption. Helpfully, Campbell et al. (1983) noted that GF chicks fed a rye-based diet had increased bone ash than CV chicks (481 g/kg vs. 443 g/kg) and bone ash in CV chicks was also considerably more variable than in GF chicks. These results suggest that the enteric microbiome may interfere with Ca metabolism and so modulatory approaches to control this may be warranted.

The enteric microbiome offers the host animal a number of competitive advantages but simultaneously creates headwind in several domains. Thus, deployment of nonspecific microbiome modulators may confer inconsistent benefits to the host if they interfere with beneficial roles of the microbiome, for example, fiber digestion or nonessential amino acid metabolism. A summary of potentially achievable targets for microbiome modulation in poultry is presented in Table 3. In future, broad-spectrum microbiome modulators are likely to become obsolete as more surgical modulatory technologies are developed that can deliver desirable end points without unintended collateral effect.

The microbiome-host interaction is extremely complex, and cause and effect relationships are difficult to establish conclusively. The GF animal model offers an opportunity to explicitly explore the role of the microbiome in host development, immunity, nutritional state, neurology, pathology, physiology, and biochemistry. In broiler chickens, the microbiome is a net cost to the host unless diet conditions are extremely disadvantageous for the animal, and it seems likely that the microbiome has co-evolved with chickens at least partly to conserve nutrients during periods of inadequate nutrient intake. An obvious area for exploitation of plasticity in the microbiome in this regard is in broiler breeder nutrition and stress management. However, as feed cost and environmental sustainability motivates decreases in dietary CP and increases in dietary fiber, the microbiome may offer solutions to mitigate inevitable upward drift in FCR in conventionally reared broilers. The enteric microbiome is evolutionarily adapted to exist in symbiosis with the host, to alleviate nutritional stress when nutrient intake is low or nutrient quality is poor and to recycle potentially toxic metabolites associated with the N cycle. Maturation of the microbiome post-hatch is also intricately involved in liver, spleen and gastrointestinal tract development, absorptive area, nutrient transport, and mucin biosynthesis. If negative effects on fat emulsification, bile salt deconjugation, and amino acid digestibility can be avoided, alongside obvious threats from pathogenic bacteria and viruses, then the microbiome may be leveraged to confer consistent advantages for the host. As an industry, it is critical that we gain a more complete understanding of microbial function and develop more precise intervention measures that achieve our goals without unintended collateral effect and loss of microbial biodiversity. If we can more precisely ‘nudge’ the microbiome to accomplish what the poultry industry requires without broad-spectrum, nonspecific effects, it is highly likely that animal health, welfare and sustainability will be delivered more consistently and with considerably more success.

This review was financially supported by DSM Nutritional Products, Kaiseraugst, Switzerland.

