An Integrated Multi-Disciplinary Perspective for Addressing Challenges of the Human Gut Microbiome

Our understanding of the human gut microbiome has grown exponentially. Advances in genome sequencing technologies and metagenomics analysis have enabled researchers to study microbial communities and their potential function within the context of a range of human gut related diseases and disorders. However, up until recently, much of this research has focused on characterizing the gut microbiological community structure and understanding its potential through system wide (meta) genomic and transcriptomic-based studies. Thus far, the functional output of these microbiomes, in terms of protein and metabolite expression, and within the broader context of host-gut microbiome interactions, has been limited. Furthermore, these studies highlight our need to address the issues of individual variation, and of samples as proxies. Here we provide a perspective review of the recent literature that focuses on the challenges of exploring the human gut microbiome, with a strong focus on an integrated perspective applied to these themes. In doing so, we contextualize the experimental and technical challenges of undertaking such studies and provide a framework for capitalizing on the breadth of insight such approaches afford. An integrated perspective of the human gut microbiome and the linkages to human health will pave the way forward for delivering against the objectives of precision medicine, which is targeted to specific individuals and addresses the issues and mechanisms in situ.

Recent advances in culture-independent study techniques of microbial communities, as well as an increasing interest in the role of the gut microbiota in health and disease, have facilitated vast insights into human microbial communities [1]. Identification of prokaryotes mainly with 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA)-encoding gene sequences [2] and eukaryotes with predominantly Internal Transcribed Spacer (ITS) rDNA sequences [3], coupled with metagenomic analyses, has revealed the ever-increasing diversity list of microorganisms within the human gut [4]. Transcriptomic, proteomic and metabolomic high-throughput tools allow us to begin to grasp the function of the human gut microbiome [5]. Despite these tools, the current state of microbiome research struggles to account for all members of the microbial community, integrate community structure with function, and characteristics of spatial and temporal aspects of the gut microbiota ecosystem [4,5,6]. Navigating these challenges further complicates our primary task: to design and carry out experiments that generate data which can be integrated, analysed, and interpreted to yield biologically relevant findings for human health.

To further investigate different perspectives of this area, a peer session on ‘metabolomics and its application in gut microbiome research’ was held during the most recent Australian and New Zealand Metabolomics (ANZMET) conference (Auckland, New Zealand, from 30 August to 1 September 2018). Over 20 metabolomics-based researchers attended the session and participated in the discussion on how functional omics could be used to advance gut microbiome research. In addition to summarizing the key points from the peer session, we provide an overview of the current challenges when researching the gut microbiome, from the perspective of the metabolomics community. In should be noted that challenges relating to specific sampling and storage conditions or techniques and approaches are not captured in this review. Where possible, the interested reader is directed to other published works for this information.

Human cells live in coexistence with a vast and diverse collection of symbiont microorganisms referred to as the human microbiota or the microbiome. The GIT is, by far, the most heavily colonized organ in the human body, with a large surface area and a consistent nutrient source of digested food for microbes to utilise, making it a preferred site for microbial colonisation. The GIT is also one of the most studied microbial ecosystems [10,11,12,13]. Although research to date has mainly focused on the bacterial component of the human gut, microorganisms belonging to Archaea and Eukarya domains of life, as well as viruses, also constitute the human microbiome [14,15,16]. A rich and complex ecosystem of bacteria, fungi, viruses, archaea, protists and (sometimes) helminths flourishes in the human gut.

Examples of successful back-calculation using faecal metabolites is the case of the SCFAs acetate, butyrate and propionate. Butyrate, produced by some Firmicutes, is rapidly absorbed and used by the colonic epithelia as an energy source, which, given the high metabolic activity of the gut, translates to as much as 10% of the body’s energy coming from microbial butyrate. Butyrate is transported into colonocytes and diffuses into the mitochondria where it undergoes β-oxidation to acetyl-CoA which then enters the TCA cycle resulting in reduction of NAD+ to NADH, the latter entering the electron transport chain for ATP production [40]. Propionate, predominantly from Bacteroidetes, acts similarly, entering the TCA cycle through succinyl-CoA [40]. The path from ubiquitously produced microbial acetate is directly through acetyl-CoA. This rapid absorption of these acids, particularly butyrate, means that correlations between these and host metabolic markers do not correlate [41]. However, when the uptake or flux of these acids is calculated (parameters obtained through 13C acetate, propionate and butyrate infusion of mice caeca), uptake fluxes correlate linearly with host metabolic markers [41]. Known or estimated SCFA flux rates may have potential to assist with correcting or standardizing other metabolite concentrations from faecal snapshots as proxies for colonic contents.

Intense clinical investigation of the human gut microbiome has revealed a sophisticated interplay between the microbiome and the host immune system and metabolism. The role of gut microbiome in accomplishing protective, structural and metabolic functions in human hosts is well documented. These include, but are not limited to, defence against colonization by harmful or pathogenic organisms [2,42,43], digestion of food [44,45,46,47], nutrition [46,48,49] and maintenance of a healthy immune system [49,50,51,52,53,54]. Any perturbations in the gut microbiome may result in dysbiosis and can further lead to a variety of phenotypes including obesity, inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), type II diabetes, fatty liver disease, cancer and several additional human disease states or disorders (Table 1). The role of the human gut microbiome in disease development and progression has become a growing research field in the recent years, yet the cause and effect of the gut dysbiosis and human health has not been well documented [2].

The prevalence of technologies (sequencing, databases, and analytical paradigms) that characterise the microbiome community, rather than elucidating mechanisms, has led to an abundance of studies that associate patterns, for instance species diversity or species richness, with disease states. However, despite this focus on community rather than mechanism, robust associations have laid the foundation for further exploration. For example, functional gastrointestinal disorders (FGIDs), defined as disorders of the gut-brain interactions, have been linked, at least partly, to altered gut microbiome and immune dysregulation [71]; however, no clear association between different microbial patterns and FGIDs has been drawn [72,73]. The gut and brain appear to communicate via the neural and hormonal signalling, the immune system, and via microbial metabolites such as SCFAs [74,75], and perturbations of this bi-directional relationship between the colonic microbiome and central nervous system, coined the ‘gut-brain axis’, may manifest in neurological conditions such as anxiety, depression, autism spectrum disorders, and influence mood and social behaviour [74,76,77,78,79,80]. Multifactorial autoimmune diseases have also been explored in the light of the gut microbiome, where the breakdown of intestinal epithelial barrier and failure of the gut mucosal immunity allows for microbial cells or their metabolites to trigger systemic inflammation [81,82,83,84]. The gut microbiome may also activate or inhibit natural, systemic anti-tumour immunosurveillance [85,86] or induce the formation of local cancers [87,88,89], as well as influence the efficacy of some chemotherapy treatments [90,91]. In cardiovascular diseases [92], atherogenic trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO) produced in the liver from microbially-derived trimethylamine (TMA) and cardioprotective SCFAs [93,94] are of particular interest. An increase in cardiovascular disease, as well as type 2 diabetes risk, has also been linked with metabolic syndrome, which in turn appears to be influenced by the gut microbiome at several levels [95]. The previous notion that a simple change in the ratio of Bacteroidetes to Firmicutes in the human gut contributes to the development of obesity, an aspect of metabolic syndrome, has been recently challenged and appears to be much more complex [96].

Most of the microbes residing in the gut are strictly anaerobic, so their isolation and cultivation in laboratory conditions is challenging, with almost 75 percent of the gut microbiome uncultivable [97]. Culture independent methodologies such as small subunit (SSU) rRNA gene amplicon sequencing (16S SSU for bacteria, 18S SSU for eukaryotes and ITS in fungi) and whole-metagenome sequencing have helped overcome this limitation to a great extent [98]. The 16S rRNA sequencing is a more rapid method for assessment of overall phylogeny and diversity of a bacterial community. As such, the 16S rRNA method may provide information on the composition of the gut microbiome; however, it does not always provide a clear link between the microbes identified and their functions in the gut [99]. Recent development of next generation sequencing (NGS) tools has greatly advanced the high-throughput metagenomics approach, with several software platforms for comparative analyses on the gene level developed. These include, Integrated Microbial Genomes with Microbiome Samples (IMG/M) [100], MicrobesOnline [101], Microbial Genomes database (MBGD) [102], Roary [103], EzBioCloud [104], OrtholugeDB [105] and Efficient Database framework for comparative Genome Analyses using BLAST score Ratios (EDGAR) [106]. The IMG/M software is one of the largest platforms containing annotated bacterial, archaeal and metagenomic sequence data [107].

Table 2 outlines many bioinformatic analytical processes applied to metagenomics and metatranscriptomics data. This information may help us undertake a more holistic approach to understanding the functions of the gut in overall human health, especially in case of diseases such as inflammatory bowel disease, irritable bowel syndrome, and obesity.

CC BY-NC; Segata et al. Molecular systems biology 2013, 9, 666.

Metabolomics is ideally placed as the foundation for a systems biology approach in the study of the gut microbiome, primarily because metabolites are involved in biological processes at all levels, driving activity [212] and inter-kingdom communication [213] at the level of the proteome, transcriptome, epigenome, and genome.

Many microbial metabolites are volatile and their study yields valuable insights into microbial community metabolism, interactions, and inter-kingdom interactions [280,281]. The volatilome is defined as all the volatile compounds that originate from an organism or ecosystem. Studying the blood and faecal volatilome in conjunction with non-volatile metabolites, epigenetic and metagenomic measurements from the same samples can yield valuable insights into metabolism and the interactome. Similarly, the volatile profiles of exhaled breath have been utilized as a technique for phenotyping IBS subjects [282], and breath shows promise as a rapid and non-invasive sample type to rapidly classify phenotype, based on volatile metabolites that may be formed in the gut, transferred to the blood, and then transferred through the lung membrane into the exhaled breath.

Integrated multi-omics approaches are challenging because the data obtained from such research consists of two or more matrices that contain the same sample IDs, but a range of different biological variables such as genes, transcripts, metabolites, proteins etc. Based on whether these studies take into consideration of prior knowledge, they can be classified as statistics-based methods or knowledge driven methods. Statistical approaches use univariate or multivariate analysis to understand the correlations between the different datasets. Meanwhile, knowledge-based approaches decipher the potential mechanistic links by using the significant variables identified in the different omics approaches and associating them with an existing knowledge base. They are often presented as interaction networks e.g., metabolic networks [283]. Ultimately, the goal is to triangulate between different biological samples that indicate absorption, secretion, or excretion to decipher the interactive systems at play internally. Chemometrics are important for the integrated analysis of the gut microbiome. Chemometrics is the application of data-driven statistical and computational methods to extract information from the measurement of chemical systems [284]. However, commonly available statistical methods are inadequate when dealing with the multidimensional omics datasets necessary for analysis of the gut microbiome. Thus, new approaches are required to deal with multi-dimensional data [285].

All of these emerging statistical techniques require considerable computing power compared to traditional statistical analysis, and need to be addressed in new ways. For research institutions in developed countries, this typically means making use of shared research computing infrastructure comprising large computing arrays that can be accessed via virtual machines. Another solution could be carrying out computations via collective, cloud-based computing power. The readers are referred to Huang, Chaudhary and Garmire [301] for a more comprehensive account of various data integration tools.

Under normal gut conditions, the most prevalent gases include methane, carbon dioxide, hydrogen, hydrogen sulphide and nitric oxide. Production of such gases and their relative concentrations affecting gut function may have pathogenic roles in several GIT disorders. Lack of direct access to these gases in the gut limits our understanding of their physiology and functional capacity. Direct sampling of gases inside the GIT is likely to provide much more accurate gas-related biomarkers for physiological abnormalities of the gut. Indigestible, endoscopy capsules have been developed by integrating pH, pressure and temperature sensors (SmartPill®, Minneapolis, MN, USA). Kalantar-zadeh, et al. [313] developed indigestible, non-invasive, swallowable intestinal gas capsules that can perform in vivo gas measurements and potentially assess putative gas biomarkers in GIT disorders. The so-called ‘gas capsules’ are obtained by integrating small gas sensors into indigestible capsule platforms. The related clinical procedures are non-invasive and once real-time monitoring of the appropriate locations to be sampled is perfected, these capsules could help in surveying gas-related biomarkers and their concentrations throughout the length of the GIT.

Culturomics is a new approach that uses high-throughput, broad spectrum culturing coupled with mass-spectrometry-based identification [314,315,316]. Culturomics enables exploration of the ‘dark’ microbiome to levels approaching those of pyrosequencing, and is able to identify or characterize microbes present in low concentrations. The use of culturomics in tandem with metagenomics would greatly advance understanding of the gut microbiome.

Equally critical to the study of the gut microbiome is the integration of the impact of the external environment into systems analysis. The exposome is defined as the totality of environmental exposures from conception onwards. While not all of these factors are easily measured, external contaminants or man-made compounds can be detected using trace analytical techniques, such as mass spectrometry. Analysis of trace environmental contaminants can often be undertaken at the same time as analysis of the metabolome, provided untargeted analytical methods are used, and comprehensive mass spectral libraries such as NIST/Wiley are available to search. At present, primarily due to the availability of large mass spectral libraries, GC-MS is still the most reliable method for exposome analysis. However, considerable advances in analytical software and enlarging databases for high-resolution LC-MS/MS have occurred recently and this technique will surpass GC-MS as many more metabolites are amenable to measurement using LC-MS than GC-MS. Alternatively, targeted analysis of large panels of pharmaceuticals, pesticides, plasticizers, and other man-made compounds can be carried out in tandem with metabolite profiling, but will inevitably suffer from bias due to assumptions made around what compounds to target.

