Genetic risk for autoimmunity is associated with distinct changes in the human gut microbiome

Susceptibility to many human autoimmune diseases is under strong genetic control by class II human leukocyte antigen (HLA) allele combinations. These genes remain by far the greatest risk factors in the development of type 1 diabetes and celiac disease. Despite this, little is known about HLA influences on the composition of the human gut microbiome, a potential source of environmental influence on disease. Here, using a general population cohort from the All Babies in Southeast Sweden study, we report that genetic risk for developing type 1 diabetes autoimmunity is associated with distinct changes in the gut microbiome. Both the core microbiome and beta diversity differ with HLA risk group and genotype. In addition, protective HLA haplotypes are associated with bacterial genera Intestinibacter and Romboutsia. Thus, general population cohorts are valuable in identifying potential environmental triggers or protective factors for autoimmune diseases that may otherwise be masked by strong genetic control.

Type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1D) is an autoimmune disorder characterized by the destruction of insulin-producing ß-cells in the pancreas, resulting in a life-long dependence on exogenous insulin. T1D development is thought to be driven by both genetic and environmental influences, as genetic susceptibility alone is not enough to cause disease1. Environmental factors are considered to be important in triggering the onset of disease development in genetically susceptible individuals; however, identifying universal triggers remains a challenge1,2.

Given that mostly weak bacterial associations with T1D autoimmunity have been observed in high T1D genetic risk cohorts, the question arose whether genetic risk alone imparts a dysbiosis of the microbiome and thus, whether any effect HLA may have on the microbiome may be masked in a high genetic risk cohort. Here, a microbiome analysis of stool samples from the ABIS general population cohort shows the effect of HLA alleles on the human gut microbiome composition. Bacterial taxa negatively and positively associated with genetic risk for type 1 diabetes are identified.

The ABIS cohort has enrolled 17,055 newborn babies from Southeast Sweden born between 1 October 1997 and 1 October 1999. All mothers of babies born during this time period were invited to participate. This cohort serves as a large biobank of biological specimens obtained longitudinally from the enrolled children at birth, 1 year, 2–3 years, and 5–6 years of age. Collected samples types include blood, urine, stool and hair. In addition, parents of enrolled children completed questionnaires including information on duration of breastfeeding, antibiotic use, diet, etc. Many of the children enrolled also had their HLA genotype determined. The aim of the ABIS cohort, in part, is to identify the importance of environmental factors in autoimmune diseases (e.g. type 1 diabetes) and how genetic and environmental factors may interact in such diseases.

In the present study, we used high-throughput 16S rRNA sequencing to assess the microbiome of stool collected at 1 year of age from ABIS children. This time point was chosen due to the proximity in timing for development of T1D autoimmunity. Because HLA genotype data was available for only some of the children at the time of analysis, 403 individual 1-year stool samples were used. Associations between the 16S data and HLA genotype information for these children were made using multiple common statistical methods. Additionally, culturing methods were used to asses stool bacterial viability.

Rarefaction curves for the observed number of amplicon sequencing variants (ASVs) and the Shannon alpha diversity index show that the chosen depth of 10,000 reads per sample was sufficient to represent the diversity of unique sequences in each sample (Fig. 1a, b). Shannon diversity was not significantly different overall among the genetic risk groups (Kruskal–Wallis, p-value = 0.4906), nor through pairwise comparisons between groups (Fig. 1c). The lack of difference in diversity between risk groups suggests that HLA does not have an effect on gut bacterial diversity. Antibiotic use (yes/no) within the first year (PERMANOVA: R2 = 0.00522; F Model = 1.0526; p-value = 0.285), duration of exclusive breastfeeding (PERMANOVA: df = 10; R2 = 0.0241; F Model = 0.97047; p-value = 0.6), mode of delivery (PERMANOVA: R2 = 0.00504; F Model = 1.015, p-value = 0.395) and gender (PERMANOVA: R2 = 0.00242; F Model = 0.97412; p-value = 0.529) did not have significant effects on gut bacterial composition at 1 year of age. Also, antibiotic use within 1 month prior to sample collection (n = 30) did not significantly impact gut bacterial composition (PERMANOVA: R2 = 0.00282; F.Model = 1.1386; p-value = 0.168). Out of the total 403 subjects analyzed, 43 were still at least partially breastfed at the time of the 1-year sample collection. Gut microbiome composition was significantly impacted by breastfeeding status at the time of stool sample collection (PERMANOVA: R2 = 0.00966; F.Model = 3.92; p-value = 0.001). Because breastfeeding status at the time of sample collection could be a confounding variable, this was corrected or accounted for in all subsequent analyses.

An assumption of the PERMANOVA test is that all groups compared have similar variance (homogeneity of variance assumption), particularly in cases of uneven sampling between groups22. Beta dispersion was calculated based on genetic risk category adjusted for sampling bias, and an ANOVA was applied to test whether the average distance to the median variance was significantly different between groups. The result of the ANOVA showed that average distance to the median variance between groups was not significantly different (F value = 0.3928; p-value = 0.7583). Also, a Tukey HSD test showed that pair-wise tests of the variance assumption are not significant. Therefore, significance testing through PERMANOVA is not expected to be influenced by uneven dispersion among groups.

Because there are significant differences in microbiome composition between genetic risk groups, bacteria associated with genetic risk across the entire dataset were identified. Using Linear discriminant analysis Effect Size (LEfSe) after grouping ASVs at the genus level, significant associations between high risk subjects and members of the Saccharimonadaceae family were identified (Fig. 2a, b). Additionally, the family Erysipelotrichaceae was associated with subjects at increased genetic risk (Fig. 2a, c). Interestingly, two genera of the family Peptostreptococcaceae, specifically Intestinibacter and Romboutsia, were associated with neutral risk HLA (Fig. 2a, d). Differential feature plots show that the taxa described above have higher average relative abundance in their associated risk group than any other group (Fig. 2b–d). Overall, taxa found to be associated with a particular risk group through LEfSe had higher average relative abundance in their associated risk group. Because subjects at neutral risk often have either DR3 or DR4 plus at least one protective haplotype, the protective haplotypes may be important for this association, though no associations with the decreased risk group were observed in the entire dataset level with LEfSe.

DESeq2 was also able to identify bacterial ASVs associated with particular HLA genotypes or haplotypes (e.g., heterozygous DR3/DR4, or genotypes positive for DR3 or DR4 without protective haplotypes). Intestinibacter and Romboutsia were associated with the DR3 positive increased risk genotype over the DR3/DR4 group. However, neither ASV was associated when comparing DR4 positive with DR3 positive increased risk genotypes, suggesting that the high-risk heterozygous genotype may be exerting a selective pressure against these bacteria. Interestingly, when comparing genotypes where DR3 or DR4 positive haplotype is associated with a protective haplotype, these two ASVs are associated with the absence of DR3 and at the same time, are also not associated with DR4. Because different haplotype combinations will lead to varying degrees of antigen-binding affinity, associations between HLA genotype and bacteria within the gut are likely to be genotype-specific. This is evident in that either having or lacking a protective haplotype in combination with DR3 associates with a different group of gut flora.

Amplicon 16S data is sparse and therefore populated with numerous low or zero counts for ASVs that are rarely seen. These rare taxa could be considered noise, as they may not be relevant to the biological question because they appear in very few subjects. To limit this noise, we filtered these data using a method that considers ASV prevalence. ASVs were filtered at 5% increments for the entire dataset (Table 3). A prevalence cutoff of 45% was chosen to assess those ASVs which were present in nearly half of all individuals analyzed. Higher prevalence cutoffs, up to 75%, could be obtained for the full dataset at the cost of additional ASVs. This filtering resulted in clear separation by PCoA between genetic risk groups that could not be observed from the raw dataset, where more distinct clusters form between ASVs prevalent in 45% of each risk group (Fig. 3), regardless of whether those samples from participants still breastfeeding at the time of sample collection were included (Fig. 3a) or not (Fig. 3b). In other words, those ASVs that are present more frequently (in at least 45% of subjects in this dataset) make up distinct patterns of composition depending on HLA-driven genetic risk for T1D.

Considering only those ASVs that are present in at least 45% of subjects in each risk group, 40 unique ASVs remain from the total 4450 ASVs in the raw dataset. Of the 40 total ASVs, 14 are prevalent among all risk groups, yet the other 16 are shared among 2 or 3 groups, while others still are unique to only one group (Fig. 4). Though, at the genus level, some taxa are shared, these organisms are represented by unique sequences and should therefore be considered unique organisms. In support of the differential abundance results, ASVs that are members of Intestinibacter and Romboutsia are most prevalent in the neutral and decreased HLA-risk groups. This provides further evidence that protective HLA haplotypes may be important for shaping the composition of bacteria in the human gut. Interestingly, an ASV belonging to the Bifidobacterium genus was prevalent among all risk groups. However, another Bifidobacterium ASV was prevalent just among high and increased risk subjects, while yet another was unique to just those at neutral risk. This highlights the importance of pairing ASV-level sequence resolution with prevalence, since the distinction among these unique sequences would be overshadowed by rare sequences and overlooked at the taxonomic rather than the single nucleotide variant level.

Geography explains a significant amount of variation between subjects’ gut microbiomes in ABIS (PERMANOVA: R2 = 0.03651; F Model = 1.3503; p-value = 0.001). Differences in geography can include underlying covariates such as diet and other lifestyle factors, and the effects of these factors can be exacerbated with increasing geographical distance23. Although the ABIS cohort benefits from geography confined to southeast Sweden, the significant impact that geographical factors have on subjects’ gut microbiomes is still evident through PERMANOVA. To limit this impact, towns were divided into three distinct clusters: the northeastern region (Linköping and Norrköping), the central region (Jönköping, Nässjö, Gislaved and Värnamo), and the southern region (Kalmar and Karlskrona). The towns within these regions were chosen for clustering based on their geographical proximity and because they provide the largest number of samples in the dataset, including many of those from high-risk subjects.

Prevalence filtering was also applied to each geographical region separately by the same prevalence level used for the entire dataset (45%). The prevalence filtered regions show distinct patterns of separation by HLA risk group through PCoA (Fig. 6). Variation among the most prevalent ASVs by risk group is most considerable in the Southern region, though overlap with these ASVs can be seen between the high/increased and decreased/neutral risk groups, respectively. In the Northeastern region, overlap between gut bacterial communities is more consistent across all risk groups. Meanwhile, in the Central region, a high degree of overlap exists between all risk groups aside from the highest risk, which are substantially separated, indicating that the variation in community overlap among the most prevalent bacteria in this risk group is strong, regardless of breastfeeding status (Fig. 6d). In other words, each genetic risk group comprises a distinct combination of ASVs that are present in most of the participants at each risk level. This would suggest that the ASVs forming these highly prevalent clusters are those most influenced by host HLA genotype, posing a potential mechanism of selection toward those bacteria in the gut.

Sample integrity is an important consideration when working with samples that have been stored for decades. Here, we assessed the viability of −80 °C frozen stool samples through isolation of non-spore forming, facultative anaerobic strains of Bifidobacterium. Members of the Bifidobacterium genus are considered relatively sensitive to long-term storage conditions, since they are non-spore forming and are sensitive to oxygen exposure. Nevertheless, strains of two Bifidobacterium species, B. breve and B. longum, were isolated from a stool sample stored at −80 °C for 19 years using media selective for the genus.

HLA gene alleles appear to have a significant effect on the bacterial composition of the late infant gut based on our findings from children in the ABIS cohort. This effect is important because of the many implications with how genetic pre-disposition to autoimmune disorders might determine environmental factors, such as the microbiome, that ultimately may lead to disease progression. In the case of T1D, this is the first time to our knowledge that HLA genetic risk for developing autoimmunity has been associated with distinct changes in the gut microbiome in a general population human cohort. Beyond just genetic risk for T1D, our results implicate specific HLA genotypes with distinct changes in members of the gut community, which highlights an important understanding of the interaction and influence of host genetics on the human microbiome. How HLA genetics might lead to environmental triggers for autoimmune disease originating in the gut deserves further investigation on many fronts.

The All Babies in Southeast Sweden (ABIS) cohort is ideal for investigating the influence of HLA genetic risk on the microbiome since it was designed to survey the general population, making up a diverse range of HLA genotypes. The information gained from this type of cohort furthers our understanding of how HLA genetic risk drives changes in the gut microbiome and how genetics may be “setting the stage” for environmental triggers that ultimately lead to T1D autoimmunity. Furthermore, the results obtained in this study can likely be extended to investigate other autoimmune diseases where HLA serves as the primary genetic risk factor.

This study is based on the ABIS cohort (All Babies in Southeast Sweden), a prospective population-based cohort study including all children born in southeast Sweden during the period 1 October 1997–1 October 1999. The parents gave their informed consent after oral and written information and possibility of obtaining information via video film. Participating mothers completed questionnaires both at birth and at 1 year of age for the infant and diaries were kept during the first year of life40. Information collected in the questionnaires and diaries include, but are not limited to, antibiotic use, duration of breast feeding, and more.

Stool samples were collected from the diaper of the infant by use of a sterile spatula and tube provided by the WellBaby Clinic. The sample tubes were labeled with a unique subject identifier and frozen immediately after collection, either at the infant’s home or at the clinic. Samples collected at home were transported frozen, using freeze clamps, to the WellBaby Clinic. After arrival at the clinic, the samples were stored dry at −80 °C. All 403 stool samples used in this analysis were collected at 1 year of age, and each subject is represented by a single one-year sample.

The ABIS-study has ethical approvals from the Research Ethics Committees of the Faculty of Health Science at Linköping University, Sweden, Ref. 1997/96287 and 2003/03-092 and the Medical Faculty of Lund University, Sweden (Dnr 99227, Dnr 99321). All parents of the children in the ABIS-study gave their informed consent after careful oral and written information in addition to video film presentation. The microbiome analysis performed at the University of Florida was approved by the University of Florida’s Institutional Review Board as an exempt study assigned as IRB201800903.

HLA-DR/DQ genotypes associated with risk and protection were defined using typing for HLA-DQB1 and informative -DQA1 and DRB1 alleles for deducing presence of common European HLA-DR-DQ haplotypes variously associated with disease risk using sequence specific hybridization with lanthanide labelled oligonucleotide probes41,42. To enable the comparison of different levels of HLA risk for developing T1D autoimmunity, subjects with available HLA genotype data were placed into one of four categories of risk based on their HLA genotype. Subjects at the highest genetic risk for developing autoimmunity are represented by a single HLA genotype in this dataset, consisting of both increased risk-associated haplotypes: (DR3)-DQA1*05-DQB1*02 and (DR4)-DQA1*03-DQB1*0302 (DR3/4). In contrast, those at lowest risk are denoted by the absence of these haplotypes and the presence of one or two of protective haplotypes (DR15)-DQB1*0602, (DR13)-DQB1*0603, (DR5)-DQA1*05-DQB1*0301 and (DR7)-DQA1*0201-DQB1*0303. Subjects having either (DR3)-DQA1*05-DQB1*02 or (DR4)-DQA1*03-DQB1*0302 without presence of protective haplotypes were defined to be at increased risk. Those with (DR3)-DQA1*05-DQB1*02 or (DR4)-DQB1*0302 and one of the protective haplotypes and those without any risk or protective haplotypes are at neutral genetic risk. A subset of subject characteristics for the samples used in this work is described in Supplementary Table 1. HLA genotype information for the subjects included in this study is provided in the source data file.

DNA from each sample was extracted from ~200 mg of stool12, using the E.Z.N.A Stool Extraction Kit following the manufacturer’s protocol (Omega Bio-tek, Doraville, CA). Samples were randomized to prevent the introduction of bias during extraction and blank negative controls were introduced alongside the samples to verify the absence of contamination in the extraction kit components. DNA used for subsequent PCR was quantified and assessed for purity using a Nanodrop spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific, Wilmington, DE). Previously used custom barcoded primers 341F and 806R, targeting the V3-V4 variable regions of the 16S rRNA gene, were employed and PCR amplification was carried out with the following modifications. Briefly, 50 nanograms of extracted DNA was used as template in a final reaction volume of 50 μl containing 25 μl of 2X GoTaq Colorless Master Mix (Promega, Madison, WI), 10 μM of each primer, 0.1 μg/μl BSA, brought to final volume with nuclease free water. The following cycling conditions were used for amplification: initial denaturation at 95 °C for 2 min, followed by 30 cycles of 95 °C for 20 s, 61 °C for 30 s, 72 °C for 30 s, and a final elongation step of 72 °C for 5 min. All PCR reactions were run on 1% agarose gels to verify correct amplification and purified using the E.Z.N.A Cycle Pure kit per the manufacturer’s instructions (Omega Bio-tek, Doraville, CA). The purified PCR products were then quantified using the 1X dsDNA High Sensitivity kit with a Qubit 2.0 fluorometer (Invitrogen, Life Technologies Inc., Carlsbad, CA). An equal mass of amplicons from each sample were pooled and sequenced on the Illumina MiSeq platform (ICBR, Gainesville, FL).

Five Illumina MiSeq flow cells were used to generate 67 gigabases of nucleotide sequencing data for 965 samples. Sequencing read pre-processing, including merging and demultiplexing, was done using scripts available through Qiime v1.9.143. Forward and reverse sequencing reads were merged based on overlap to generate single reads using fastq-join https://github.com/ExpressionAnalysis/ea-utils. The joined reads were analyzed for quality using FastQC https://github.com/s-andrews/FastQC. The forward primer sequence used during PCR was trimmed using the fastx_trimmer tool available in the FASTX-Toolkit (http://hannonlab.cshl.edu/fastx_toolkit). The reads were then labelled according to 11-base barcodes located at the 3′ end of the read. Finally, the labelled reads were demultiplexed into separate FASTQ files by sample ID.

Demultiplexed sequences were further processed into amplicon sequencing variants (ASVs) using the DADA2 software package available in R44 (https://www.R-project.org). Briefly, the demultiplexed FASTQ files were visually assessed for quality via the “plotQualityProfile” function. Read quality dropped sharply beyond 400 nucleotides and the reads were truncated to this length. The truncated reads were also filtered to allow for no ambiguous nucleotides (N), a maximum expected error rate of 2, further truncation after encountering a base with Q-score 2 and the removal of PhiX reads. Chimeric sequences were filtered using the consensus method and taxonomy was assigned using the SILVA_v132 training set45–48. The resulting ASV table was used to analyze the composition of the stool microbiome using the phyloseq package49.

Further filtering removed samples with fewer than 1000 reads and samples with no subject genotype information. The remaining samples were rarefied to an even sequencing depth of 10,000 reads per sample, a sufficient sequencing depth verified through rarefaction curves. After filtering, 603 of the total 965 samples with HLA genotype data remained for analysis. Because not all genetic risk groups are represented in every town sampled, only those towns with at least one subject from each risk group were retained, resulting in 403 samples for analysis. The number of subjects in each risk group category are described in Supplementary Table 1.

Differentially abundant ASVs between the genetic risk groups were determined using DESeq2 and LEfSe50,51. Alpha diversity (including plots) were calculated using the Microbiome R package (http://microbiome.github.com/microbiome). The Microbiome package was also used to calculate and filter by ASV prevalence. Differences in microbiome composition by genetic risk and other covariates were tested for using the permutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) test through the “adonis” function in the vegan R package (https://github.com/vegandevs/vegan). All PERMANOVA tests were performed with the default 999 permutations. PERMANOVA was used to test for significant differences in distance dissimilarity on a number of covariates including duration of breastfeeding, breastfeeding status at sample collection, antibiotic usage in the first year and within one month of sample collection (yes/no), mode of delivery and gender. The vegan package was also used for assessing multivariate homogeneity of variance (beta dispersion) between sampling groups using PERMDISP2. For calculating presence/absence metrics such as Jaccard, the “binary = TRUE” option was set. P-value results from statistical testing were corrected for false discovery rate (FDR) using the Benjamin–Hochberg (B–H) method52. Principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) plots, including the calculated 95% confidence ellipses, were generated using the ggplot2 R package53.

Aliquots of stool were stored at −80 °C prior to DNA extraction to culture bacteria of interest, such as those associated with health and low genetic risk. Samples showing the highest relative abundance of significant Bifidobacterium ASVs were serially diluted in 1X phosphate buffered saline and plated on pre-reduced Modified Bifidobacterium Agar (Becton, Dickinson and Company) without the addition of lactulose. Individual colonies were isolated from the two lowest dilution plates and culture stocks were stored in a 15% glycerol solution at −80 °C. DNA from each isolate was extracted using the E.Z.N.A Bacterial DNA kit (Omega Bio-tek, Doraville, CA) and the full length 16 S rRNA gene sequence was amplified by PCR using universal primers 27F and 1492R54. The resulting PCR products were Sanger sequenced to determine the identity of the isolates (Eton Bioscience, Inc., San Diego, CA). Resulting sequences were compared to the GenBank nucleotide database for identification using BLAST55.





Peer review information: Nature Communications would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their contributions to the peer review of this work. Peer review reports are available.

Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Supplementary Information accompanies this paper at 10.1038/s41467-019-11460-x.

