A Review of the Role of the Gut Microbiome in Personalized Sports Nutrition

The gut microbiome is a key factor in determining inter-individual variability in response to diet. Thus, far, research in this area has focused on metabolic health outcomes such as obesity and type 2 diabetes. However, understanding the role of the gut microbiome in determining response to diet may also lead to improved personalization of sports nutrition for athletic performance. The gut microbiome has been shown to modify the effect of both diet and exercise, making it relevant to the athlete's pursuit of optimal performance. This area of research can benefit from recent developments in the general field of personalized nutrition and has the potential to expand our knowledge of the nexus between the gut microbiome, lifestyle, and individual physiology.

The gut microbiome has been implicated in the modulation of human health and metabolism (1, 2). This microbial “organ” has been linked to nutrition-related chronic diseases such as obesity and diabetes (3–6) and has also been shown to influence systemic functions including immunity (7, 8) and brain function (9, 10). The gut microbiome may influence health via mechanisms such as the production of metabolites (2, 11) [e.g., short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs)] that can influence a wide array of host systems and metabolic pathways (12, 13).

Variability in the physiological response to training and nutrition has been attributed to factors such as age, sex, training history, initial training status, psychological factors, and the mode, duration, intensity, and frequency of training (26). Genetics has also become a large topic of research in the area of variability in response to exercise training and potentially ergogenic dietary components (27–38). It is possible that variability in the gut microbiome may also influence gains in performance in response to training and nutrition. Despite the growing interest in the gut microbiome and personalized nutrition, very few studies have combined these fields with that of athletic performance. This is surprising as athletes are extremely motivated to capitalize on any advantage, however small, that could increase their performance. This review focuses on several topics related to the question of whether the gut microbiome may be used to predict performance response to dietary and/or training interventions. This includes topics such as (1) the effect of exercise on the gut microbiome, (2) the effect of dietary components or patterns relevant to athletic nutrition on the gut microbiome, and (3) the effect of the gut microbiome on performance response to diet and exercise. Each of these related topics will be discussed, as will gaps in the research and future directions.

Numerous reviews have been published highlighting the effect of exercise on the gut microbiota (39–56). However, the primary focus of these reviews has been the implications for aspects of host health, such as the immune system and risk of chronic diseases. Only a few have discussed the implications for athletic performance (41, 48, 52). This review aims to provide a more in-depth discussion of the interactive effect between the gut microbiota and diet on athletic performance and highlight the need for further research in this area. A literature search in PubMed and Google Scholar, including combinations of key words “gut microbiota”, “exercise”, “performance,” “variability,” and “effect,” was used to identify relevant studies. References were also obtained from the above review articles.

The earliest study found was published in 2008 by Matsumoto et al. (57) but was followed by a host of studies aiming to identify the effects of exercise on the gut microbiota (19, 58–83). The majority of these studies have investigated the effect of exercise on the gut microbiota in rodents (57–75), though some have studied humans in intervention trials (18, 76–78, 84) and in cross-sectional or observational comparisons of athletes or active individuals and sedentary individuals (19, 79–83, 85, 86).

Table 1 summarizes the studies listed above and their findings of the effect of exercise on the gut microbiota.

However, in some studies, changes in taxa are dependent on other factors such as changes in weight, body fat, and blood glucose (64, 76). This suggests, that the associated metabolic effects of the exercise regime may be the proximal cause, while exercise is the ultimate cause. Related variables, SCFA production and butyrate-producing taxa, have been consistently shown to increase in response to exercise (18, 57, 79) and have also been positively correlated to changes in lean muscle mass, also suggesting that SCFAs may play an important role in mediating the effects of exercise and the gut microbiome on host response (18). Table 2 summarizes additional effects of exercise on microbial metabolites, host health, and dietary interactions.

Potential reasons for the disparate results of these studies include study design factors as well as analytic methods (Figure 2). Study design factors include the choice of model (e.g., humans, mice, rats), the strain of mouse/rat (e.g., C57BL/6J, Zucker, Wistar, Sprague Dawley, etc.) (87), choice of diet (72), health or disease status (75, 81), age (66), gender, and the mode, duration, and intensity of training (59, 63, 72, 83, 84) as well as analytic methods such as DNA extraction and PCR primer biases (88–90), choice of microbiome sequencing methods (e.g., 16S rRNA gene sequencing, qPCR, metagenomics, etc.) (64), bioinformatic pipelines (90), and choice of diversity metrics (e.g., Shannon, Chao1, Simpson, etc.). For example, mouse models often use forced treadmill running or voluntary wheel running as modes of training. However, forced treadmill exercise often uses aversive motivation, such as shocks, which could induce negative stress responses (91–93) that may also affect intestinal permeability and the gut microbiome (59, 94, 95). In humans, exercise or sport is a broad term that can apply to a wide range of modes, durations, and intensities of activity. O'Donovan et al. (83) attempted to determine differential effects of different modes of exercise on the gut metagenome by doing a cross-sectional analysis of professional athletes from different sports with varying degrees of static and dynamic components. In this analysis, O'Donovan etal. found some differences in bacterial taxa and metabolites between sports classification groups (SCGs) that did not correlate with any other metadata (e.g., diet, sex, etc.) (83).

In addition to differences in how results are obtained or measured, there is also a great deal of heterogeneity in what results are measured, or reported, that make it difficult to determine the full extent of variability in response between studies. In order to gain better insight into the potential effects and pathways by which exercise exerts its effect on the gut microbiome, it would be beneficial for studies to report effects on at least a certain standard set of microbiota variables that have already been shown to be relevant by multiple studies such as Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, Lactobacillus, Bifidobacterium, Akkermansia, Clostridium, and Proteobacteria as well as diversity (though a standard metric has yet to be determined), butyrate-producing taxa (96), and SCFA production, even if the result is no change/difference. Munukka et al. (76) reported a lack of consistent effects due to inter-individual variability in response of the gut microbiota to exercise. This too is an important finding that should be reported and explored to determine factors that contribute to this variability in response and whether these differences in microbial response translate to differences in physiological response. These reporting standards would allow for better comparison between studies and potentially enable researchers to determine how different methods impact the results and elucidate factors that may contribute to variability in response.

Diet is also a major factor that influences and shapes the gut microbiome (15–17). Kang et al. report that diet and exercise both cause shifts in the gut microbiome but that these changes are orthogonal (61). However, some of the studies above reported that dietary factors influenced the gut microbiota independently of, or in combination with, exercise. Dietary factors found in the studies presented here to associate with gut microbiome differences or changes include dairy products (82), light-colored vegetables (77), seaweed (77), rice (77), cereals (82), sucrose (76), fiber (76, 79, 82), protein intake (19, 79, 82), fat intake (82), and total food intake (65, 76) (Figure 3). Some differences or changes in the gut microbiota that seem to be associated with exercise may therefore be due to differences or changes in dietary intake, especially plants and carbohydrates, rather than exercise itself. There is therefore a need for studies investigating the link between the gut microbiome and exercise that control and standardize the dietary intake of participants.

Although studies have shown some dietary interactions with the gut microbiome in athletes, it is unclear the extent to which the gut microbiome might be affected by supplements or dietary patterns commonly used by athletes, and the potential effects of this on the host. A review by Kårlund et al. (97) comprehensively discusses the topic of protein supplementation in athletes and the potential unknown effects on the gut microbiome. Excess protein may be fermented in the large intestine by various species from the genera Clostridium, Bacteroides, and others from the Proteobacteria phylum (98, 99), resulting in end products such as ammonia, amines, phenols, and sulfides as well as some SCFAs that may have systemic and metabolic effects on the host (100, 101). Different protein types have been shown to have differential effects on the gut microbiome (102–104) and plant-based vs. animal-based diets have also been shown to induce differences in the gut microbiome composition in humans (16). Additionally, different protein types have been assessed in the context of the anabolic response to exercise (105). However, there are no studies evaluating the impact of different types of protein supplements or whole-food protein sources on the gut microbiome and amino acid fermentation in athletes (97). As protein and protein supplements are widely advertised and recommended to athletes, this is an important gap in the research that should be addressed. Future research should also be sure to compare the effects of different protein sources as both isolated supplements as well as in their whole-food form as the matrix of the whole food has been shown to play an important role in the anabolic response to exercise and may alter effects based on factors such as the type and amount of fat (106, 107). Additionally, it would be interesting to know whether supplementation of plant-based proteins with amino acids such as leucine, lysine, and methionine, which is a strategy that has been shown by a couple studies to augment the anabolic effect of plant proteins (105), alters the effect of these proteins on the gut microbiome.

Caffeine is also a widely used ergogenic aid among athletes. Coffee, one of the primary dietary sources of caffeine, has been linked to increases in Bifidobacterium and protection against high-fat diet-induced decreases in Lactobacillus, though these effects may be due to other bioactive compounds present in coffee such as chlorogenic acid (119). The effect of these aspects of dietary intake on the gut microbiome in athletes is only one half of the story. The other is the effect of the gut microbiome on the overall response, in terms of performance and training adaptation, of the athlete.

As discussed in Hughes et al. (22, 23), the gut microbiome is a potential predictor of response to diet. However, that review focused on predictors of response relevant to general health and prevention of chronic disease. Here, the evidence that the gut microbiome may be a predictor of athletic performance is reviewed. Personalized sports nutrition has incorporated the type of sport or activity, the training status of the individual, the athlete's goals, the time of the competitive season, and the athlete's food preferences (120, 121) as well as biological traits such as genetic polymorphisms, RNA expression, and epigenetic modifications (28–30, 34–38) in the attempt to optimize athletic performance and response to training programs.

The gut microbiome should be incorporated into this system as it modulates metabolism of diet and dietary supplements, and therefore has the potential to contribute to variability in response. Inter-individual variability among athletes in response to dietary supplements, such as caffeine and antioxidants, has been attributed to genetic polymorphisms and baseline antioxidant concentrations (35, 122). However, the gut microbiome has been identified as an important factor in the bioavailability and metabolism of antioxidants (123–125) and may be involved in caffeine metabolism via mechanisms such as modulation of the expression of the N-acetyltransferase 2 (NAT2) gene (126). Variability in the gut microbiome has been linked to variability in serum carotenoid concentrations (127), which suggests that the gut microbiome does indeed play a role in modulating antioxidant metabolism. In short, the gut microbiome may affect the metabolism of dietary components, supplements, and dietary patterns marketed to and used by athletes, but this is an area of research that has not yet been adequately explored.

Though the gut microbiome has been shown to modulate metabolism of relevant dietary components, as discussed above, the implications of this for performance are still unclear.

It is worth noting, however, in Huang et al. (132) that L. plantarum and C. coccoides did not colonize stably in the mice, fecal analysis showed no significant increases of these microbes, while E. rectale did colonize and increase over time. Therefore, it is unclear whether the ergogenic effect was due to the presence of E. rectale specifically, or simply due to the successful colonization by a microbe. These studies suggest that the gut microbiome may influence performance. They also indicate that a more diverse microbiome may be more beneficial as SPF mice performed better than monocolonized BF mice (131). While Huang et al. (132) suggests that individual taxa such as E. rectale may be partially responsible for performance effects, further research is needed to determine exactly what aspects or taxa contribute to this ergogenic effect. These studies also did not investigate responses to a dietary or training regimen, leaving room for further research on the potential of the gut microbiome to mediate or modify exercise performance response to diet.

While there are a number of studies on probiotic supplementation in animals and human athletes, most focus on effects such as frequency of respiratory and gastrointestinal illness or biomarkers of inflammation and immune function (137, 144–146). Supplementation of probiotic bacteria to boost the abundance or activity of potentially beneficial taxa may also serve as a potential method of modifying performance response to training. Our review of the literature found eleven studies investigating the ergogenic effect of probiotic supplementation (133–142, 147) (Table 4). Common probiotic bacteria used were strains of Lactobacillus or Bifidobacterium (133, 134, 136–139, 147). Additional strains tested included those belonging to species Bacillus subtillis (140) or Bacillus coagulans (135), Veillonella atypica (141), or even yeast Saccharomyces boulardii (142).

In addition to performance variables, many of these studies investigated effects on body composition and inflammation. Again, results were mixed, with some studies reporting significant effects of supplementation on outcomes such as fat mass and muscle mass (132, 133) or inflammatory markers (133, 137, 139, 141, 147), though results were often mixed with some biochemical markers showing no significant effect of probiotic treatment and some studies showing no significant effects at all on these outcomes (134, 142). However, as none of these variables were analyzed, further research is necessary to determine the mechanism of the effects as well as whether the same effects are seen in humans.

Conversely to the use of probiotics to determine the potential effect of the gut microbiome on athletic performance, the use of antibiotics in mouse models has recently been explored to determine the potential effects of a lack of gut microbes and their metabolites on exercise capacity and muscle function (148, 149). Table 5 displays the findings of these recent studies. In both studies, antibiotic treatment decreased the exercise capacity of the mice, tested using forced treadmill running. Additionally, this phenotype could be rescued by either natural reseeding (148) or acetate infusion (149). Nay et al. also found reduced gene expression of SCFA receptor G-protein coupled receptor 41 (GPR41) and sodium/glucose cotransporter 1 (SGLT1) as well as reduced muscle glycogen in antibiotic-treated mice, suggesting that the reduced exercise capacity in these mice may have been mediated by muscle glycogen availability (148). Okamoto et al. concluded that the reduced exercise capacity of antibiotic-treated mice was due to the lack of acetate available for use as a substrate during exercise as acetyl-CoA (149). With regards to changes in the gut microbial community, Okamoto et al. reported that relative abundance of Firmicutes was increased in antibiotic-treated mice while Bacteroidetes, α-diversity, and fecal bacterial DNA concentration was reduced (149). Nay et al. found that fecal bacterial DNA was reduced in antibiotic-treated mice but only reported differences in composition between control mice and mice treated with antibiotics but naturally reseeded, which showed no significant differences in α- and β-diversity, Bacteroides, and Firmicutes (148).

Okamoto et al. additionally tested the effect of a low microbiota-available carbohydrate diet (LMC) vs. a high microbiota-available carbohydrate (HMC) diet to determine with substrate availability for the gut microbiome altered exercise capacity. In these treatment groups, treadmill running time was decreased in the LMC mice, concomitant with a decrease in muscle mass, fecal SCFA, and plasma acetate and proprionate as well as an increase in Firmicutes and decrease in Bacteroidetes and other SCFA producing bacterial taxa (149). This reduced exercise capacity phenotype was rescued when mice were given a fecal microbiota transplant (FMT) from HMC mice and a dose of inulin prior to exercise. The increased exercise capacity in LMC+FMT+inulin mice was not accompanied by changes in body mass or muscle mass but there was an increase in fecal SCFAs, again suggesting that SCFA concentration may act as a direct substrate or mediate substrate availability in such a way as to influence exercise capacity.

These studies suggest that there may be an effect of the gut microbiome on exercise performance via mechanisms such as SCFA availability, muscle glycogen content, antioxidant enzyme activity, gastrointestinal permeability, and lactate metabolism (Figure 4). Additional speculative mechanisms may involve alterations in substrate utilization (142) as well as glycogen metabolism and storage (150), changes in neural function (142), as well as immune modulation (142) or cross-talk between the gut microbiome and mitochondria in energy production and inflammation (45). The gut microbiota has been hypothesized to impact skeletal muscle physiology and function via metabolites such as SCFAs, folate, tryptophan, glycine betaine, vitamins B2 and B12, and urolithins that may act through various pathways such as stimulation of insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1), prevention of oxidative stress or inflammation, and promotion of mitochondrial biogenesis (151). However, these data also indicate that improvements in these functions do not always translate to improvements in performance. Further research is needed to investigate the effects of different probiotic strains, the interaction with dietary composition (e.g., differences of effect in athletes who have different overall dietary patterns), the use of dietary supplements, and in different modes of exercise, such as strength training.

The gut microbiome represents an open field of study in the realm of personalized sports nutrition. High interindividual variability in response to training and physical activity is regularly reported (152) and the gut microbiome may contribute to this variability by impacting individual metabolism of food components and/or adaptation to the homeostatic stress, or training load, of the exercise stimulus (153). More research is needed to determine whether the gut microbiome could be an important predictor of athletic performance in response to dietary and exercise interventions. Researchers should refer to guides such as Ross et al. (36), Hecksteden et al. (152), Mann et al. (153), Swinton et al. (154), and Hopkins et al. (155) for statistical frameworks to interpret inter-individual variability in response and identify factors that contribute to this variability.

In conclusion, there are several different fields of research that have touched on the question of the role of the gut microbiome in exercise and athletic performance. However, there are many gaps and limitations in the research thus far that must still be addressed. While there have not yet been any conclusive findings, further research and collaboration among disciplines may help shed light on the connection between exercise and the gut microbiome and the potential implications on athletic performance.

RH performed the literature review, conceived, and composed the manuscript.

The author declares that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

Funding. Partial funding for this manuscript was provided by the UC Davis Open Access Fund.

