Improving causality in microbiome research: can human genetic epidemiology help?



We updated the manuscript regarding information on the paper by Sanna et al. after receiving reviewer comments on the second version.

Evidence supports associations between human gut microbiome variation and multiple health outcomes and diseases. Despite compelling results from in vivo and in vitro models, few findings have been translated into an understanding of modifiable causal relationships. Furthermore, epidemiological studies have been unconvincing in their ability to offer causal evidence due to their observational nature, where confounding by lifestyle and behavioural factors, reverse causation and bias are important limitations. Whilst randomized controlled trials have made steps towards understanding the causal role played by the gut microbiome in disease, they are expensive and time-consuming. This evidence that has not been translated between model systems impedes opportunities for harnessing the gut microbiome for improving population health. Therefore, there is a need for alternative approaches to interrogate causality in the context of gut microbiome research.

The integration of human genetics within population health sciences have proved successful in facilitating improved causal inference (e.g., with Mendelian randomization [MR] studies) and characterising inherited disease susceptibility. MR is an established method that employs human genetic variation as natural “proxies” for clinically relevant (and ideally modifiable) traits to improve causality in observational associations between those traits and health outcomes. Here, we focus and discuss the utility of MR within the context of human gut microbiome research, review studies that have used this method and consider the strengths, limitations and challenges facing this research. Specifically, we highlight the requirements for careful examination and interpretation of derived causal estimates and host (i.e., human) genetic effects themselves, triangulation across multiple study designs and inter-disciplinary collaborations. Meeting these requirements will help support or challenge causality of the role played by the gut microbiome on human health to develop new, targeted therapies to alleviate disease symptoms to ultimately improve lives and promote good health.

AUC = area under the curve; BMI = body mass index; CAD = coronary artery disease; CKD = chronic kidney disease; FGFP = Flemish Gut Flora Project; GECCO = Genetics and Epidemiology of Colorectal Cancer Consortium; GWAS = genome-wide association study; IBD = inflammatory bowel disease; LD = linkage disequilibrium; MI = myocardial infarction; MR = Mendelian randomization; OR = odds ratio; RCT = randomized controlled trial; RR = risk ratio; SCFA = short chain fatty acid; SD = standard deviation; SNP = single nucleotide polymorphism; TMAO = trimethylamine-N-oxide; T2D = type 2 diabetes

Evidence from microbiome-wide studies has highlighted relationships between the gut microbiome and many complex traits and diseases – from dietary composition, obesity, rheumatoid arthritis and type 2 diabetes (T2D) to Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease and depression 1– 9. For example, the lower diversity and relative abundances of bacteria within the Bacteroidetes vs. Firmicutes phyla in obese vs. lean individuals has been observed in studies of mice and humans, with cross-sectional, longitudinal and experimental designs 10, 11. Several studies have also demonstrated that the relative bacterial abundances in the Bacteroidetes order increases and Firmicutes order decreases with low-calorie diets (e.g., through fat or carbohydrate restriction) or surgery-induced weight loss in obese individuals, whereby the gut microbiota composition becomes similar to that of their lean counterparts 10– 13. Ostensibly, these studies suggest that the manipulation of the human gut microbiome (e.g., not only through diet and surgery but also via the intake of pre- or pro-biotics, antibiotic usage or faecal microbiome transplants) may have potential as an approach to develop new, targeted therapies and treatments to reduce disease in the population.

Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) in this area have made some steps towards understanding the causal role played by the gut microbiome in disease. However, many mainly focus on alleviating symptoms within patients who have an established condition 37– 39. RCTs have focused on the influence of diet, pre- and pro-biotics, or antibiotics on the gut microbiome and related traits and have presented an array of conclusions ranging from a preventative to detrimental role of these interventions. However, most of these RCTs consist of fewer than 50 participants, who tend to be selected based on disease status and who are often on different medications, which are difficult to control 40. Only a handful of registered trials to date have completed with tangible results and more have been terminated, suspended or withdrawn 40. Given the current literature, trials focusing on disease prevention in healthy individuals or those understanding how variations within the gut microbiome can promote good health are imperative. Whilst larger efforts are ongoing (e.g., as of July 2019, there were approximately 650 RCTs of the gut microbiome still recruiting), such trials are likely not feasible to answer every scientific question and are importantly expensive, time-consuming and sometimes unethical, particularly within a healthy human population. The application of alternative causal inference methods in this context are needed to improve causal inference and help elucidate the role played by the gut microbiome in human health and disease.

MR is an approach that uses human genetic variation (usually single nucleotide polymorphisms [SNPs], identified in genome-wide association studies [GWASs]) to act as a “proxy” measure for exposures of interest (e.g., here, the gut microbiome) 41– 43. Provided a number of key assumptions are met ( Figure 1), these genetic variants can be argued to have properties that approximate those of “instruments” and thus can be used to estimate the causal effect of a trait on disease or health outcome 44. Theoretically analogous to arms of an RCT, genetic variants used in MR are largely independent of confounding factors, due to the random nature of their allocation within a population in the absence of any population stratification. These genetic variants are also not modified by the later development of disease or health outcome and, with very accurate genotyping being commonplace, measurement error is largely reduced. Therefore, at a population level, the portion of variance in the modifiable trait explained by human genetic variants (unlike the direct measurement of the trait itself) can be used to model situations that are free of the aforementioned limitations that would otherwise weaken causal inference in observational studies.

Given the inconsistencies between studies aimed at estimating the causal role of the gut microbiome in human health and disease, MR provides the opportunity to assess causality in observed associations not only between the gut microbiome and health outcomes but also the impact of various traits on the gut microbiome itself, without the need for costly RCTs or lab-based study designs in the first instance. Results derived from the application of MR in this context also provides a potential mechanism to direct the prioritisation of characteristics of the gut microbiome as interventional targets (e.g., via dietary regulation or using pre- and pro-biotics), to inform clinical and public health guidelines and to improve population health in an efficient and cost-effective manner. For a full description and definitions of terminology, methods and assumptions specific to MR, please see the online MR Dictionary 43.

Our understanding of the host (i.e., human) genetic contribution to the gut microbiome has primarily arisen from candidate gene studies and genome-wide screens in model organisms 49. In recent years, and with the advent of higher-throughput technologies that are able to capture measurements of the gut microbiome at scale, several GWASs in humans have been conducted to further uncover host genetic variation that shapes the gut microbiome 50– 57. Together, these initial GWASs have identified associations between more than 100 human genetic variants associated with constituents of the gut microbiome (e.g., microbial diversity, taxon abundance and community structure). However, there has been limited overlap of identified host genetic variants implicated as being associated with the gut microbiome across studies. With the existence of host genetic variants associated with the gut microbiome, we and others have applied MR to appraise causality in the relationships between the gut microbiome and human health 58– 61. However, it is of upmost importance for careful examination and interpretation of MR-derived causal estimates, host genetic effects and the assessment of other benefits that the integration of human genetics to this field may provide in appraising causality. The current applications of MR in microbiome research are described below, with pertinent limitations shared between these applications discussed.

In 2018, Yang et al. used MR to assess the causal effect of 27 component genera of the gut microbiome on ischemic heart disease, T2D, adiposity, lipid levels and insulin resistance using human genetic variation that had previously been associated with these particular bacterial taxa measured with 16S rRNA sequencing 58. In this case, host SNPs (i.e., human genetic variation) associated with these 27 genera were obtained from previous studies 51– 53, 55, 57, with highly correlated SNPs removed based on linkage disequilibrium (LD; based on an r 2 ≥ 0.8). These were also crossed-referenced with Ensembl and the GWAS catalog to remove potentially pleiotropic SNPs (i.e., those that may have an effect on the outcome other than through the exposure of interest) and to reduce possibility of invalidating the third MR assumption ( Figure 1).

This application of MR provides compelling evidence of the causal impact of the gut microbiome on cardiometabolic traits. However, these results were not robust when testing whether the effects of these genetic variants were independent of Bifidobacterium (i.e., “horizontal pleiotropy” – Figure 1), suggesting that this bacterial genus may not have been the sole driver of these seemingly beneficial metabolic effects. Additionally, many of the associations between the human genetic variants and the gut microbiome used in the MR analyses were not replicated either within or between the studies from which they were obtained 51– 53, 55, 57, questioning the validity of using them in MR analyses, as they may not be reliably associated with the exposure (i.e., invalidating the first MR assumption, Figure 1).

In 2019, authors of another study based on a collection of 952 normoglycemic individuals from the LifeLines-DEEP cohort with genetic, metagenomic sequences and faecal short-chain fatty acid (SCFA) levels performed bi-directional MR to assess the association of 245 metagenomic features describing functionality of the gut microbiome (2 of which were linked to SCFA production, 57 unique taxa and 186 pathways) with 17 metabolic and anthropometric traits 59, 62. Genetic variants were chosen by conducting a GWAS within 952 individuals from the LifeLines-DEEP cohort. A fairly lenient p-value threshold of 1×10 -5 was used to define host genetic variants independently associated with functional features of the gut microbiome. These genetic variants selected at the lenient threshold were chosen as they explained most variance in the same feature in an independent cohort of 445 individuals, compared to other variants defined using varying thresholds.

Whilst the metagenomic features authors used provided more insight into the functionality of the gut microbiome (over and above measuring relative abundances with 16S rRNA sequencing), authors were unable to test the relationship between these features and circulating levels of the SCFAs (e.g., butyrate and propionate), as these were not measured in the study sample. Similar to Yang et al., the associations between the genetic variants used in MR analyses and the functional features of the gut microbiome were not replicated in other studies. Additionally, much of the GWAS summary-level data that authors used was adjusted for other covariates (mainly BMI), which may induce false correlations between the exposure and outcome via a certain type of selection bias (i.e., collider bias) and, in the most extreme cases, this can reverse the direction of the causal effect estimate (which was observed in this study) 64, 65.

A further study conducted by Jia et al. used MR to examine the association between the trimethylamine-N-oxide (TMAO) metabolite, produced by processes specific to gut bacteria when metabolising choline from high-fat foods such as eggs and beef, and its predecessors with both continuous measures of cardiometabolic health and diseases 60. This study was motivated by the observational epidemiological literature, suggesting that choline, TMAO (a derivative of choline) and carnitine are associated with an increased risk of heart disease and other cardiometabolic diseases, hypothesised through their atherosclerotic effects in blood vessels 66, 67. The authors undertook a bi-directional MR analysis to unpick the direction of association of circulating levels of these metabolites with traits relating to adiposity, glycaemic profile, lipids and kidney function alongside diseases including T2D, coronary artery disease (CAD), myocardial infarction (MI), stroke, atrial fibrillation and chronic kidney disease (CKD) 60. Genetic variants used in MR analyses as instruments for each of four metabolites (choline, TMAO, carnitine and betaine) were obtained from a GWAS of 217 blood-based metabolites in 2,076 individuals of European descent from the Framingham Heart Study (Offspring Cohort) 68 and chosen based on a lenient threshold of “suggestive” genome-wide significance ( P<5×10 -5). Given the number of tests being performed, authors set an a priori Bonferroni-corrected threshold ( P<0.0005) to detect evidence for association.

Results presented by Jia et al. provided further insight into the functional relevance of the gut microbiome on cardiometabolic disease, performing power calculations and utilising a selection of appropriate sensitivity analyses that appraise validity of derived causal estimates. These results suggested that, by altering levels of these microbiome-dependent metabolites, there may be an opportunity to modify the potential causal impact of the gut microbiome and its metabolic functionality to reduce the risk of T2D. However, it is important to clarify firstly that authors tested the relationship of circulating levels of metabolites with cardiometabolic traits and not characteristics of the gut microbiome itself. Indeed, whilst constituent gut microbiota do produce these metabolites naturally and are associated with their circulating levels, such metabolites can be introduced into the blood stream via other means (e.g., supplementation and diet). Thus, the direct causal impact of gut microbiome in this instance is uncertain and may, in fact, be irrelevant. Similar to the other applications of MR described above, the genetic variants used as instruments for the microbiota-derived metabolites were not replicated in the original GWAS from which they were obtained and were selected based on a fairly lenient threshold (similar to Sanna et al. 58), questioning the reliability of their use.

As is evident from the current applications of MR in the context of microbiome research, one of the main limitations is the limited overlap and replication of identified host genetic variants associated with the gut microbiome across studies. Most recently, a GWAS of the gut microbiome characterised with 16S rRNA sequencing was conducted by Hughes et al. in over 3800 individuals from three independent studies, including a discovery sample comprising the Flemish Gut Flora Project and two German replication samples 61. Within this analysis, 13 SNPs reached conventional levels of genome-wide significance ( P<2.5×10 -8), with some showing low heterogeneity between studies, and two of these reached a strict study-level threshold ( P<1.57×10 -10). This novel and persistent collection of SNPs associated with measures of the gut microbiome enabled the application of MR to provide further insight into the causal link between these microbial features and a set of metabolic, inflammatory and neurological traits previously implicated as being associated with the gut microbiome throughout the literature 61.

Whilst these are first steps in the right direction of understanding the utility of host genetic variation in microbiome research for improved causality, there is much room for improvement. Importantly, when appreciating the complexity of these relationships, the integration of human genetics, genetic epidemiological techniques and causal inference methodologies to the field of microbiome research holds great potential.

With the advent of the application of MR within the context of gut microbiome research, and the growing data available for such analyses, there are important limitations and complexities to these applied epidemiological analyses that need to be acknowledged and addressed. The general limitations of MR have been summarised before 41, 43, but those most pertinent to microbiome research are currently the lack of robust and reliable genetic variants associated with the gut microbiome and its functionality and the complexity of mechanisms by which host genetic variants impact these microbial traits. This latter complication includes the possibility that identified genetic variants associated with components of the gut microbiome are also associated with the outcome of interest in an MR study through independent mechanisms ( Figure 2). In addition, many of the current studies utilizing MR have used lenient p-value thresholds to define the set of included genetic variants, leading to concerns in their instrumental variable quality (via an invalidation of the third MR assumption).

In addition to these MR-specific limitations, it is worth revisiting the general limitations with microbiome research that have likely driven the limited overlap of genetic variants consistently associated with gut microbiota between microbiome-wide GWASs. These include (but are certainly not limited to) differences in protocols/standards for sample collection and storage, DNA extraction method (including chosen hypervariable region for PCR and sequencing methods 77), PCR primers, and amplicon vs. shotgun sequencing 78, 79. Whilst 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing is useful in providing insight into the types of bacteria present within samples, one particular issue in current studies is the limited resolution afforded by this technology. However, as studies using 16S sequencing combine for undertaking harmonized GWASs (e.g., with the MiBioGen initiative), the power afforded by larger sample sizes will be invaluable for understanding the host genetic contribution to the gut microbiome. This, in combination with future studies using data from complementary technologies (e.g., shotgun metagenomics achieving strain-level resolution, metatranscriptomics, proteomics and metabolomics) able to provide more refined measures of components and functionality of the gut microbiome, will enable a more comprehensive understanding of the role played by these microorganisms in health and disease and the mechanisms by which these occur. In addition, whilst most studies have focused on the bacterial component of the gut microbiome, it is important to interrogate the causal role that other integral microorganisms (i.e., fungi, viruses and archaea) play in the development and progression of host disease and health outcomes over the lifecourse.

MR is an established approach that uses human genetic variation to estimate causal associations in observational epidemiological relationships and can be used to provide further insight into the causal relevance of the gut microbiome in human health and disease. The applications discussed here currently flag the potential of MR analyses following the growing collection of genetic association data for the human gut microbiome, but there are also important issues likely to arise with a naïve integration of complex GWAS results to understanding causes of health outcomes without in-depth knowledge of the host genetic variants themselves and the performance and pitfalls of MR methodology 41, 80. Whilst MR was motivated to confer certain advantages over traditional epidemiological study designs, like any study design within epidemiology, it is not exclusively adequate to conclusively demonstrate causality. Therefore, there is a continued need for triangulation across multiple traditional epidemiological approaches and inter-disciplinary collaboration to support or challenge causality of the role played by the gut microbiome on human health and to understand the mechanisms by which these relationships occur. Such partnerships are necessary to maximise translation into the development of new, targeted therapies to alleviate disease symptoms to ultimately improve lives, and promote good health whilst preventing ill health 81.

No data are associated with this article.

In this review article, the authors discuss how studies on microbiome can be translated into human health & diseases, particularly by focusing on the utility of Mendelian randomization (MR) studies. The manuscript, describing usefulness and limitation of MR studies, is well written.

I confirm that I have read this submission and believe that I have an appropriate level of expertise to confirm that it is of an acceptable scientific standard.

Thank you, I do not have any further comment.

I confirm that I have read this submission and believe that I have an appropriate level of expertise to confirm that it is of an acceptable scientific standard.

I thank the authors for incorporating my suggestions. 

I confirm that I have read this submission and believe that I have an appropriate level of expertise to confirm that it is of an acceptable scientific standard.

We have incorporated the changes, as requested by the Reviewer.

This review is clearly written and comprehensive. It explains the urgent need in identifying causal relationships between microbiome and diseases before moving to real clinical application and to commercial kits, and then introduces the Mendelian Randomization approach that has been recently used in this context. The authors present findings and limitations of these studies, and also more in general the  pros and  cons of Mendelian Randomization in application to microbiome. 

I confirm that I have read this submission and believe that I have an appropriate level of expertise to confirm that it is of an acceptable scientific standard.

We wanted to thank the Reviewer for their kind words on the writing and understanding of the importance of this area. We hope that this report provides understandable insight into the Mendelian randomization approach and how this may help further integrate epidemiology and microbiology and interrogate causal relationships between the microbiome and health outcomes. We also thank the Reviewer on their suggestions for improvement, which we have addressed below. For each comment made the Reviewer (in bold) we have responded and added the italicized excerpt. 

“A greater number of genetic variants robustly associated with features of the gut microbiome will further enable the application of the continuously developing plethora of MR methods that require multiple instruments to investigate the effect of confounding, mediation, pleiotropy and invalidation of MR assumptions.”

