Precision Nutrition and the Microbiome Part II: Potential Opportunities and Pathways to Commercialisation

Modulation of the human gut microbiota through probiotics, prebiotics and dietary fibre are recognised strategies to improve health and prevent disease. Yet we are only beginning to understand the impact of these interventions on the gut microbiota and the physiological consequences for the human host, thus forging the way towards evidence-based scientific validation. However, in many studies a percentage of participants can be defined as ‘non-responders’ and scientists are beginning to unravel what differentiates these from ‘responders;’ and it is now clear that an individual’s baseline microbiota can influence an individual’s response. Thus, microbiome composition can potentially serve as a biomarker to predict responsiveness to interventions, diets and dietary components enabling greater opportunities for its use towards disease prevention and health promotion. In Part I of this two-part review, we reviewed the current state of the science in terms of the gut microbiota and the role of diet and dietary components in shaping it and subsequent consequences for human health. In Part II, we examine the efficacy of gut-microbiota modulating therapies at different life stages and their potential to aid in the management of undernutrition and overnutrition. Given the significance of an individual’s gut microbiota, we investigate the feasibility of microbiome testing and we discuss guidelines for evaluating the scientific validity of evidence for providing personalised microbiome-based dietary advice. Overall, this review highlights the potential value of the microbiome to prevent disease and maintain or promote health and in doing so, paves the pathway towards commercialisation.

The gut microbiota is an integral component of the human body, and such is its contribution to human physiology that it has been deemed an organ in itself. With a genetic coding capacity that exceeds its human host by ≥100-fold [1], the gut microbiota executes essential functions that the body itself is incapable of performing. It promotes gut maturation, educates the immune system, provides protection against viral and bacterial pathogens, influences brain activities and bodily metabolism. In Part I of this two-part review [2], we provided an overview of its development from birth to old age and detailed how it impacts host health through multiple mechanisms.

In this review, we examine initially the consequences of different life stages or situations on the gut microbiota of humans and examine the efficacy of probiotics and prebiotics with a focus on gut microbiota modulation and/or improvement of symptom(s). We then investigate the potential of probiotics, prebiotics and dietary fibre to aid in the management of two forms of malnutrition which are prevalent in both developed and developing countries, namely, overnutrition and undernutrition, reporting changes conveyed to the gut microbiota and hence host physiology based on data from human studies. However, it is becoming increasingly clear that an individual’s baseline microbiota and genetic make-up can influence the efficacy of such interventions and scientists are beginning to unravel the discrepancies which exist between human ‘responders’ and ‘non-responders.’ This is perhaps one of the core elements of precision nutrition through the microbiome whereby it can serve as a biomarker to predict responsiveness to dietary components and interventions. As an example, the gut microbiota of an individual can be used to predict postprandial glycemic responses (PPGRs) to food [14] enabling the design of a precision-tailored individualised diet that helps prevent the development of metabolic syndrome and its comorbidities, a study which is discussed in more detail in Section 5. This level of data paves the way for new opportunities in terms of interventions and microbiome testing at an individual level. Microbiome testing is currently available; thus, we discuss its feasibility at this moment in time and how it can be streamlined to generate more scientifically meaningful results. Finally, we propose guidelines for evaluating the scientific validity of evidence for providing personalised microbiome-based dietary advice.

As science continues to delineate the composition and functionality of life stage-specific gut microbiota and deviations from what is considered “normal” or “healthy,” opportunities arise for dietary and therapeutic interventions which can beneficially modulate the microbiota and result in translational benefits to host physiology and overall health. In this section, we consider different life stages/situations and the impact of each on the gut microbiota including pregnancy, infancy and the elderly, especially focusing on those in long-stay care facilities, physical activity, and times of psychological stress. Dietary recommendations exist for these particular life junctures, but we also summarise a number of studies which have investigated the potential of probiotics and prebiotics to beneficially influence the gut microbiota and ultimately human health.

The female body undergoes several changes during pregnancy including an increase in body fat in early pregnancy which is followed by a decrease in insulin sensitivity later on [15]. The change in insulin sensitivity has been linked to immunity changes which are proposed to induce metabolic inflammation that is normally associated with obesity [16]. However, during pregnancy these changes support the growth of the foetus and prepare the mother’s body for lactation [17,18,19]. Specific nutritional recommendations exist for pregnancy, but these can differ depending on eating tradition and nutritional status of the population [20]. However, the gut microbiota of the pregnant mother has received increasing attention given that it can influence the health of both mother and child.

Further studies are warranted to fully understand the impact of probiotic/prebiotic/synbiotic supplementation on breast milk composition at the microbiological, immunological and bioactive molecule levels, and to determine the consequence of these changes for both mother and infant in the long term.

The infant gut microbiota plays an essential role in establishing the gut mucosal barrier, education of the immune system and in preventing enteric pathogen infection [65]. In Part I of this review, we described the development of the infant gut microbiota from birth onwards and while several factors have been shown to influence its composition (host genetics, gestational age, birth mode, feeding regime, antibiotic exposure), the gut microbiota of full-term, vaginally-delivered, exclusively breast-fed infants is generally recognised as representing the healthy microbiota [66,67]. Indeed, owing to its complex mixtures of bioactive components, which change in concentration, structure and function over lactation, human milk is considered the “gold standard” for early life nutrition [68].

These studies suggest that probiotics, prebiotics and synbiotics have a beneficial role to play in infant nutrition, and particularly in vulnerable infants including preterm and those born by caesarean section or for those for who breast milk is not an option. However, in order to incite greater confidence in both the medical profession and the public in general there is a need for large cohort, possibly multi-centre randomized controlled trials that focus on specific prebiotics, probiotics and synbiotics which assess their impacts and modes of action on the gut microbiota, infant health and wellness and the long-term outcomes for these parameters.

In Part I of this review we discussed the elderly (> 65 years) microbiota which is generally characterised by a reduction in microbial diversity, a decrease in species associated with short chain fatty acid (SCFA) production, especially butyrate, an increase in opportunistic pathogens [95,96] and even greater inter-individual variation than observed in adults [97]. The gut microbiota of those in long-stay residential care facilities is significantly less diverse than individuals of the same age group who reside within the community and the increased frailty observed in long-stay care residents correlates with loss of community-associated microbiota [98]. In the same study, the distinct microbiota groups identified as a result of residence location also overlapped with diet where individuals in long stay care facilities tended to consume high fat, low fibre diets versus the low fat, high fibre diet of community dwellers. Furthermore, scientists are hypothesizing that the gut microbiota may influence sarcopenia through a gut-muscle axis, a syndrome which affects older individuals (recently reviewed by Ticinesi et al. [99,100]). Sarcopenia is described as depletion of muscle mass and reduction of muscle performance which both result from anabolic resistance or boosted protein catabolism [101]. It is distinct from frailty although the two may overlap [102]. To date, there have been no studies in humans investigating the microbiome of sarcopenic individuals; however, Siddharth et al. [103] identified a distinct faecal microbiota composition associated with age-related muscle wasting in rats which revealed a reduction in several taxa reported to have pro-anabolic and anti-inflammatory properties. Interestingly, the SCFA butyrate was shown to have beneficial effects on muscle mass in ageing mice, partially or wholly protecting them from muscle atrophy [104], and the human commensal L. reuteri inhibited muscle wasting in mice [105].

These studies indicate that dietary interventions involving fibre, prebiotics and probiotics in the elderly, and especially those in residential care, can induce beneficial changes to the gut microbiota with potential to improve immune function and gut homeostasis. The gut microbiota of healthy younger adults is considered a suitable reference for the elderly microbiota assuming the younger population shares the same geographical location, historical past and social habits/lifestyle etc. [111,138]. Thus, further studies are required for this cohort to find interventions which can improve the relevant targets of the intestinal microbiota and immune function and generate meaningful physiological changes which translate to improved general health and well-being (e.g., frailty reduction, improved mobility, reduced risk of fracture and falls, improved sleep and overall energy levels etc).

The impact of exercise on the gut microbiota has only begun to be studied in recent years. In a first study of its kind, Clarke et al. [139] reported increased microbial diversity in a professional rugby team of a preseason camp compared to age-matched and BMI-matched controls. The gut microbiota differences observed in these athletes correlated with protein consumption and creatine kinase, a marker of extreme exercise. In fact, protein accounted for 22% of the total energy intake of athletes compared to 16% in the low BMI control group and 15% in the high BMI control group. A follow-on study investigating the metabolic activity of the gut microbiota of these athletes revealed several differences compared to the control groups [140]. Pathways involved in amino acid biosynthesis, carbohydrate metabolism and antibiotic biosynthesis were increased in athletes. SCFA levels were also increased in the athletic group. Of note, athletes also excreted higher levels of the uremic toxin, trimethylamine-N-oxide (TMAO), which has been discussed in Part 1 of this review [2] as it has been proposed as a risk factor for cardiovascular disease in humans. However, the authors state that the implications of this result are limited and require further study. As expected, the athletes consumed more calories and macronutrients than the control groups. Fibre intake was also higher in the athletic group compared to the high BMI control group.

In terms of diet, athletes tend to consume more protein than the average population and an early research review in 1984 examining the importance of protein for athletes concluded that athletic individuals should consume 1.8 to 2.0 g of protein/kg of body weight/day which is approximately twice that recommended for sedentary individuals [168]. However, the studies reviewed in Part I of this review [2] in relation to the impact of protein on the gut microbiota clearly showed that dietary source is a critical factor with animal- and plant-derived protein sources generating heterogeneous responses in terms of gut microbiota composition and functionality. Further research is warranted to fully comprehend the consequences of these alterations but Blachier et al. [169] concluded that some caution should be exercised around high protein diets given their effects on the gut microbiota following a review of the topic. In this regard, probiotic supplements geared at the sports industry should be investigated with respect to typical dietary extremes undertaken by athletic individuals.

In a recent report by a UK charity called the Mental Health Foundation, stress is defined as the “body’s response to pressures from a situation or life event” [170]. According to this report almost 74% of people surveyed from a total of 4169 adults felt stressed to the point of being overwhelmed or unable to cope at some point of 2018. Stress can be caused by a variety of events and life situations. Some common stress triggers include workplace related stress, exam stress, and illness. Exam stress can be a major issue for students, negatively affecting sleep patterns and academic performance [171,172]. With regard to work-related stress, a report compiled by the UK Health and Safety Executive stated that over half a million people suffer from work-induced stress, depression or anxiety, resulting in a loss of 15.4 million working days over 2017 and 2018 [173]. Workplace stress is also the major source of stress for adults in the USA [174]. Implementation of work-place policies and procedures is critical in tackling these issues. However, we now know that quality of diet, specific dietary components and supplements can aid in the treatment or prevention of depression, anxiety and stress symptoms [175]. Opie et al. [176] compiled a number of dietary recommendations for the prevention of depression based on current available evidence which included increased consumption of fruits, vegetables, wholegrain cereals, legumes, nuts and seeds, high consumption of omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids, limited intake of processed foods and replacement of unhealthy foods with nutritious wholesome foods. In addition, the study recommended following traditional dietary patterns such as the Japanese, Norweigan or Mediterranean diet, the latter of which has been discussed in detail in Part I of this review in terms of its beneficial impacts on the gut microbiota and host health [2]. Thus, the impact of diet on the gut microbiota undoubtedly influences our emotional state. Even in adults without diagnosed mood disorder, gut microbes have been shown to be connected to mood (depression, anxiety and stress) and these relationships differ by sex and are influenced by dietary fibre intake [177]. It is now known that the gut microbiota communicates with the brain along the brain–gut–microbiota axis as evidenced from preclinical and some clinical studies [178]. In Part I of this review [2], we discussed the ability of the gut microbiota to produce neurochemicals including gamma amino butyric acid (GABA), a major inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain [179], as well as its involvement in serotonin biosynthesis [180] and tryptophan metabolism [181].

While these studies highlight the benefits of particular probiotics, prebiotics and their combinations (summarized in Table 1), the beneficial effects rarely impacted every subject in a test group, albeit they impacted enough to generate statistical significance in most cases. One possible reason is the quality and quantity of an individual’s baseline microbiota. In the following sections, this becomes very apparent whereby studies have begun to disentangle the disparities between responders and non-responders in terms of gut microbiota composition and behaviour, particularly in response to fibre. Moving forward, it is possible that future interventions will have to be individually-tailored following a comprehensive analysis of an individual’s gut microbiome through microbiome testing, the feasibility of which is discussed in Section 6.

aGDM, gestational diabetes mellitus; bNEC, necrotizing enterocolitis; cIgE, immunoglobulin E; dURTI, upper respiratory tract infection; eCFS, chronic fatigue syndrome; fIBS, irritable bowel syndrome; gLDL, low density lipoprotein.

Undernutrition and overnutrition represent forms of malnutrition which manifest due to imbalances in energy and/or nutrient intake [199]. Symptoms of undernutrition include wasting (low weight-for-height), stunting (low height-for-age) and underweight (low weight-for-age) [199]. Overnutrition results from overfeeding, defined as the supply of energy containing nutrients in excess of requirements resulting in fat storage and other undesirable outcomes as discussed in Part I of this review [2]. Overweight and obesity can coexist with undernutrition, a phenomenon described as the “double burden” of malnutrition by the WHO. Thirteen percent of the world’s population aged 18 years and over are obese [200]. According to the WHO, 462 million adults are underweight and around 45% of deaths among children under five years of age are linked to undernutrition [199]. Given the link between the gut microbiota and energy regulation in the body, probiotics, prebiotics or fibre may provide effective dietary strategies to restore energy homeostasis through strategic manipulation of the gut microbiota.

Several clinical trials have investigated the impact of probiotics on overnutrition in humans. The studies are discussed in this section and are summarized in Table 2.

aBMI, body mass index; bHDL, high density lipoprotein.

Furthermore, it is important to mention that probiotic-mediated beneficial effects may not require live cells. Indeed, Plovier et al. [10] reported that a purified membrane protein from Akkermansia muciniphila, or the pasteurised bacterium, improved metabolism in diabetic and obese mice. Indeed, pasteurisation enhanced its capacity to reduce dyslipidemia, fat mass development and insulin resistance. This finding suggests that the beneficial effects of difficult-to-cultivate microorganisms may still be harnessed for therapeutic use by using dead or injured cells.

Parnell and Reimer [213] investigated the impact of daily oligofructose supplementation (21 g/day) in healthy adults with BMI > 25 for 12 weeks in a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Compared to the control group, which experienced an increase in weight gain (0.45 ± 0.31 kg), the prebiotic group experienced a 1.03 ± 0.43 kg loss in body weight. Glucose regulation was also improved in the prebiotic group who self-reported a reduction in caloric intake. The authors suggest that the suppression in ghrelin expression and enhanced peptide YY (PYY) expression observed in the prebiotic group partly contributes to the reduction in energy intake. In overweight/obese children, aged 7–12 years, daily consumption of 8 g oligofructose-enriched inulin for 16 weeks significantly reduced body weight z-score (reduced by 3.1%), percent body fat (2.4% reduction), and percent trunk fat (3.8% reduction) compared to children who received the placebo who experienced a slight increase in all 3 parameters [214]. The prebiotic group also showed a significant decrease in IL-6 levels from baseline (15% lower), while the placebo group showed an increase (by 25%). Serum triglycerides were also significantly reduced (by 19%) in the prebiotic group. Gut microbiota analysis revealed significant increases in Bifidobacterium species and decreases in Bacteroides vulgatus in the prebiotic group. Levels of primary bile acids increased in the placebo group but remained unchanged in the prebiotic group over the 16-week period. However, twelve weeks of oligofructose consumption at the same quantity in obese and overweight children, aged 7–11 years (8 g prebiotic/day) and aged 12–18 years (15 g/day) in a double-blind placebo-controlled trial had no impact on body weight and body fat [215].

Synbiotics have shown some promise towards improving growth outcomes in healthy and malnourished children, although there is a paucity of clinical trials in this area. For example, Malawian children, aged 5 to 168 months, suffering from SAM who received ready-to-use-therapeutic-food (RUTF) with a synbiotic for approximately 33 days (median) in a double-blind efficacy randomized controlled trial showed a trend towards reduced outpatient mortality when compared to those who received RUTF alone (P = 0.06) [218]. Despite this, the study showed no differences between both groups in terms of nutritional cure, weight gain, time to cure, and prevalence of clinical symptoms including respiratory issues, fever and diarrhoea. One year consumption of a probiotic- (Bif. lactis, 1.9 × 1010 cfu/day) and prebiotic-fortified milk by Indian preschool healthy and stunted children resulted in increased weight gain (0.13 kg/year, P = 0.02) and reduced risk of being anemic and iron deficient (P = 0.01) compared to children receiving control milk [219]. A synbiotic consisting of Bif. longum, L. rhamnosus and inulin and FOS fed to healthy 12-month-old toddlers in milk for one year significantly improved weight gain compared to those receiving control milk (difference of 0.93 g/day) [220]. The weight gain resulted in a change in z-score weight-for-age closer to the WHO Child Growth Standard. Fecal lactobacilli and enterococcal counts were also significantly increased in the synbiotic group between 12 and 16 months. A six-month synbiotic supplementation to children with failure to thrive, a common problem in children in underdeveloped countries, resulted in a significant increase in weight gain compared to control children [221]. Indeed, by the end of the six-month trial, the mean weight of the control group was 11.760 ± 0.17 kg which increased from 10.75 ± 0.16 kg initially, while the mean weight of the synbiotic group was 12.280 ± 0.190 kg, increasing from 10.25 ± 0.2 kg initially. More clinical trials investigating the impact of combinations of probiotics and prebiotics on undernutrition are required. An emphasis on gut microbiota changes should help to delineate mode of action and identify the most suitable formulations for specific conditions. The studies discussed in this section are summarized in Table 3.

aBMI, body mass index; bPYY, peptide YY; cIL-6, interleukin-6; dSCFAs, short chain fatty acids; eRUTF, ready to use therapeutic food; fSAM, severe acute malnutrition; gFOS, fructooligosaccharide.

In order to fully appreciate the impact of fibre on the gut microbiota it is important to be aware of the different types and their properties and in this respect several classification systems have been proposed. That proposed by Ha et al. [13] classifies fibres into those that are “microbially degradable” and those that are “microbially undegradable.” Combining microbial degradability with the other main properties of fibre, including viscosity and water solubility, Bozzetto et al. [222] presented four main groups based on the concepts of McRorie et al. [223]: (1) non-viscous, insoluble, non-fermentable fibre, e.g., bran, cellulose, hemicelluloses, lignin; (2) non-viscous, soluble, fermentable fibre, e.g., inulin, dextrin, oligosaccharides, resistant starch; (3) viscous, soluble, fermentable fibre, e.g., pectin, β-glucan, guar gum and glucomannan; (4) viscous, soluble, non-fermentable fibre, e.g., psyllium, methylcellulose. Different fibres can exert different effects on the gut microbiota and hence have different physiological consequences for the host (Table 4).

aBMI, body mass index; bLDL, low density lipoprotein; cHDL, high density lipoprotein.

These studies indicate that dietary fibre has a role to play in the control of obesity and its related comorbidities. Further research is needed in order to fully comprehend the impact of the different dietary fibres on the gut microbiota and to delineate the subsequent consequences for host metabolic health. However, the human microbiota is characterised by extensive inter-individual variation, with genetics a significant contributing factor, and it is now becoming clear that the composition of an individual’s microbiota will determine how it responds to dietary components, in particular fibre. In this regard, understanding what ‘responding’ and ‘non-responding’ microbiota look like is essential as well as how to convert a ‘non-responder’ into a ‘responder.’

We know that diet can directly or indirectly influence the gut microbiota, and studies have shown that this response can be rapid with changes observed within 1–3 days [7,230,231] when the modifications are “large” [232] such as the all-animal or all-plant products diet [7], or large increases/decreases in fibre [230,231]. However, inter-individual variance is often much greater than the variance introduced as a result of diet [233]. Indeed, an individual’s baseline microbiota and health status at the beginning of an intervention influences the extent of potential changes to the microbiota and subsequently the host, and studies are showing that baseline microbiota consisting of responders and non-responders to dietary interventions as well as effectors of host responses (both of which may be the same microorganism or a consortia of microorganisms), is generally linked to habitual dietary trends [6,230,234]. In this regard, an individual’s baseline microbiota harbors predictive potential with regard to the effect of dietary constituents on the host and this has been proven particularly in case the of fibre.

These studies indicate that the microbiota has the potential to serve as an effective biomarker to predict responsiveness to specific dietary constituents with most if not all studies to date focusing on fibre/complex carbohydrates. The responsiveness of the gut microbiota (including responders and effectors of host responses) appears to be largely dependent on baseline microbiota diversity and the specific microbes present or absent at baseline, the latter of which can have a profound influence on the poorly diverse microbiota. Indeed, a highly diverse microbiota as a result of long-term, healthy dietary practices involving adequate fibre consumption remains stable in the face of fibre intervention, is rich in both responders and effectors and is capable of reaping the metabolic benefits for the host. A gut microbiota with low diversity can benefit from dietary intervention but only if the specific responder and effector microbes are actually present even at low abundances. Indeed, Healey et al. [243] showed that lower baseline bifidobacteria concentrations in subjects correlated with a more pronounced bifidogenic response following prebiotic intervention. But poor dietary practices and insufficient dietary fibre intake over a long-term period may actually result in the extinction of beneficial microbial lineages. In this case, dietary intervention with fibre/prebiotics will fail to mitigate a beneficial outcome for the host and will presumably require the addition of specific taxa along with their corresponding MACs in the form of synbiotics. However, despite the presence of resistant-starch degrading microorganisms at low abundances in a subset of healthy young adults, the consumption of resistant starch failed to increase their abundances [247]. Such a phenomenon may be due to the presence of antagonistic microorganisms to the resistant starch-degrading microbes which the authors suggest could require targeted removal prior to intervention and could include the presence of bacteriophages. Another form of dietary fibre may be more suited to the particular microbiota in these individuals, or the synbiotic approach may be required. Clearly, more studies are required to determine gut microbiota responses to specific dietary components, i.e. targeted microbiota dietary intervention, using a top-down approach of gut microbiota analysis from diversity levels to species and even strains, to their gene content and functionality (metabolome, transcriptome, proteome), alongside host clinical and genetic data, for input into machine learning algorithms designed to identify correlations, which subsequently can be investigated for causal evidence, in order to accurately predict individualised responses for maximized health (Figure 1). Indeed, machine learning models for predicting disease from metagenomic datasets have already been developed [248]. Thus, already the potential of the gut microbiota as a biomarker of responsiveness to diet is tangible with opportunity for precision microbiomics beginning to emerge. However, ‘causal evidence,’ is a critical factor in this workflow and in Section 7 we provide guidelines for evaluating the scientific validity of evidence for providing personalised microbiome-based dietary advice.

Understanding how the microbiome responds to dietary constituents and the subsequent clinical consequences for the host can be used in the design of precision-tailored diets which ensure maximal nutritional/functional outcome for the host. However, to date only a handful of studies are available to provide specific examples of precision microbiomics in nutrition. For example, composition and functional alterations observed in the faecal metagenome of 145 European women with type 2 diabetes were integrated into a mathematical model that enabled accurate prediction of type 2 diabetes based on metagenomic profiles [249]. The model was capable of identifying women with a diabetes-like metabolism among a group with impaired glucose tolerance. However, the model failed to work on a Chinese cohort revealing that discriminant metagenomic markers for type 2 diabetes differ between Chinese and European cohorts and should be age- and geography-specific. Another example is the direct modulation of colonic microbiota with short-chain GOS to metabolize lactose in lactose intolerant individuals [250]. In this case, GOS failed to elicit a bifidogenic response in three out of 30 participants; however, an increase in bifidobacteria was associated with a decrease in pain and cramping revealing its significance in terms of symptoms. Cho et al. [251] reported that high TMAO producers amongst healthy male adults (≥ 20% increase in urinary TMAO in response to beef and eggs) had significantly more Firmicutes than Bacteroidetes and significantly less microbiota diversity. While the results are based on a short-term feeding study, longer-term feeding trials involving larger cohorts coupled with microbiome data could enable accurate prediction of a high TMAO-producing microbiota and subsequent strategies to alter it. Maintaining normal blood glucose levels is critical for the prevention and control of metabolic syndrome [252] but blood glucose levels are rising at an increased rate as evidenced by the prevalence of prediabetes and impaired glucose tolerance in the general population [253]. Food choices that induce normal PPGRs are critical for controlling blood glucose levels which are in essence controlled by dietary intake. However, until recently, no method existed to predict PPGRs to food. Over the period of a week Zeevi et al. [14] continuously monitored PPGRs in a cohort of 800 healthy and prediabetic individuals in Israel in response to identical meals and noted high variation. They also measured physical activity, anthropometrics, blood parameters, gut microbiota composition and function, as well as self-reported lifestyle behaviours. This multidimensional data was integrated into a machine learning algorithm that was capable of accurately predicting personalised PPGRs and was further validated in an independent cohort of 100 people. Interestingly, the highly variable PPGRs in individuals associated with multiple person-specific microbiome and clinical factors, and tailored diets based on predictions from a machine learning algorithm not only significantly improved PPGRs but also resulted in consistent alterations to the gut microbiota. This study was recently replicated in a different population (from the USA) [254]. Based on a randomized cross-over trial involving 20 healthy subjects comparing the effects of consuming either traditionally made sourdough leavened whole-grain bread or industrially made white bread for one week each, Korem et al. [255] found that the glycemic response varied significantly in response to the different bread types and the type of bread which induced the higher glycemic response in each person could be predicted using microbiome data recorded just prior to the intervention. However, the exact mechanisms involved in the gut microbiota and glycemic control remain to be elucidated.

Non-calorific artificial sweeteners (NAS) were developed to provide sweet taste to foods without the high-energy content of calorie-rich sugars. However, Suez et al. [256] reported that long-term consumption of commonly used NAS in humans significantly and positively correlated with several metabolic syndrome-related clinical parameters including measures of central adiposity, higher fasting blood glucose, higher haemoglobin A1c%, and higher measures of impaired glucose tolerance. Moreover, statistically significant positive correlations were found between multiple taxonomic entities and long term NAS consumption including the Enterobacteriaceae family, the Deltaproteobacteria class and the Actinobacteria phylum. In order to determine if the relationship between blood glucose control and NAS consumption was causal, Suez et al. [256] followed seven healthy volunteers (who did not normally consume NAS in any form) who consumed the FDAs maximum acceptable daily intake of saccharin (5 mg/kg body weight) for 5 days. Four of the seven individuals developed significantly poorer glycemic responses 5–7 days after NAS consumption. Interestingly, the microbiome of NAS responders was distinct from NAS non-responders both before and after NAS consumption and the microbiome of NAS non-responders featured minimal changes after the NAS intervention in contrast to the pronounced compositional changes observed in NAS responders. Transferring day 7 stools from NAS responders into normal germ-free mice induced significant glucose intolerance compared to mice transplanted with day 1 stool (before intervention) from the same NAS responders. Similarly, day 7 stools from non-NAS responders induced normal glucose tolerance in mice. Furthermore, germ-free mice transplanted with responders’ day 7 stool replicated some of the dysbiosis observed in humans including a 20-fold increase in Bacteroides fragilis (order Bacteroides) and Weissella cibaria (order Lactobacillales) and a 10-fold decrease in Candidatus Arthromitus (order Clostridiales) [256]; this over-representation of Bacteroides and underrepresentation of Clostridiales has been previously associated with type 2 diabetes in humans [249,257]. Thus, humans exhibit a personalised response to NAS as a result of their microbiota composition and functionality which as the authors state strongly suggests that other nutritional responses may be driven by “personalised functional differences in the microbiome,” and the resulting opportunity for “personalised nutrition” may lead to “personalised medical outcome.” Wang et al. [258] recently described the bacteriostatic effect of non-nutritive sweeteners such as sucralose and stevia in mice.

Gut microbiome testing is currently commercially available and takes advantage of the reduced costs associated with next-generation sequencing technologies. Table 5 provides a non-exhaustive list of these companies. While several companies provide doctor-ordered stool tests (e.g., the SmartGut test provided by Ubiome and Genova Diagnostics, USA, etc.) the majority of the companies listed in Table 5 provide direct-to-consumer tests.

aHbA1c, haemoglobin A1c; bIBS, irritable bowel syndrome; cIBD, inflammatory bowel disease; dNAFLD,, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease; eN/A, not available; fIBD, inflammatory bowel disease; gNGS, next-generation sequencing.

In relation to future testing, it is also important to consider the importance of host genetics/gene expression, and considering how host genetics can impact the gut microbiome, and be used as proxy for providing personalised dietary advice. For example, numerous genetic variations have been linked to influencing a range of microbiota [260,261] as well as beta-diversity [260]. However, other factors such as diet may mask the effect of genetics on the microbiome making it difficult to predict changes in phenotype without assessing an individual’s diet and including this in the interpretation. An example whereby the assessment of host genetics in a commercial setting shows utility in providing personalised microbiome-based recommendations is the association between FUT2 genotype/secretor status and the expression of fucosyllated glycans on host cell surfaces and in secretions [262]. Common FUT2 polymorphisms have been shown to influence the expression of fucosyltransferase2, an important enzyme associated with the production of the dominant human milk oligosaccharide, 2’-fucosyllactose (2’FL), and other fucosyllated oligosaccharides. Lactating mothers who possess the inactive form of the FUT2 polymorphism (approximately 20% of the Caucasian population) do not contain 2’-FL in their breast milk. The absence of this gene (non-secretors) has been associated with delayed establishment of Bifidobacterium spp. in the infant gut and increased risk of diabetes, alcohol-induced pancreatitis and Crohns disease. Interestingly, non-secretor status has also been associated with resistance to infectious disease such as norovirus and rotavirus infection and Helicobacter pylori colonization. As such, genotyping for FUT2 secretor status allows for the identification of infants and adults that can benefit from treatment with probiotics, prebiotics and other dietary components. Hence, future commercial tests may offer genetic testing as a way to help consumers, such as lactating mothers in the case of FUT2, make better choices and optimise health outcomes.

As noted in the previous section, there are risks associated with the rapid commercialisation of microbiome testing including inconsistencies in results between laboratories as well as over-extrapolation of results on the side of the service provider and over-interpretation of results on the side of the consumer. To mitigate such risks, guidelines for evaluating the scientific validity of evidence for providing personalised microbiome-based dietary advice need to be developed. A similar set of guidelines has been proposed for genotype-based dietary advice [263] providing a useful template from which to start.

The requirements for clinical utility, on the other hand, may be harder to fulfil as it has strict criteria in the medical sense, demanding strong evidence that a given therapy ‘will lead to an improved health outcome’ [264,265]. A caveat is that defining an ‘improved health outcome’ due to microbiome-based advice in a generally healthy person is very hard. Additionally, we are still unsure as to what constitutes a ’healthy‘ microbiome, making it even harder to define an ‘improved health outcome’. With regard to the ethical, legal and social implications, as with personalised nutrition, existing rules must be developed for microbiome testing to ensure that the fundamental rights of the consumer are protected and legislation should be put in place to identify direct-to-consumer tests which provide non-scientifically validated information and advice [264,265]. Ethical, legal and social implications of the human microbiome have been discussed elsewhere [266,267]. Therefore, as per the framework proposed by Grimaldi et al. [263], a guideline that evaluates the scientific validity and evidence for providing personalised microbiome-based dietary advice should focus primarily on the assessment of scientific validity, an essential requirement before any nutrition advice should be given.

The scientific validity assessment criteria for microbiota-based dietary advice within an adapted framework would include (i) study design and quality, (ii) biological mechanism and plausibility and (iii) the probability term (Table 6). Whilst the assessment of study design and quality as well as biological mechanisms and plausibility are commonly used to assess the value of scientific evidence, the use of a ‘probability term’ is not as common. The probability term is the overall judgement of the evidence provided and is based on the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) guidance document expressing uncertainty in scientific assessment [268] to help describe the likelihood of an outcome where firm conclusions are difficult to draw. A probability term makes it possible for an ‘evidentiary conclusion based on many papers, each of which may be relatively weak, to be graded as ‘moderate’ [probable] or even ‘strong’ [convincing], if there are multiple small case reports or studies that are all supportive with no contradictory studies”. For more detail on the definition and use of each probability term, study design and quality, biological plausibility as well as examples of the type criteria that can be used to assess gene/microbiome x diet interactions, please refer to Grimaldi et al. [263].

The fundamental requirement of a nutrition test (genetic, metabolites, microbiota), as with any health-related test, is that the results should indicate clearly a diet-related recommendation that is beneficial in relation to a concrete aspect of health or performance. Any such advice should fulfil all requirements set out in the framework described here. Inevitably, any assessment of nutrition can only be semi-quantitative at best. We consider that the approach of this framework has the benefit of creating a formal and generic model for the assessment of such evidence and will guide more focused debates on specific points, which may be judged in different ways. Moreover, the framework and associated resources will allow stakeholders such as dietitians, nutritionists and genetic counsellors to improve their knowledge of the microbiome and, at the same time, will provide a valuable resource to assess the various tests that are offered. This framework may also encourage a greater standardisation of research protocols, supporting other initiatives, as well as the reporting of novel and replicated microbiome-environment interactions in other populations.

The field of gut microbiota research boasts thousands of studies, the majority of which have been published in recent years. Many of these are observational, documenting differences between healthy and diseased states allowing for correlations to be made between diversity scores, specific taxa, disease, disease risk and health status, and have been essential in our understanding of the significance of the gut microbiota to overall health and disease. Interventions have highlighted the significance of inter-individual variation in terms of intervention efficacy and this is most apparent for fibre, presumably due to the ability to measure the expected outcome i.e. modulation of gut microbiota composition, increases in SCFAs. Thus, understanding why and how an intervention has failed at the individual level is as critical as understanding why and how it has succeeded. With this in mind, it seems the field is on the brink of being propelled towards precision microbiomics, where inter-individual variation is being embraced and correlation studies are beginning to be supported by causal evidence through thorough experimental validation. This will allow for the design of strategic interventions and ultimately evidence-based dietary advice at the individual level. Criteria ensuring scientific validity for microbiota-based dietary advice are, thus, critical. Such data will not only serve nutrition counselling but will also prove valuable in the field of medicine for the clinical/therapeutic management of individuals. Furthermore, other members of the microbiota including the phageome, virome and mycobiome, are likely to contribute to human health as much as the bacterial component and should be included in analysis in order to gain comprehensive insight. Indeed, precision nutrition through the microbiome offers individuals huge potential to manage disease risk through diet and microbiome-modulating interventions and thus improve both quality and longevity of life.

