Gut Microbiota, Probiotic Interventions, and Cognitive Function in the Elderly: A Review of Current Knowledge

Changes in the composition and proportions of the gut microbiota may be associated with numerous diseases, including cognitive impairment. Over the recent years, the growing interest in this relation is observed, but there are still many unknowns, especially in the elderly. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that synthesizes and critically evaluates existing evidence on the possible association between human gut microbiota and cognitive function in the elderly. For this purpose, comprehensive literature searches were conducted using the electronic databases PubMed, Google Scholar, and ScienceDirect. The gut microbiota of cognitively healthy and impaired elderly people may differ in the diversity and abundance of individual taxes, but specific taxes cannot be identified. However, some tendencies to changing the Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio can be identified. Currently, clinical trials involving probiotics, prebiotics, and synbiotics supplementation have shown that there are premises for the claim that these factors can improve cognitive functions, however there is no single intervention beneficial to the elderly population. More reliable evidence from large-scale, long-period RCT is needed. Despite proposing several potential mechanisms of the gut microbiota’s influence on the cognitive function impairment, prospective research on this topic is extremely difficult to conduct due to numerous confounding factors that may affect the gut microbiota. Heterogeneity of research outcomes impairs insight into these relations.

Aging is one of the inevitable and progressive biological processes that leads to irreversible physiological and functional changes throughout the body. Undoubtedly, aging is associated with the deterioration of the body’s condition over the years. The functions of many organs and systems weaken. At the same time, the body’s ability to withstand physiological burdens, fight infection, and maintain homeostasis decreases [1,2]. The aging process also leads to changes in the nervous system and the brain, and thus also to changes in cognitive functioning. Brain aging can go in one of three directions: successful aging—which proceeds without changes in the cognitive function, normal aging—when there is a slight deterioration of cognitive functions with age, and cognitive aging—including mild cognitive impairment and clinical cognitive disorders affecting everyday functioning [3]. Dementia is a general term used to describe a clinical syndrome characterized by progressive decline in cognitive domains, including memory, language, executive and visuospatial function, behavior, and ability to perform activities of daily living. The most common cause of dementia is Alzheimer’s disease (AD), but the term includes also other forms such as vascular dementia, frontotemporal dementia, dementia with Lewy bodies, or even mixed forms. AD is an progressive and irreversible neurodegenerative disease and accounts for 60–80% of dementia cases [4]. Cognitive deficits between normal aging and dementia disorders are collectively called mild cognitive impairment (MCI), often considered an early stage of AD, but resulted from a variety of etiologies [5]. Cognitive impairment related to dementia affects not only the everyday functioning and quality of life of elderly individuals, but it also exerts immense social and economic impacts. Therefore, identifying interventions to prevent or reduce the risk of its onset is an urgent public health priority [6].

The work presents a review of the data on the association between human gut microbiota and cognitive function in the elderly in accordance with recently published investigations. Despite increased interest in this area in recent years, there is a lack of original research concerning the elderly. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first review on gut microbiota and nutritional interventions in the context of cognitive decline in the elderly. We asked ourselves what has been confirmed in this regard so far. For this purpose, we have identified three indirect questions: Are there any differences in the gut microbiota between healthy elderly and those with cognitive impairment such as mild cognitive impairment (MCI), dementia, and AD? Can nutritional factors improve cognitive functions in the elderly due to gut microbiota modulation? What are the possible mechanisms behind gut microbiota and cognitive impairment?

The review methodology can be divided into several phases (Figure 1). In the first review phase, the planning phase, we identified research areas that could shed light on the review question. Several inquiry domains were deemed relevant, including research on the elderly with MCI, dementia, and AD.

Due to the complexity of the analyzed issue and a great variety of terms, we provided a glossary of frequently used terms (Table 1).

The microbiome composition differs even among healthy people, as there are multiple interindividual differences. The density and composition of the microbiota are affected by chemical, nutritional, and immunological gradients along the gut [11]. In the small intestine, there are typically high levels of acids, oxygen, and antimicrobials, and a short transit time, which is why it is mainly colonized by facultative anaerobes like Proteobacteria and Lactobacillales, but in the more distal area, gut microbiota becomes more diverse and approaches that of the colon [8]. Although to remain healthy, not only abundance, but also the microbiome’s diversity, seem crucial, some examples of bacteria classification are potentially beneficial (Bifidobacterium, Lactobacillus, Eubacterium, and Fusobacterium) and potentially harmful (Staphylococcus, some of Clostridia and Proteus). Pathogenic bacteria do not occur extensively in a healthy human microbiota [28]. However, most of the gut microbes were mainly commensals (normal microbiota), which play a pivotal role in human health modulation, e.g., immune function, metabolic function, as well as neurobehavioural traits [14]. A decline in gut microbiota diversity is one of the most common changes during the aging process. Core species tend to decrease with the increased abundance of subdominant species [29]. The numbers of Firmicutes, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, and Clostridium are significantly reduced in people ≥65 years old [30]. Researchers also report a significant reduction of Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium, which is related to lower levels of its metabolites: short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) and γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), which play an essential role in the nervous system, for example, in the regulation of neurotransmitter secretion. The only one of the dominant species of Bifidobacterium genus found in old age is B. adolescentis, or phenotypically close B. angulatum and B. longum in comparison in adult microbiota, where 4–5 species of Bifidobacterium are present [31,32]. Other authors also reported decreased Bacteroides and Enterobacteriaceae levels in centenarians compared to younger adults [33,34]. The increase of proteolytic bacteria, such as Fusobacteria, Propionibacteria, and Clostridia, was found in the intestinal microbiota of elderly people leading to the development of putrefactive processes, especially in patients with post-antibiotic therapy. Furthermore, an increased number of proinflammatory Enterobacteriaceae, Streptococcus, Staphylococcus, and yeast cells were found, which may be associated with an elevated level of serum antibodies to commensal microbiota, such as Escherichia coli and Enterococcus faecalis [32,35]. Population differences should also be considered while analyzing microbiota changing data because it also influences microbiome composition, as there are different environmental conditions, level of hygiene, eating habits, and many more factors [29]. There are also differences in the gut microbiota composition in different geographic regions of the world which is most often explained by the diversity in the eating habits—Bacteroides enterotype is more common in Western countries (with high fat and protein intake) while Prevotella enterotype is more abundant in non-Western countries with high fiber consumption. The population of Africa is characterized by a high gut microbiota diversity (dominated by Actinobacteria, Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes, Proteobacteria, and Spirochaetes), while Europeans and Americans gut microbiota is enriched in Firmicutes, Actinobacteria, Verrucomicrobia, and Bacteroidetes [36].

It is not clear whether it is the aging process that influences gut microbiota changes or a combination of various factors related to the elderly. Gut microbiota changes might be associated with a general deterioration of health, the occurrence of chronic diseases, multi-drug use, including antibiotics and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, but also with changing lifestyle habits [15]. For example, antibiotics are now considered in two ways in influencing gut microbiota in the pathogenesis of AD: on the one hand, overuse of antibiotics may lead to decreased diversity and cause dysbiosis, but on the other hand, there is also the possibility of the use of antibiotics as therapeutic manipulation of gut microbiota [37]. Older people often eat a monotonous diet as a result of losing a partner due to death or divorce and living alone, repeatedly giving up preparing wholesome meals due to a lack of motivation to cook every day [38]. Furthermore, problems with dentition lead to choosing only known products with a certain hardness and structure, and not using raw vegetables and fruits or nuts [39]. As mentioned above, changing nutritional habits are very often connected with malnutrition, which is present in 5–30% of community-dwelling older adults, with higher numbers reaching 60% in acute care settings [40,41]. Not only in the oral cavity, but also in further parts of the gastrointestinal tract, there are some important changes connected with aging, which may influence the gut microbiota composition: for example, the compliance of gastric and rectal is lowered, which results in prolonged oro-caecal and colonic transit time [15]. Older people often limit their physical activity due to mobility limitations, fear of injury, or lack of motivation [42,43]. All of these factors can indirectly influence the composition and diversity of the gut microbiota and therefore affects human health [44,45,46].

The evidence regarding gut microbiota differences in patients with various kinds of cognitive decline is insufficient to perform a deep analysis and draw unequivocal conclusions. We found only single studies that compared the composition and abundance of the gut microbiota in healthy older people and people with cognitive impairment—the results are shown in Table 2 and the methodological details are presented in Table 3.

Abbreviations: AD, Alzheimer’s Disease; D, dementia; MCI, Mild Cognitive Impairment.

Abbreviations: AD, Alzheimer’s Disease; aMCI, Amnestic MCI; Amy+, brain amyloidosis present; Amy-, brain amyloidosis absence; CDR, Clinical Dementia Rating; MCI, Mild Cognitive Impairment; MMSE, Mini-Mental State Examination; MoCA, Montreal Cognitive Assessment.

In summary, small-sample studies have shown that the gut microbiota of cognitively healthy and impaired elderly people may differ in the diversity and abundance of individual taxes, but due to the small number of studies and divergent results, specific taxes cannot be clearly identified. However, some tendencies to changing the Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio can be identified. Gut microbiota diversity seems to be one of the crucial factors in retaining a healthy microbiome in older age; however, its assessment is connected with multiple methodological issues.

Available reports on the existing differences in the composition and diversity of gut microbiota, which depend on cognitive functioning, give rise to the question of whether it is possible to manipulate the gut microbiota to improve cognitive functions or to reduce the risk of cognitive impairment in the elderly. Multiple environmental and host factors play an important role in shaping gut microbiota composition and function. Within environmental factors, diet is considered as a key factor [60], both as short-term changes [61], as well as long-term dietary patterns and habitual intake [62]. Due to the lack of long-term human studies, it cannot be determined whether prolonged dietary changes can induce permanent alterations in the gut microbiota, but it is possible that habitual diets have a greater influence than acute dietary changes [63].

Some nutrients have been shown to affect the composition of the gut microbiota as well as cognitive function (Table 4). For example, omega-3, polyphenols, and vitamin D appear to have the potential to confer health benefits via modulation of the gut microbiota [45]. A little more is known about the impact of nutrients on cognitive function than the gut microbiota in the elderly. Observational studies indicate the role of poor nutritional status (e.g., low vitamin D status, low plasma level of antioxidant) in poorer cognition and an increased risk of cognitive impairment, but RCT studies do not confirm that the use of dietary supplements can help maintain cognitive health. The RCT studies showed that fiber and vitamin D influence the composition of the intestinal microbiome. Both, in the case of cognitive function and gut microbiota, the adverse effect is noted for saturated fatty acids. However, to the best of our knowledge, there are no clinical trials that would link nutrients, gut microbiota, and cognitive functions. In this review, we focus only on probiotic interventions in the elderly and their effects on cognition by modifying the gut microbiota.

Abbreviations: AD, Alzheimer’s Disease; MUFA, monounsaturated fatty acids; PUFA, polyunsaturated fatty acids; RCT, randomized controlled trials; SFA, saturated fatty acids.

It has been noted that the elderly buy probiotic supplementation expecting to improve their health [87]; however, probiotic effects on the cognitive function in this particular group have not been studied well. The “psychobiotics” theory indicates that probiotics have a potential, positive effect on mental health, but more research on this relation is warranted [88]. The health effects of microbiota-driven therapy (pre-, pro-, and synbiotics) on the elderly include changes in the composition and activity of the intestinal microbiota, especially by promoting the growth of bifidobacteria and lactobacilli [89]. However, it should be emphasized that only limited studies were conducted specifically on the elderly.

Abbreviations: 8-OHdG, serum high sensitivity 8-hydroxy-2′-deoxyguanosine; ACPT, auditory continuous performance test; AD, Alzheimer’s Disease; BDNF, Brain-derived neurotrophic factor; CERAD-K, Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer’s Disease, The Korean version; CFU, colony-forming units; DAO, serum diamine-oxidase; DST, digit span test; DW2009, Lactobacillus plantarum C29-fermented soybean; FPG, fasting plasma glucose; GAD-7, Generalized Anxiety Disorder-7; GDS-SF, Geriatric Depression Scale, short form; GSH, total glutathione; HOMA-B, homeostatic model assessment for B-cell function; HOMA-IR, homeostasis model of assessment-insulin resistance; hs-CRP, high-sensitivity C-reactive protein; IFABP, intestinal fatty acid binding protein; IL-10, interleukin 10; LPS, lipopolysaccharide; MCI, Mild Cognitive Impairment; MDA, malondialdehyde; MMSE, Mini-Mental State Examination; MNA, Mini Nutritional Assessment; MoCA-J, Japanese version of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment instrument; NART, National Adult Reading Test; NO, nitric oxide; PHQ-9, Patient Health Questionnaire-9; POMS, The Short Form Of The Profile Of Mood States; PSS, perceived stress scale; QUICKI, quantitative insulin sensitivity check index; RBANS, Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status; SRT, story recall test; TAC, total antioxidant capacity; TC, total cholesterol; TG, triglycerides; TNF-α, tumor necrosis factor α; VLT, verbal learning test; WBV, frictional force of blood flow in vessels.

Only single RCT studies on the effects of prebiotics and synbiotics supplementation on cognition in the elderly are available (Table 5). Buigues et al. evaluated whether the regular intake of prebiotic can improve frailty criteria, functional status, and response of the immune system in elderly people affected by the frailty syndrome. They assessed the effect on functional and cognitive behavior as well as sleep quality, but no significant effects were observed [103], whereas Louzada and Ribeiro investigated the effect of a synbiotic on symptoms of brain disorders and inflammation in the elderly, and found weak effects of synbiotic on depressive symptoms and more optimistic effects on cognition in apparently healthy elderly [104].

Recent studies have shown that the gut microbiota is involved in the neurodevelopment and diverse brain functions through regulating the gut–brain axis. The term “microbiota–gut–brain axis” (broadened from “gut–brain axis”) [111] represents the bidirectional communication between the central nervous system (CNS) and the gastrointestinal tract [111]. The communication between CNS and the enteric nervous system is multichannel and involves neural, immune, endocrine, and metabolic signaling mechanisms [112,113]. As we presented above, it is still discussed if dysbiosis of gut microbiota, as well as probiotics and prebiotic supplements, may influence cognitive function, especially since the mechanism underlying between the microbiota–gut–brain axis and cognitive function is not fully understood.

In recent years, the number of studies that focus on explaining this mechanism has been increasing, but most of the research has been done within animal models. In a scoping review, Gao et al. distinguished five main pathways through which the microbiota–gut–brain axis may modify cognitive function [114]. First, gut microbiota dysbiosis has been shown to have an impact on the function of the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis, which regulates cognitive function. The second pathway is the neuronal regulation pathway, where gut microbiota communicates with the CNS and autonomic nervous system (ANS) via vagus nerve stimulation [114,115]. The other pathway is based on microbiota and its metabolites that can stimulate the increased release of inflammatory markers, interacting with the blood–brain barrier. Fourth, the gut microbiota products, such as neurotransmitters or hormones, have been shown to modify CNS function. The last pathway that can explain gut microbiota’s role in the regulation of cognitive function is its induction of modification of myelination, myelin plasticity, microRNA expression in the prefrontal cortex, which plays an important role in planning and decision making. As the authors suggest, the mechanism through which gut microbiota modifies cognitive function is still not well understood; it is likely a combination of presented mechanisms [114].

Although many pathways are considered in the link between gut microbiota and cognitive function, little is known about detailed mechanisms among the elderly with dementia. Knowledge about the physiopathology role of the gut microbiota is much more established in other neuropsychiatric disorders (e.g., Parkinson’s disease) [116].

To sum up, the gut microbiota may secrete significant amounts of amyloids and lipopolysaccharides, which can enhance inflammatory response to endogenous neuronal amyloids and increase the proinflammatory production of cytokines associated with the pathogenesis of AD. Furthermore, microbiota dysbiosis may lead to increased permeability of the gut and blood–brain barrier and modulation of the kynurenine pathway. In this position, transmitters and neurotoxic substances can easily enter the brain, affect nerve function, and lead to the development or progression of cognitive impairment and AD. All of the mentioned possible mechanisms may play a part simultaneously. Naturally, AD is probably associated with multiple pathomechanisms and etiologies; gut microbiota appears as a significant part of the pathophysiologic process. A significant limitation of most studies investigating microbiota’s role in AD pathomechanism is that they are animal studies or cross-sectional studies. This causes difficulties in establishing an association between gut microbiota and the development/progression of AD. Additional case-control and prospective studies (including post-mortem studies) among patients with AD are required to better understand the link between gut microbiota and cognitive function/disease.

Over the recent years, growing interest in the relation between gut microbiota and cognitive function, especially in the elderly is observed, but there are still major gaps in our understanding of these interactions. Gut microbiota of cognitively healthy and impaired elderly people may differ in the diversity and abundance of individual taxes, but due to the small number of studies and divergent results, only some tendency to changing the Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio can be identify. There will be interesting to find some specific taxes of microorganisms that could be serve as a marker of early stage of dementia. Such factors will be extremely important in preventing cognitive impairment development.

Currently, clinical trials involving dietary interventions and supplementation with probiotics, prebiotics, and synbiotics have shown that there are premises for the claim that these factors can improve cognitive functions, however it was not shown that there is a single intervention beneficial to the elderly population. More reliable evidence from large-scale, long-period RCT is needed. Previous heterogeneity of research outcomes impairs further insight into these relations. It is difficult to spot any unambiguous dependencies due to methodological difficulties and a multitude of factors influencing both cognitive functions and gut microbiota. The effects of probiotics supplementation seem to be greater on cognitively impaired individuals than those on healthy ones, but more proof is needed in this area. Despite that we know that the health-promoting effect of a probiotics depends on the strain, doses and duration of probiotics ingestion, there is still lack of studies compared different intervention, e.g., different genus or species, different doses. It is also unclear whether the effect will persist after the end of the intervention and for how long. Future studies should also consider the baseline of microbiota composition and dietary intake of included individuals. The results of such studies should provide scientific clues for the rational design of dietary intervention specific to groups of older adults, with particular emphasis on the safety of using probiotic and prebiotic products. These findings are of public health importance because of the rapidly aging population and increasing cases of cognitive function diseases. Whether gut microbiota, probiotics/synbiotics may improve or slow down the cognitive function decline in the elderly needs further study. What is more, it seems that personalized nutrition strategies will be particular importance in the future, which is already noticeable in growing interest in this area.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

