The Impact of Microbial Composition on Postprandial Glycaemia and Lipidaemia: A Systematic Review of Current Evidence

Postprandial hyperglycaemia is associated with increased risk of cardiovascular disease. Recent studies highlight the role of the gut microbiome in influencing postprandial glycaemic (PPG) and lipidaemic (PPL) responses. The authors of this review sought to address the question: “To what extent does individual gut microbiome diversity and composition contribute to PPG and PPL responses?”. CINAHL Plus, PubMed, Web of Science, and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) databases were searched from January 2010 to June 2020. Following screening, 22 studies were eligible to be included in the current review. All trials reported analysis of gut microbiome diversity and composition and PPG and/or PPL. Results were reported according to the ‘Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis’ (PRISMA) statement. Individual microbiota structure was found to play a key role in determining postprandial metabolic responses in adults and is attributed to a complex interplay of diet, microbiota composition, and metagenomic activity, which may be predicted by metagenomic analysis. Alterations of gut microbiota, namely relative abundance of bacterial phylum Actinobacteria and Proteobacteria, along with Enterobacteriaceae, were associated with individual variation in postprandial glycaemic response in adults. The findings of the current review present new evidence to support a personalised approach to nutritional recommendations and guidance for optimal health, management, and treatment of common metabolic disorders. In conclusion, personalised nutrition approaches based on individual microbial composition may improve postprandial regulation of glucose and lipids, providing a potential strategy to ameliorate cardiometabolic health outcomes.

Cardiovascular disease remains the leading cause of morbidity and mortality globally [1].

Therefore, the aim of the current systematic review is to determine the extent to which individual gut microbiome diversity and composition contributes to inter-variability of postprandial glucose and lipid responses in human subjects based on available randomised controlled (RCTs), clinical trials, and acute experimental studies. This research also aims to elucidate the role of individual gut microbiota in predicting postprandial metabolic responses for prevention and management of glycaemia and dyslipidaemia and contribute to the discussion about whether current nutritional guidelines should be reconsidered and updated to support the current evidence. The review protocol is listed in the International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews (PROSPERO) (CRD 42021248843).

The literature search identified 22 studies (total sample size, n = 3851) that investigated the effect of host gut microbiota on postprandial glycaemia and/or lipidaemia either as a primary or secondary outcome. The 22 studies are summarised in Table 1.

Abbreviations: BKB, barley kernel-based bread; CHO, carbohydrate; CRP, C-reactive protein; CVD, cardiovascular disease; FFA, free fatty acid; GQD, Gegen Qinlian Decoction; HDL-C, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol; IL-6, interleukin 6; IHTG. intrahepatic triglyceride; LPQ180, Lactobacillus plantarum Q180; LDL-C, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol; LCn3, long chain n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids; LPS, lipopolysaccharides; MetS, metabolic syndrome; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; PP, polyphenols; PPG, postprandial glucose; PPGR, postprandial glucose response; PPL, postprandial lipids; PPLR, postprandial lipid response; PYY, peptide YY; RS, resistant starch; SCFA, short-chain fatty acids; T2D, type-2 diabetes; TC, total cholesterol; TG, triglycerides; TMAO, trimethylamine n-oxide; VLDL-C, very low-density lipoprotein cholesterol; WWB, white wheat flour bread.

The study selection process that followed the literature search is summarised in Figure 1. A total of 294 citations were identified through database searches (n = 154) and screening of references (n = 140). After initial screening and removal of duplicates, 265 records remained, of which 155 were screened by abstract and excluded. Following the initial screening, 110 full-text articles were retrieved for detailed review and were assessed against the established selection criteria.

Eighty-seven full-text records did not fulfil the set inclusion criteria and after their removal, 22 studies remained eligible to be included in the current review. The reasons for exclusion of the 88 full-text articles are outlined in the methods section (Figure 1); 40 trials did not include analysis of the gut microbiome; 35 trials did not include plasma analysis in the postprandial state; 7 trials were excluded as full-text access was unavailable (abstract/protocol only); and 6 studies were not included due to lack of control, reporting on baseline results only, observational study design, and further duplication in the screening process.

The characteristics of the included studies are summarised in Table 1. Published between 2010 and 2020, included studies originated from 12 countries including United States of America (five studies); China (three studies); Netherlands (three studies); Denmark (three studies); Israel (two studies); and 1 study each from United Kingdom, Spain, Sweden, Korea, Switzerland, Italy, and France. The number of participants included in the studies ranged from 5 to 1002 [21,36]. Of the 22 studies included, the current review consisted of randomised controlled trials (10), randomised trials (6) and non-randomised trials (6), of which 5 were included a series of acute experimental trials.

With respect to the interventions that studied both diet (16 trials) and drug treatments (6 trials) to assess the extent to which the gut microbiome may be affected, studies varied from 6 days [21,25] to 17 weeks [34] in duration with participant age ranging from 18 to 80 years. Trials were conducted on both sexes, with the exception of studies by Clemente-Postigo et al. (2013) [30], Mikkelsen et al. (2015) [27], Reijnders et al. (2016) [37], and Vrieze et al. (2014) [43], which were performed only on male subjects, and Vors et al. (2020) [42], which was performed only on women. With regards to time of publication, more than 50% were published in 2018–2020. Several molecular biochemical techniques were used to assess the characterisation of the gut microbiome including DNA extraction, amplification by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR), Illumina [28] and whole genome 16S rRNA shotgun sequencing [25,45]. Quantification of postprandial glucose and lipid markers were assessed enzymatically or through use of a continuous glucose monitor (CGM) provided to participants for home use [46,47].

Several studies highlighted the effect of dietary components on both host metabolism and gut microbial ecology [29,30,31,32,33,34,38,39,41,42]. Of the 10 trials retrieved, six studied responses to carbohydrate and protein consumption, specifically manipulation of dietary components including starch, wholegrain and gluten, as a primary or secondary outcome.

Finally, two studies investigated the impact of dietary fat consumption on postprandial metabolic response and intestinal microbial diversity. Vetrani et al. (2020) [41] evaluated the effects of diets rich in polyphenols (PP) and/or long-chain n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (LCn3) on intestinal microbiota composition in subjects with high cardiovascular risk. The study found that diets rich in PP increased bacterial diversity, whilst diversity diminished following consumption of both diets low in LCn3 and PP, and diets high in LCn3 respectively. In addition, a significant correlation was observed between changes in the Atopobium cluster and large VLDL triglycerides (R = 0.313, p = 0.009), cholesterol in large VLDL (R = 0.319, p = 0.008), and postprandial triglycerides in plasma (R = 0.266, p = 0.026). In comparison, a similar study by Vors et al. (2020) [42] examined the effect of milk polar lipid (PL) consumption on lipid metabolism, absorption, microbiota, and known markers of cardiometabolic health in a population of postmenopausal women. Following 4-week consumption of 0, 3, or 5 g PL/day, the study reported significant reductions in both fasting and postprandial concentrations of serum cholesterol with analysis showing significant alterations between groups for measures of TC, TG, apolipoprotein B (ApoB), and apolipoprotein A1 (ApoA1) (p posthoc < 0.05 vs. control). Conversely, it is important to note that a non-significant decrease in postprandial TG was only observed in the group consuming 5 g-PL/day. Subsequently, Vors et al. [42] concluded that daily consumption of milk polar lipids did not result in significant modulation of either phylogenetic groups or bacterial species of gut microbiota.

Five studies investigated the extent to which individual gut microbiome composition contributes to metabolic responses through analysis of a series of acute experimental trials, of which all noted high interpersonal variability in postprandial response following consumption of standardised test meals (Table 1) [19,20,21,25,40]. Adopting a similar methodological framework to that of Zeevi et al. (2015) [19], a number of trials concluded substantial variations in glucose responses following consumption of identical meals, with one study reporting glycaemic excursions ranged from 6–94 mg/dL (0.3–5.2 mmol/L) above baseline following consumption of a standardised meal (0–150 min) [21]. Two studies by Mendez-Soares et al. (2019) [21,25] analysed the extent to which individual postprandial responses could be reproduced in a Midwestern USA cohort, building on the previous model created by Zeevi et al. (2015) [19]. Utilising stochastic gradient boosting regression to predict PPGRs, both studies found that, despite differences in population characteristics, the framework model of Zeevi et al. [19] accurately predicts PPGRs when tested on a Midwestern cohort consuming a Western diet, outperforming traditional methods used to inform dietary interventions to better regulate glycaemic control in a cohort of 327 and 297 healthy, non-diabetic individuals, respectively.

The previous findings are in agreement with a 2020 validated cohort study by Berry et al. [20], which reported considerable heterogeneity across all postprandial time points for glucose, insulin, and triglyceride concentrations, following a standardised meal test. The findings of which thereby strengthen the earlier conclusions of Tily et al. (2019) [40], reiterating the widely accepted hypothesis that glycaemic response is driven by both individual characteristics and the macronutrient content of foods when measured using multiple diet types and populations.

We found seven trials in the past decade (Table 1) that investigated the effect of drug administration, medicinal or probiotic supplementation on postprandial responses and microbiota profile [26,27,28,36,37,43,44]. All seven studies compared results with baseline measurements prior to undertaking the intervention. Three trials studied the effects of antibiotic use [27,37,43], another one the use of sevelamer [26], one with the use of probiotics [36], and two measured the effects of supplementation with traditional Chinese herbal formulas, one of which also included analysis of an antidiabetic medication [28,44].

In contrast, a recent study by Park et al. (2020) [36] highlighted the effect of probiotic supplementation in ameliorating LDL-C and postprandial lipid biomarkers following 12 weeks of probiotic treatment with Lactobacillus plantarum Q180. The area under the curve (AUC) and maximum concentration (Cmax) of postprandial TG significantly improved in those treated with LPQ180 in comparison to placebo (p = 0.049 at 6 h); maximum concentration of chylomicron (CM) TG also decreased significantly (p = 0.020). Conversely, Park et al. (2020) [36] reported no significant changes in intestinal flora diversity between placebo and LPQ180 groups over the 12-week period. However, non-significant changes in TC, TG, and phenol levels in the LPQ180 group were negatively correlated with baseline abundance of Ruminococcus bromii. Likewise, positive changes in TC and LDL-C were associated with increased baseline levels of bacterium Kineothrix alysoides in individuals in the LPQ180 group.

To our knowledge, this is the first systematic review that compiles and provides effects and associations of gut microbiota composition and postprandial glycaemia and lipidaemia in human subjects. Despite heterogeneity across trials, the findings of the 22 included studies, summarised in Table 1, indicate an association between gut microbial composition and individual postprandial glycaemic and lipidaemic responses in both healthy adults and individuals with pre-existing conditions including MetS, T2DM, and obesity, which are key risk factors of cardiovascular disease [50].

Despite high levels of intra-individual variability in PPGR and PPL responses, which are attributed to a complex interplay of diet, microbiota composition, and metagenomic activity, the findings of the current review reinforce the hypothesis that once postprandial responses to specific foods are established, metabolic response to other dietary components may be accurately predicted. However, it is important to acknowledge that further research is needed to better understand the role of individual microbiota and improve homogeneity across studies, allowing for more in-depth analysis of data such as baseline and endpoint PPGR and PPL response. Further analysis of the specific nutritional breakdown included in standardised test meals would also be beneficial in order to accurately develop tailored nutritional approaches, paving the way for precise personalisation of diet recommendations [23].

The current study sought to conduct a systematic review on the contribution of the individual microbiome composition on postprandial glycaemia and dyslipidaemia in humans, and the extent to which interpersonal variability of the microbiome contributes to the predictability of glycaemic and lipidaemic control. We also gave attention to the effectiveness of analytical models in predicting postprandial metabolic responses in human subjects. This systematic review was performed and reported according to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis (PRISMA) statement [69] and PICOS (Population, Intervention, Comparison, and Outcomes) [70] criteria used to define the following research question: To what extent does the individual gut microbiome diversity and composition contribute to the variability of postprandial glycaemia and dyslipidaemia in human subjects? (Table 2).

CINAHL Plus, PubMed, Cochrane Central, and Web of Science were searched for relevant randomised trials published between January 2010 and June 2020 with no restriction on language. Databases were searched individually with advanced search strategies utilising various combinations of controlled phrases as either keywords or MeSH terms. To maximise search sensitivity, we combined multiple terms relating to both the gut microbiome and postprandial state in addition to glycaemia and lipidaemia to enhance precision (Supplementary Material). The wild-card term “*” was included to increase sensitivity of the search strategy.

Following the initial database search and screening, full-text articles were independently reviewed by two of the authors to ensure all studies included were relevant and met the inclusion criteria for the current study (W.W. and M.W.). Furthermore, to minimise the effect of publication bias, a snowball method, characterised by manual checking of references from retrieved articles, was applied to relevant studies that met the selection criteria outlined below.

The current review included all clinical trials and non-randomised acute experimental studies that evaluated the effect of the individual gut microbiome diversity on postprandial glycaemia and lipidaemia. Eligible studies were screened to meet the following criteria: (1) adult study population (aged 18+); (2) randomised controlled or clinical trials with either parallel, crossover, or acute experimental studies (a series of non-controlled acute studies that tested microbiome, glycaemic, and lipidaemic responses to various test meals on different days in large cohort populations); (3) use of dietary or pharmacological intervention; (4) presence of both metagenomic and postprandial plasma analysis; and (5) presentation of sufficient information on primary objective/outcome at baseline and endpoint or provision of net change values. Exclusion criteria was as follows: (1) non-clinical studies; (2) animal and/or in vitro study models; (3) pregnancy/child studies; (4) studies that did not provide baseline or endpoint values for outcomes of interest; and (5) narrative reviews, opinion pieces, editorials, protocols, and/or studies that did not include primary data were also excluded from the review.

Duplicate studies were removed, and remaining studies screened by title and abstract initially before full-text articles were reviewed by two researchers independently (M.W., W.W.) to minimise risk of bias. Following the initial screening, studies were listed as either included, excluded, or pending if the eligibility of the study to be included in the review was unclear. Pending studies were temporarily included in the next stage of screening. Once retrieved, full-text articles were independently reviewed, and inclusion/exclusion criteria applied. Discrepancies in the selection process were resolved at a meeting between reviewers prior to the retrieval of the final selection of papers. Based on the PRISMA guidance, a flowchart was produced to enable transparency of the screening process (Figure 1).

A systematic assessment of bias in the included studies was performed in accordance with the criteria established by Cochrane [71]. Studies were assessed on the following: adequacy of random sequence generation, blinding of participants, personnel and outcomes assessment, selective outcome reporting, allocation concealment, and handling of dropouts (incomplete outcome data). Discrepancies regarding the presence of bias were resolved by discussion with a second and third author (M.M and I.G.D) to resolve inconsistencies and reach a consensus.

Full-text studies that met the inclusion criteria were retrieved and screened to assess eligibility by two reviewers (M.W., W.W.). Once methodological quality was determined, the reviewer (M.W) extracted and transferred to a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet and briefly summarised key concepts, findings, and results from each study. Summaries for each study were discussed with a third reviewer (M.M.) and any inconsistencies resolved. Data was organised by first author, year of publication, country of origin, age range and gender of participants, study design and duration, intervention type, presence of background disease/conditions, and summary of key findings (Table 1).

The quality and the risk of bias across all included studies were assessed using the Cochrane Risk of Bias Tool [71] (Figure 2). Alternatively, studies containing a series of acute experimental trials were assessed using the (ROBINS-I) tool [72]. Due to the nature of several studies, randomisation and blinding of participants and/or outcome assessors was not possible; however, as all outcome measures were objective, it was determined that it was unlikely that this influenced the results of the studies. For studies that utilised a series of acute experimental trials [21,28,41,46,51], risk of bias was assessed separately in accordance with the recommended guidance provided by Cochrane regarding assessment of bias risk in cohort studies [71]. Overall, no study included in the review received a “high” risk of bias result in any assessed category.

To our current knowledge, this is the first systematic review to comprehensively address the impact of individual gut microbiota in influencing metabolic parameters attributed to postprandial hyperglycaemia and lipidaemia in human subjects. The use of multiple databases and manual searching of reference lists associated with key studies was beneficial in maximising access to trials that encompassed a broad spectrum of population and methodological considerations whilst meeting strict inclusion and exclusion criteria, allowing for effective identification of comparisons and contrasting aspects between studies. In addition, whilst the study allowed for a wide range of participants including both healthy individuals and those with chronic disease, we acknowledge that different baseline characteristics can influence microbiome diversity, and therefore cannot be considered comparable. Given the limited number of papers on individual postprandial glycaemic/lipidaemic response and gut microbiome diversity, the inclusion criteria was designed to include all available studies to provide a broad comprehensive review. The presented study had several limitations; it is important to note that due to the presence of considerable clinical, methodological, and statistical heterogeneity across studies, a statistical meta-analysis was not performed. This was determined as substantial methodological heterogeneity; contrasting outcome measures and metrics were inconsistent throughout the final included studies. In addition, sample size and study duration varied significantly across studies, ranging from 5 to 1002 participants and 7 to 180 days respectively, a factor which may have limited the statistical power of the included studies and potentially compromised research outcomes. Moreover, whilst all studies included postprandial plasma and microbiome analysis, interventions varied across trials and included both dietary and pharmacological interventions, which is important to note due to the complexity of diet/drug interactions, how such interactions influence the microbiome, and consequent contribution to alterations in PPGR and PLL responses.

The findings of the current review present new evidence to support a personalised approach to nutritional recommendations and guidance for optimal health, management, and treatment of common metabolic disorders. However, the mechanisms of microbial metabolic regulation remain unclear due to the complexity of the microbiota. These findings provide greater insight for future investigation of the complex interplay between diet, gut microbiota, and postprandial metabolic responses that may support the development of tailored nutritional approaches for preventing cardiometabolic disease in humans. In conclusion, a personalised approach to nutrition based on individual microbial diversity may improve postprandial regulation of plasma glucose and lipids. However, further research is warranted to objectively measure the extent to which individual gut microbiome diversity and composition contribute to the variability of postprandial glycaemia and dyslipidaemia in humans, and further support the concept of personalised nutrition as an effective alternative to traditional strategies for management and treatment of metabolic disorders in individuals.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

