A comprehensive assessment of demographic, environmental, and host genetic associations with gut microbiome diversity in healthy individuals

The gut microbiome is an important determinant of human health. Its composition has been shown to be influenced by multiple environmental factors and likely by host genetic variation. In the framework of the Milieu Intérieur Consortium, a total of 1000 healthy individuals of western European ancestry, with a 1:1 sex ratio and evenly stratified across five decades of life (age 20–69), were recruited. We generated 16S ribosomal RNA profiles from stool samples for 858 participants. We investigated genetic and non-genetic factors that contribute to individual differences in fecal microbiome composition.

Among 110 demographic, clinical, and environmental factors, 11 were identified as significantly correlated with α-diversity, ß-diversity, or abundance of specific microbial communities in multivariable models. Age and blood alanine aminotransferase levels showed the strongest associations with microbiome diversity. In total, all non-genetic factors explained 16.4% of the variance. We then searched for associations between > 5 million single nucleotide polymorphisms and the same indicators of fecal microbiome diversity, including the significant non-genetic factors as covariates. No genome-wide significant associations were identified after correction for multiple testing. A small fraction of previously reported associations between human genetic variants and specific taxa could be replicated in our cohort, while no replication was observed for any of the diversity metrics.

In a well-characterized cohort of healthy individuals, we identified several non-genetic variables associated with fecal microbiome diversity. In contrast, host genetics only had a negligible influence. Demographic and environmental factors are thus the main contributors to fecal microbiome composition in healthy individuals.

ClinicalTrials.gov identifier NCT01699893

A wide diversity of microbial species colonizes the human body, providing considerable benefits to the host through a range of different functions [1]. Notably, these microbes generate metabolites that can act as energy sources for cell metabolism, promote the development and the functionality of the immune system, and prevent colonization by pathogenic microorganisms [2].

In this study, we leveraged the in-depth phenotypic and genotypic information available for the Milieu intérieur (MI) cohort—a population-based study of 1000 healthy individuals of western European ancestry, evenly stratified by sex (1:1) and age. We investigated the role of socio-demographic and environmental factors in inter-individual gut microbiome variation (Fig. 1). In particular, we were able to assess the impact of family status, income, occupational status and educational level, smoking habits, sleeping habits, psychological problems, and nutritional behavior. We also evaluated the influence of basic physiological parameters (such as body mass index), family and personal medical history (including vaccination history), and multiple laboratory results (comprising mostly blood biochemical measurements). Finally, we investigated the potential impact of human genetic variation using a genome-wide association study (GWAS) framework, including as covariates, the non-genetic factors that were found to be correlated with various measures of gut microbiome diversity.

To characterize the bacterial diversity of the gut flora of the 1000 healthy donors, we performed 16S rRNA gene sequencing on standardized collections of fecal samples. From this cohort, we obtained profiles for 858 individuals and we normalized the data for sequencing depth (see the “Methods” section). A total of 8422 operational taxonomy units (OTUs) were detected, corresponding to 11 phyla, 24 classes, 43 orders, 103 families, 328 genera, and 698 species. On average, we detected 193 species per individual (standard error 1.9, standard deviation 55.1), with a minimum of 58 and a maximum of 346 species. Inter-individual variability was already marked at the phylum level. Figure 2a presents the relative abundances of the 8 phyla observed in more than 10% of study participants. Firmicutes and Proteobacteria were detected in all individuals, and Bacteroidetes in all but one individual. Firmicutes was the dominant phylum in the vast majority of individuals (91.8%).

As measures of β-diversity, which describes the difference in taxonomic composition between samples, we used compositional Jaccard (unweighted), as well as Bray-Curtis (weighed) and phylogenetic Unifrac (weighted) dissimilarity matrices. We present here the results obtained using Bray-Curtis dissimilarity matrix as a representative metric of β-diversity. The results for other indexes are presented in the supplementary material. Figure 2c presents the multidimensional scaling (MDS) plot of the Bray-Curtis dissimilarity matrix coloring study participants by a relative abundance of Firmicutes, indicating an absence of marked stratification. Similar homogeneous distributions of other dissimilarity metrics on the MDS plot are available in Additional file 1: Figure S2.

Demographic, lifestyle, and environmental variables were collected via a detailed questionnaire, while biochemical parameters were measured in blood samples. Correlations between dietary consumption parameters and gut microbiome have previously been investigated in the MI cohort [29]. We considered an additional 274 variables and filtered them based on prevalence, missingness, and collinearity, resulting in a final number of 110 variables to be included in association analyses (see the “Methods” section). Figure 1 outlines the six categories of non-genetic variables considered and shows representative examples. The full list with a detailed description of the tested variables is provided in Additional file 2: Table S1.

Data plots showing positive correlations of the three identified associations are presented in Additional file 1: Figure S6A-C.

We next searched for potential associations between human genetic variants and gut microbiome diversity, using a GWAS framework. We here hypothesize that common human genetic polymorphisms might have an effect on the abundance of specific taxa or on overall microbiome diversity.

We then attempted to replicate associations for the SNPs previously reported to be associated with individual taxa (Additional file 2: Table S15) [19–22, 25, 27]. Only 13 out of 336 SNPs passed the corrected nominal significance threshold (Pthreshold < 1.49 × 10−4, i.e., 0.05/336) for association with a quantitative phenotype. Of these, 9 were concordant at the phylum level with the original report (i.e., the strongest associated taxon in our study belonged to the same phylum as the previously observed association). For binary phenotypes, 10 SNPs passed the corrected nominal significance threshold, including 2 that were concordant at the phylum level.

We investigated the potential influence of demographic, environmental, clinical, and genetic factors on the fecal microbiome composition in 858 unrelated healthy individuals of French descent. The Milieu Intérieur cohort is particularly well suited for such a comprehensive assessment [30]. The study participants have a homogeneous genetic background, live in the same region, and are evenly stratified by sex and age, which provides an excellent opportunity to search for unique determinants of gut microbiome diversity.

Our in-depth investigation of demographic, environmental, and clinical variables allowed us to identify factors that are associated with various measures of gut microbiome composition. Including them as covariates in genome-wide association studies increased our power to potentially detect true genetic effects, by increasing the signal-to-noise ratio. However, after correction for multiple testing, we did not observe any statistically significant associations. This was the case for a total of 7 different α- and β-diversity metrics and for 475 individual taxa, tested either as quantitative or as binary phenotypes. We also attempted to replicate the previously reported associations between human polymorphisms and gut microbiome composition at the β-diversity or the taxonomic levels [19–22, 25, 27]. None of the variants associated with β-diversity metrics replicated. For individual taxa, replication at the phylum level was successful for 2 SNPs using binary phenotypes (presence vs. absence of the phylum) and for 9 SNPs using quantitative phenotypes (abundance). Of these, only one signal was replicated at the family level: the association between rs7856187 and Lachnospiraceae [27]. Of note, the only SNP that was significant in a recent meta-analysis [20], rs4988235, did not show any association in our study (Additional file 2: Table S12).

Our study provides an in-depth investigation of potential demographic, environmental, clinical, and genetic influences on the diversity of the fecal microbiome in healthy individuals. We identified variables associated with overall microbiome composition and with a small number of individual taxa, explaining a non-negligible fraction of microbiome diversity in healthy individuals in the absence of drug treatment. The lack of any significant results in the genome-wide association analyses, on the other hand, indicates that common human genetic variants of large effects do not play a major role in shaping the gut microbiome diversity observed in healthy populations. Future studies should include larger sample sizes and a more comprehensive evaluation of human genetic variation, including rare and structural variants not captured by genotyping arrays. Evaluation of the environmental effects should be optimized for example by longitudinal tracking of study participants. It should be noted that our study, as most previously published works of comparative power, tried to link human genetics and the microbiome by exploring microbiome variation through 16S rRNA gene sequencing. This methodology has obvious limitations, since it only allows the study of taxonomic composition and diversity measures, while ignoring variation of gene repertories and species pangenomes, which represent a broader and more refined picture of microbiome variability [36–38]. Future efforts evaluating host genetics influence on microbiome composition should thus focus on a refined picture of microbiome variability, obtainable through shotgun metagenomics instead of 16S rRNA gene profiling. Lastly, large-scale microbiome and genomic data should be pooled across cohorts, as recently proposed [39], to accelerate discovery in the field of human-microbiome interactions.

The 1000 healthy donors of the Milieu Intérieur cohort were recruited by BioTrial (Rennes, France). The cohort is stratified by sex (500 men, 500 women) and age (200 individuals from each decade of life, between 20 and 70 years of age). Participants were selected based on stringent inclusion and exclusion criteria, detailed elsewhere [30]. Briefly, they had no evidence of any severe/chronic/recurrent medical conditions. The main exclusion criteria were seropositivity for human immunodeficiency virus or hepatitis C virus, travel to (sub-) tropical countries within the previous 6 months, recent vaccine administration, and alcohol abuse. Subjects were excluded if they were on treatment at the time or were treated in the 3 months preceding enrolment with, nasal, intestinal, or respiratory antibiotics or antiseptics. Volunteers following a specific diet prescribed by a doctor or dietician for medical reasons (calorie-controlled diet or diet favoring weight loss in very overweight patients, diets to decrease cholesterol levels) and volunteers with food intolerance or allergy were also excluded. To avoid the influence of hormonal fluctuations in women during the peri-menopausal phase, only pre- or post-menopausal women were included. To minimize the influence of population substructure on genomic analyses, the study was restricted to individuals of self-reported Metropolitan French origin for three generations (i.e., with parents and grandparents born in continental France). Fasting whole blood samples were collected from the 1000 participants in lithium heparin tubes between September 2012 and August 2013.

Human stool samples were produced at home no more than 24 h before the scheduled medical visit and collected in a double-lined sealable bag with the outer bag containing a GENbag Anaer atmosphere generator (Aerocult, Biomerieux), used to maintain anaerobic conditions, and an anaerobic indicator strip (Anaerotest, Merck Millipore) to record the strict maintenance of the anaerobic atmosphere. Upon reception at the clinical site, the fresh stool samples were aliquoted and stored immediately at − 80 °C. DNA was extracted from the stool as previously published [40, 41]. DNA quantity was measured with Qubit using a broad range assay. Barcoding polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was carried out using indexed primers targeting the V3-V4 region of the 16S rRNA gene as described in [42]. AccuPrime™ Pfx SuperMix (Invitrogen - 12344-040) was used to perform the PCR. PCR mix was made up of 18 μL of AccuPrime™ Pfx SuperMix, 0.5 μL of both V3-340F and V4-806R primers (0.2 μM), and 1 μL of DNA (10 ng). PCR was carried out as follows: 95 °C for 2 min, 30 cycles of 95 °C for 20 s, 55 °C for 15 s, 72 °C for 5 min, and a final step at 72 °C for 10 min. Amplicon concentration was then normalized to 25 ng per PCR reaction using SequalPrep™ Normalization Plate Kit, 96-well (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Equal volumes of normalized PCR reaction were pooled and thoroughly mixed. The amplicon libraries were sequenced at the Institut Curie NGS platform on Illumina MiSeq using the 2*300 base pair V3 kit to 5064 to 240,472 sequencing reads per sample (mean ± SD: 21,363 ± 19,087 reads).

Raw reads were trimmed using sickle [43], then error corrected using SPAdes [44] and merged using PEAR [45]. Reads were clustered into operational taxonomy units (OTUs) at 97% of identity using vsearch pipeline [46]. Chimeric OTUs were identified using UCHIME [47] and discarded from downstream analysis. Microbiome profiles obtained were normalized for sequencing depth (sequencing counts were divided to their sample size and then multiplied by the size of the smaller sample) [48]. We further checked the presence of the sequencing batch effect and principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) plot obtained at the genus level presented in Additional file 1: Figure S12 shows a random distribution of samples obtained from different sequencing batches.

For 138 individuals, the gut microbiome composition could not be established because of technical issues in the extraction and the sequencing steps (i.e., due to low DNA extraction yield, absence of PCR amplicons, low read counts). These were excluded from further analysis.

Based on OTUs, we calculated two types of microbial diversity indicators: α- and β-diversity indexes. As estimates of α-diversity, we used Simpson’s diversity index, observed richness, Chao1 richness estimate, and ACE (abundance-based coverage estimator). We applied Yeo-Johnson transformation with R package VGAM [52] to normalize these phenotypes. The histograms of raw and transformed distributions are shown in Additional file 1: Figure S1A and Additional file 1: Figure S1B, respectively. As estimates of β-diversity, we used Bray-Curtis (weighed), compositional Jaccard (unweighted), and Unifrac (weighted) dissimilarity matrices. All diversity indicators were generated on non-rarefied data using the R package vegan [53] that was corrected for sequencing depth prior to indexes’ computation [48].

A large number of demographical, environmental, and clinical variables are available in the Milieu Intérieur cohort [30]. These notably include infection and vaccination history, childhood diseases, health- and diet-related habits, socio-demographical variables, and laboratory measurements. The questionnaire that was filled by the study participants and used to obtain the majority of the non-genetic variables is available at http://www.milieuinterieur.fr/sites/milieuinterieur.fr/files/crf_mi.pdf. After manual curation, we considered 274 variables as potentially interesting for our analyses. Of those, we removed 130 that (i) were only variable in less than 5% of participants or (ii) were missing in more than 10% of participants. We tested for collinearity among the remaining 144 variables using Spearman rank correlation. All pairwise correlations with a Spearman’s ρ > 0.6 or ≤ 0.6 and a false discovery rate (FDR) < 5% were considered colinear; one variable from each pair was removed from further analysis, resulting in a final set of 110 variables (described in Additional file 2: Table S1). Of these, 39 had some missing values (< 1% in 25, 1–5% in 10, 5–10% in 4 individuals), which were imputed using random forest method in the R package mice [54]. We evaluated the effects of various clinical measurements within their normal healthy range, such as those of BMI (mean ± SD: 24.26 ± 3.26 kg/m2) and C-reactive protein (CRP; mean ± SD: 1.99 ± 2.58 mg/L). Several symptoms of depression, such as lack of interest in doing things and poor self-image, and potentially relevant personal and family medical history information (such as route of birth delivery, immunization history with several vaccines, and familial occurrence of diabetes or myocardial infarction) were investigated. Furthermore, smoking status and nutritional tendencies (such as the salt consumption habits) were kept in our analyses.

We searched for associations between the 110 demographic, environmental, and clinical variables selected above and the various gut microbiome phenotypes. For α-diversity indexes (Simpson’s index, observed richness, Chao1 richness estimate, and ACE), we used non-parametric Spearman correlations. For β-diversity dissimilarities (Jaccard, Bray-Curtis, and Unifrac matrices), we used permutational analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) with 1000 permutations. PERMANOVAs identify variables that are significantly associated with β-diversity and measure the fraction of variance explained by the factors tested. The variables that were significantly associated (Benjamini–Hochberg FDR < 0.05) with the diversity estimates in the univariable models were included in the respective multivariable models: we used multivariable ANOVAs for α-diversity and PERMANOVAs for β-diversity. We used a backward selection, i.e., we eliminated the variables that were not significant in the first multivariable model, and reran the tests iteratively until all included predictors were significant. Spearman correlations, ANOVA, and PERMANOVAs tests were performed in R v3.5.1. Finally, to search for associations with individual taxa, we implemented multivariate association with linear models by using MaAsLin [55] with default parameters. For each taxon, MaAsLin preforms boosting and feature reduction of metadata, thus selecting each time different set of non-genetic variables to test in the final model. All associations between taxa and non-genetic variables that were tested in the final model are presented in Additional file 2: Table S8 with their respective p and q values.

As previously described [56], the blood was collected in 5-mL sodium EDTA tubes and kept at room temperature (18–25°) until processing. After extraction, DNA was genotyped at 719,665 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) using the HumanOmniExpress-24 BeadChip (Illumina). The SNP call rate was > 97% in all donors. To increase coverage of rare and potentially functional variation, 966 of the 1000 donors were also genotyped at 245,766 exonic variants using the HumanExome-12 BeadChip. The variant call rate was < 97% in 11 donors, which were thus removed from this dataset. We filtered out from both datasets genetic variants based on a set of criteria detailed in [57]. These quality-control filters yielded a total of 661,332 and 87,960 variants for the HumanOmniExpress and HumanExome BeadChips, respectively. Average concordance rate for the 16,753 SNPs shared between the two genotyping platforms was 99.99%, and individual concordance rates ranged from 99.8 to 100%.

Relatedness was detected using KING [58]. Six pairs of related participants (parent-child, first-, and second-degree siblings) were identified. Of those, four pairs had both genotyping and microbiome datasets and one individual from each pair, randomly selected, was removed from the genetic analyses, leaving in total 858 individuals with both genotyping and 16S rRNA gene sequencing data. The genetic structure of the study population was estimated using principal component analysis (PCA), implemented in EIGENSTRAT (v6.1.3) [59]. The PCA plot of the study population is shown in Additional file 1: Figure S13.

As described previously [57], we used Positional Burrows-Wheeler Transform for genotype imputation, starting with the 661,332 quality-controlled SNPs genotyped on the HumanOmniExpress array. Phasing was performed using EAGLE2 (v2.0.5) [60]. As a reference panel, we used the haplotypes from the Haplotype Reference Consortium (release 1.1) [61]. After removing SNPs that had an imputation info score < 0.8, we obtained 22,235,661 variants. We then merged the imputed dataset with 87,960 variants directly genotyped on the HumanExome BeadChips array and removed variants that were monomorphic or diverged significantly from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (P < 10−7). We obtained a total of 12,058,650 genetic variants to be used in association analyses.

We used KIR*IMP [63] to impute killer-cell immunoglobulin-like receptor (KIR) alleles, after haplotype inference on chromosome 19 with SHAPEIT2 (v2.r790) [64]. A total of 19 KIR types were imputed: 17 loci plus two extended haplotype classifications (A vs. B and KIR haplotype). A MAF threshold of 1% was applied, leaving 16 KIR alleles for association analysis.

For single-variant association analyses, we only considered SNPs with a MAF higher than 5% (N = 5,293,637). Unless otherwise stated, we used PLINK (v1.9) [65] for association testing. In all tests, we included the first two first principal components of the genotyping matrix as covariates to correct for residual population stratification. The demographic, environmental, and clinical variables that were identified as significantly associated were also included as covariates in the respective analyses. A full list of covariates for each phenotype is available in Additional file 2: Table S8.

We used linear regression (within PLINK) and microbiomeGWAS [66] to test for SNP associations with α-diversity indexes and β-diversity dissimilarities, respectively. Linear regression was also used to search for associations with relative abundance of specific taxa. Only taxa present in at least 10% of individuals were tested (N = 475), i.e., 8/11 (remaining/total) phyla, 16/24 classes, 20/43 orders, 50/103 families, 135/328 genera, and 246/698 species. The list of all tested taxa is presented in Additional file 2: Table S7. We used logistic regression to test binary phenotypes (presence/absence of specific taxa). Here, we excluded taxa that were present in > 90% of individuals, resulting in a total of 374 phenotypes (4 phyla, 8 classes, 15 orders, 38 families, 104 genera, and 205 species). For all GWAS, we used a significance threshold corrected for the number of tests performed. For α-diversity (N = 4): Pα-threshold < 1.25 × 10−8, for β-diversity (N = 3): Pβ-threshold < 1.67 × 10−8, for taxa abundance (N = 475): Ptaxa-linear < 1.05 × 10−10 and for presence or absence of taxa (N = 374): Ptaxa-logistic < 1.33 × 10−10.



Publisher’s Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Supplementary information accompanies this paper at 10.1186/s40168-019-0747-x.

