The athletic gut microbiota

The microorganisms in the gastrointestinal tract play a significant role in nutrient uptake, vitamin synthesis, energy harvest, inflammatory modulation, and host immune response, collectively contributing to human health. Important factors such as age, birth method, antibiotic use, and diet have been established as formative factors that shape the gut microbiota. Yet, less described is the role that exercise plays, particularly how associated factors and stressors, such as sport/exercise-specific diet, environment, and their interactions, may influence the gut microbiota. In particular, high-level athletes offer remarkable physiology and metabolism (including muscular strength/power, aerobic capacity, energy expenditure, and heat production) compared to sedentary individuals, and provide unique insight in gut microbiota research. In addition, the gut microbiota with its ability to harvest energy, modulate the immune system, and influence gastrointestinal health, likely plays an important role in athlete health, wellbeing, and sports performance. Therefore, understanding the mechanisms in which the gut microbiota could play in the role of influencing athletic performance is of considerable interest to athletes who work to improve their results in competition as well as reduce recovery time during training. Ultimately this research is expected to extend beyond athletics as understanding optimal fitness has applications for overall health and wellness in larger communities. Therefore, the purpose of this narrative review is to summarize current knowledge of the athletic gut microbiota and the factors that shape it. Exercise, associated dietary factors, and the athletic classification promote a more “health-associated” gut microbiota. Such features include a higher abundance of health-promoting bacterial species, increased microbial diversity, functional metabolic capacity, and microbial-associated metabolites, stimulation of bacterial abundance that can modulate mucosal immunity, and improved gastrointestinal barrier function.

The human gut microbiota contains thousands of different bacterial taxa as well as various archaea, eukaryotic microbes and viruses, more than three million genes, and harbors an enormous metabolic capacity [1, 2]. The microorganisms in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract play a role in nutrient uptake, vitamin synthesis, energy harvest, inflammatory modulation, and host immune response [3, 4]. In turn, numerous intrinsic and extrinsic factors can affect the gut microbiota which results in a complex gut ecosystem that is highly dynamic and individual [5, 6]. Important factors such as age, birth delivery route, antibiotic use, and diet can shape the gut microbiota [7–10]. The role that exercise plays, in particular the associated factors and stressors, such as sport/exercise-specific diet [11], environment [12], and their interactions, on the gut microbiota have been less well described. Athletes, although diverse as a population given the wide variety of different types of exercise/fitness/athletic training, competition, dietary practices and attributes, exemplify these factors on a generally consistent and long-term basis.

Given the increasing interest in exercise, associated dietary factors, and athletes as a population in relation to the gut microbiota, the purpose of this narrative review is to summarize current knowledge of the athletic gut microbiota and the factors that shape it. While differences likely exist among how the gut microbiota is affected by the different types of sport/athlete/fitness training regimens (e.g., resistance, interval, stretching/flexibility, endurance/aerobic, etc.), the primary aim is to provide a “state-of-the-art research” statement. Key topics covered include:

Numerous factors such as age, genetics, drug use, stress, smoking, and diet can all affect the microbial composition of the gut, influencing a complex ecosystem that is highly dynamic and individual [5–7, 20]. For example, the manner in which we are born and raised can result in substantial differences in the composition of the gut microbiota. This outcome is related to the differences in exposure (or non-exposure) of bacteria in the birth canal during vaginal birth [10], being bottle fed or breastfed [21], living with a dog, cat, or close to farm animals [22], the number of antibiotic treatments administered [8], and environmental toxin exposure [23]. From birth until the age of about 3 years, an individual assembles their core of resident microbiota primarily dominated by gram-positive Firmicutes and gram-negative Bacteroidetes phyla, and this subsequent make-up is as unique as a set of fingerprints [24–26]. The gut microbiota is also essential for processing dietary components and appears to have a major role in shaping the immune system [27]. Not surprisingly, the role of the gut microbiota in determining host health and development of disease has been gaining clinical and community interest [9]. Altered gut microbiota composition and/or function is linked to a growing number of conditions from metabolic disorders to some brain-related dysfunctions [28, 29]. Individuals in a known disease state can have a significantly different gut microbiota composition compared with healthy individuals [30]. A common observation is increased species diversity and/or richness in the gut microbiota of healthy individuals. Although new research suggests gene content/diversity in the gut may be a better predictor of physiological states [31]. In addition, counterexamples exist as recent work links high gut microbial diversity with a longer colonic transit time and systemic circulation of potentially harmful protein degradation products [32]. On a compositional level, it could be that low diversity indicates poorer health, while high diversity does not always guarantee improved health. Thus, information about compositional diversity alone is not sufficient to assess the health of the microbiota (and the host). Although, from an ecological perspective, functional diversity may be a key factor in allowing an ecosystem to continue operating properly [33]. Resilience to both external and internal changes (with the ability to rapidly return to its baseline functional profile) is likely a key feature of a healthy gut microbiota’s ability to maintain itself [34].

While the aforementioned techniques have allowed for a rapid increase in gut microbiota research, the variation in microbial analysis across different studies can make comparing/contrasting study findings difficult. Indeed, variation in profiling techniques (e.g., sequencing strategy, platform, variable regions, sequencing depth, etc.) may act as a confounding variable resulting in divergent findings due entirely to laboratory techniques rather than treatment [51]. Furthermore, many gut microbiota studies may be underpowered, and scientists may not be controlling for important confounding variables such as diet, gender, ethnicity, GI problems, antibiotics, etc. As the investigation of the athletic microbiota is a newer field of research, the intention of this review is to provide a broad overview of the current state of the literature. For future, more specific reviews, deeper discussions of methodological nuances are warranted.

Establishing consistent relationships across studies in physically active groups, such as athletes has been problematic. Beyond the obvious methodological differences such as sample preparation techniques, DNA sequencing, bioinformatics tools, and reference databases [52–55], there is also large variation across exercise/athletic regimens. Moreover, confounding factors including training history, level of physical fitness, training environment, and dietary intake all have the potential to affect study outcomes substantially, and make detecting differences due to exercise/athletic regimens on the gut microbiota difficult to ascertain. Therefore, when comparing these individuals within or across various exercise/athletic disciplines and classifications, these factors should be accounted for and reported by investigators. While the current body of this comparative-type research is mixed and more limited (see Table 1), collectively it provides important insight and highlights key areas of future study.

Several studies have investigated the difference in compositional gut microbiota between those physically active (including athletes) and a range of populations. While the above confounding factors are still relevant when interpreting these studies, such research provides an important comparator to the gut microbiota of these individuals. In an observational study, the gut microbiotas of sedentary and physically active premenopausal women were compared [56]. Physical exercise was not related to differences in the microbiota diversity or richness (the total number of OTUs or species recorded); however, sedentary parameters (i.e., sedentary time and breaks) correlated negatively with microbiota richness. Further, quantitative polymerase chain reaction analysis revealed higher abundance of health-promoting bacterial species in active women, including Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, Roseburia hominis and Akkermansia muciniphila. In another cross-sectional study in females, Mörkl et al. [57] compared the gut microbiota of anorexia nervosa inpatients to recreational athletes from a range of sports and overweight, obese, and normal weight controls. Microbiota diversity was markedly lower in anorexia nervosa patients and obese participants compared to other groups, while athletes showed the highest alpha diversity (species richness). Interestingly, total fat mass, serum lipids, C-reactive protein, depression scales, and smoking status were negatively associated (R2 = − 0.012 to − 0.256, P < 0.05) with microbiota diversity. It is important to note that these associations are likely driven by lifestyle. While caution should be used in interpreting this data given the cross-sectional nature and inability to account for other potential influences, investigation of gut microbiota composition, diversity, and function should be useful in characterizing key elements of a healthy lifestyle.

Clarke et al. [19] reported the gut microbiota of professional male rugby players was more diverse than healthy, non-athlete subjects matched for body mass index (BMI), age, and gender. Given the physical size of modern rugby players, two control groups were assessed; one matched for athlete size with a comparable (elevated) BMI (> 28 kg/m2) and a second reflecting the background age-matched and sex-matched population (lower BMI of < 25 kg/m2). Importantly, the alpha diversity of the elite athlete’s microbiota was higher than that of both control groups. Further, the athletes and those in the low BMI control group had higher proportions of the genus Akkermansia than the high BMI control group. Moreover, protein consumption was correlated positively (R = 0.24–0.43) with microbial diversity across all groups, indicating that greater protein intake was linked to higher levels of microbial diversity. There is a possibility that the increased diversity of the athlete’s gut microbiota was due, in part, to their higher protein intake. Barton et al. [13] re-examined the microbiota in these participants using whole metagenome shotgun sequencing to provide deeper insight into taxonomic composition and metabolic potential. Differences in fecal microbiota between athletes and sedentary controls showed even greater separation at the metagenomic and metabolomic level than at the gut microbiota compositional level. Relative to controls athletes appear to have increases in metabolic pathways (e.g., amino acid and antibiotic biosynthesis and carbohydrate metabolism) and fecal metabolites (e.g., microbial produced short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) including acetate, propionate, and butyrate) associated with enhanced fitness and overall health when compared to control groups [13].

To explore possible differences between levels of athletes, Petersen et al. [18] investigated the gut microbiotas of 22 professional and 11 amateur competitive cyclists. Using metagenomic whole genome shotgun sequencing, no significant correlations were evident between the taxonomic clusters in professional or amateur cycling status. However, the amount of exercise (time reported exercising during the average week) was correlated positively with a greater abundance of the genus Prevotella (≥2.5%). Increased abundance of Prevotella, common in non-Western populations and associated with plant/fiber rich diets, was further positively correlated with several amino acid and carbohydrate metabolism pathways, including branched-chain amino acid (BCAA) metabolism. Using metatranscriptomic sequencing, there was increased abundance of Methanobrevibacter smithii transcripts in a number of the professional cyclists in comparison to amateur cyclists. Moreover, this archaeon had upregulation of genes involved in the production of methane and when methane metabolism was upregulated, there was similar upregulation of energy and carbohydrate metabolism pathways. Similar to Clarke et al. [19], there was low abundance of Bacteroides in the athletes. In addition, Akkermansia was present in 30 out of 33 cyclists, with seven cyclists having relative abundances > 2% of this microbe in their metagenomic community. These outcomes may have been a reflection of higher fitness/metabolism of these athletes as increased proportions of Akkermansia are generally associated with a healthier metabolic profile [59].

To investigate the long-term effects of a specific exercise type and athletes’ diets on gut microbiota, Jang et al. [11] compared fecal microbiota characteristics, dietary intake, and body composition in 15 healthy sedentary men (as controls), 15 bodybuilders, and 15 distance runners. Exercise type was associated with athlete diet patterns (i.e., bodybuilders: high-protein, high-fat, and low-carbohydrate/dietary fiber diet; distance runners: low-carbohydrate and low-dietary fiber diet). While athlete type did not differ regarding gut microbiota alpha and beta diversity, it was significantly associated with the relative abundance of several bacteria. For instance, at the genus level, Faecalibacterium, Sutterella, Clostridium, Haemophilus, and Eisenbergiella were the highest, while Bifidobacterium and Parasutterella were the lowest in bodybuilders. At the species level, intestinal beneficial bacteria widely used as probiotics (Bifidobacterium adolescentis, Bifidobacterium longum, Lactobacillus sakei) and those producing short chain fatty acids (Blautia wexlerae, Eubacterium hallii) were the lowest in bodybuilders and the highest in controls. In distance runners, protein intake was negatively correlated with diversity (Shannon index R = − 0.63; P = 0.01) and in bodybuilders, fat intake was negatively correlated with Bifidobacteria (R = − 0.52; P = 0.05). These differences may relate to the nutrition status of athletes in the study (i.e. insufficient carbohydrate and dietary fiber; higher fat).

From the limited evidence, it appears that athletes harbor an increased abundance of functional pathways within the microbiome that are exploited by the host for potential health benefits, as well as carbohydrate degradation and secondary metabolite metabolism compared to control groups [60]. While difficult to isolate, the influence of dietary intake on many of these differences is likely and needs to be considered in the context of this research. Furthermore, athletes have an enriched profile of SCFAs, previously associated with numerous health benefits and a lean phenotype [61–63]. This profile along with an increased number of detected SCFA pathways in athletes is conducive to an enhanced rate of SCFA production [64]. While evidence is currently limited, results from Clarke et al. [19] and Petersen et al. [18] suggest A. muciniphilia may be more present in athletes than non-athletes. A. muciniphilia is a mucin-degrading bacterium that resides in the nutrient-rich mucus layer of the gut that appears to be associated with positive metabolic function [59]. A. muciniphilia levels are decreased in obese and type 2 diabetic mice, and treatment with these bacteria reversed high-fat diet-induced metabolic disorders, including fat mass gain, metabolic endotoxemia, adipose tissue inflammation, and insulin resistance [65]. A. muciniphilia can control mucus production by the host and restore mucus layer thickness in mice with high-fat diet-induced obesity, thereby reducing gut permeability. This outcome led to the hypothesis that A. muciniphilia engages in cross-talk with the intestinal epithelium to control inflammation and gut barrier function [65]. A. muciniphilia has also been found to be enriched in mice fed a ketogenic diet, exhibiting gut-brain functions including conferring seizure protection in two preclinical models for refractory epilepsy [66]. While the role of A. muciniphila is less certain in humans, it is depleted in individuals with several metabolic and inflammatory disorders. For example, of subjects undergoing dietary calorie restriction treatment for obesity, those with higher levels of these bacteria exhibited the best metabolic status and clinical outcomes [59]. Future research in athletes should continue to investigate the role A. muciniphilia plays in the gut microbiota and its functional impact on metabolism.

Barton et al. [13] speculated that the athlete gut microbiome may possess a functional capacity primed for tissue repair and a greater ability to harness energy from the diet with increased capacity for carbohydrate metabolism, cell structure, and nucleotide biosynthesis. This assertion reflects the significant energy demands and tissue adaptation that occurs during intense exercise and elite sport. It appears that being physically active is another important factor in the relationship between the microbiota and host metabolism. Intervention-based studies to delineate this relationship will be important and provide further insights into optimal therapies to influence the gut microbiota, and its relationship with health and disease as well as athletic performance.

Few studies have focused on the impact that voluntary exercise has on gut microbiota and, to date, all but seven of these experimental studies utilized murine models [17, 71]. These preliminary studies indicate that exercise influences the composition of the gut microbiota community. Matsumoto et al. [72] reported that regular running exercise in rats was related to an increase in butyrate-producing bacteria in the microbiota composition along with an increase of butyrate concentration. Other animal studies demonstrated that daily wheel running exercise may improve some aspects of unhealthy states, such as diet-induced obesity, diabetes, and toxicity, by impacting the gut microbial composition in mice [73–75]. These effects included altering the ratio between the dominant phyla Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes, which has been found to be correlated with obesity and other diseases [76–78]. Animal and human data have reported that the Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio is higher (i.e., increased Firmicutes and/or decreased Bacteroidetes) in obese people compared to lean people [79–82]. However, this is not always the same between studies [83, 84] and may be an oversimplification of phylum-level patterns in relation to host health. Further, mechanisms by which specific members of the microbiota, such as Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes, can affect human phenotypes remain to be fully elucidated [85]. Therefore, changes in phyla ratios should be interpreted with caution.

Moreover, it seems that the changes exerted by physical exercise depend on the physiological state of the individual. For example, regular forced exercise differentially affected microbiota richness whether they were obese-hypertensive or normal rats [86]. Alterations to the microbiota exerted by exercise in rats following a high-fat diet were different to rats on a normal diet [89], as well as the alterations produced in diabetic mice were different to their control counterparts [75]. Collectively, these findings indicate that modulation of the microbiota by chronic exercise depends not only on the physiological state of the individual, but also on the diet. Moreover, another significant difference between forced vs. voluntary exercise in animals is exercise volume. This is recapitulated in human cyclist data [18] and requires further investigation in animal models. Finally, it has been observed that exercise induces more effective changes in the microbiota in juvenile rats than in adult rats [90]. A common finding in these murine studies examining the effects of exercise training on the gut microbiome, is an increase in alpha diversity [17]. Several other studies using murine-based models also demonstrated increased alpha diversity in animals that exercised vs. those that were sedentary [73, 74, 86, 87].

In healthy individuals, Estaki et al. [14] reported higher cardiorespiratory fitness (as measured by peak or maximum oxygen uptake, VO2peak or VO2max) correlated with increases in both microbial diversity and fecal butyrate (see Table
2). Also identified was a core set of gene related functions rather than a core set of bacterial taxa in individuals with high levels of fitness [14]. Further, ~ 20% of the variation in gut bacterial alpha diversity could be explained by VO2peak alone; in fact, VO2peak stood as the only variable that contributed significantly to increased alpha diversity. The primary findings indicate that cardiorespiratory fitness is a good predictor of gut microbial diversity in healthy humans, outperforming several other variables including sex, age, BMI, and multiple dietary components. Additionally, enhanced bacterial diversity was correlated positively with certain microbial metabolic functions including chemotaxis, motility, and fatty acid biosynthesis. As VO2peak was not significantly associated with variation in community composition, this result suggests function may be a better predictor than species richness, as noted previously. This study also confirmed results by Matsumoto and colleagues [72] who initially reported that exercising rats exhibited a positive correlation between high-cardiorespiratory fitness and an increase in the SCFA, butyrate. Increases in fecal butyrate were observed when relative abundances of Clostridiales, Roseburia, Lachnospiraceae, and Erysipelotrichaceae were increased [14]. These SCFAs are derived from fermentation of undigested plant fiber by the microbiota in the large intestine.

In professional rugby players, who had a unique dietary pattern (higher energy intake and quantities of protein, fat, carbohydrates, sugar and saturated fat per day, with protein accounting for considerably more of the total energy) and a high level of physical activity, there was a higher diversity of gut microbiota compared with controls [19]. However, it was unclear if this effect was due to exercise, a high-protein diet, a combination of these two factors, or other factors [19].

To investigate the effect of an acute exercise bout in athletes, Zhao et al. [20] examined the fecal metabolites and microbiota in 20 amateur runners before and after a half-marathon race using metabolomics and 16S rRNA sequencing analysis. According to the alpha diversity analysis, there were few differences in diversity, nevertheless, abundances of certain microbiota members showed differences before and after running. At the phylum level, Lentisphaerae and Acidobacteria, whose functions in the human gut are unknown, were detected after running. At the species level there was a marked increase in the families Coriobacteriaceae and Succinivibrionaceae. Coriobacteriaceae (phylum Actinobacteria) is involved in metabolism of bile salts and steroid hormones as well as activation of dietary polyphenols in the human gut [95]. Coriobacteriaceae was correlated positively with 15 metabolites, indicating that metabolism of Coriobacteriaceae may be a potential mechanism underlying the role of exercise in preventing disease and improving health outcomes. These increased metabolites indicate a microbiota-derived metabolism was promoted by running. At the genus level, half-marathon running reduced the abundance of fecal Ezakiella, Romboutsia, and Actinobacillus, but increased the abundance of Coprococcus and Ruminococcus bicirculans. Actinobacillus species are purportedly responsible for several distinct animal diseases, such as actinomycosis in cattle, potent septicemia in the neonatal foal, and human periodontal disease [96]. Thus, inhibition of this potential pathogen indicated an anti-inflammatory effect of exercise. Interestingly, the pentose phosphate pathway, a metabolic pathway parallel to glycolysis and involving the oxidation of glucose, was the most enriched pathway after a half-marathon run. These findings highlight a microbiota-derived mechanism for the health-promoting benefits of exercise.

In a third set of experiments, Scheiman et al. [16] isolated a strain of Veillonella atypica from a stool sample of one of the aforementioned marathon runners and inoculated mice. In a pre-clinical crossover trial, Veillonella inoculated mice had a 13% improvement in time to exhaustion running tests as well as significant reductions in inflammatory cytokines post exercise compared to control. They also more effectively converted lactate to the SCFAs propionate. Importantly, Scheiman et al. [16] found systemic lactate in these animals was able to cross the gut barrier into the lumen, making it available as a substrate for microbial SCFA conversion. Taken together, these experiments revealed that V. atypica improved run time via its metabolic conversion of exercise-induced lactate into propionate, thereby identifying a natural, microbiome-encoded enzymatic process that enhances athletic performance. While other studies reported butyrate as a prominent feature of the athletic microbiota [13, 14, 72, 88, 98, 99], this research implicated propionate as another significant beneficial SCFA. Moreover, these preclinical, proof-of-concept experiments displayed for the first time that beneficial microbes from athletes can be effectively transferred to enhance performance. While performed in animal model, this research is notable as it took an important step from correlative to causal function, implicating athlete microbiomes for broader human health and performance applications.

In a longitudinal research design, Allen et al. [98] reported for the first time that exercise training can modulate the composition and metabolic capacity of the human gut microbiota in previously sedentary individuals. Lean and obese subjects underwent 6 weeks of endurance training with diet controlled, followed by a 6-week washout period [98]. Exercise-induced modulations of the gut microbiota and SCFA were strongly associated with changes in body composition in lean participants and VO2max in obese participants, independent of diet. After the washout period, exercise-induced changes in the microbiota were largely reversed once exercise training ceased. This study supports the notion that gut microbiota composition is linked to exercise status and that exercised-induced changes may be temporary and require continual stimulus [100]. Of note, the exercise induced shifts in SCFA-producing taxa (Faecalibacterium species [spp.] and Lachnospira spp.) and genetic machinery (butyrate-regulating gene, BCoAT) were more substantial in lean versus obese participants. This connection is also supported by the observed shifts in metabolic capacity of the gut microbiota which may be transient and likely dependent on repeated exercise stimuli.

The functional potential of bacterial species involved in specific amino and fatty acid biosynthesis also increased. Specifically, the gene expression of functional metabolic pathways involved in L-isoleucine and L-lysine production increased, which play an important role in reducing muscular fatigue and damage during strenuous exercise [112]. Microbial-derived lysine may also contribute to the body protein pool in humans [113]. Changes in essential amino acid availability influence hematopoiesis, which in turn may increase oxygen carrying capacity and cardiorespiratory fitness [112]. Many of the adaptations in microbial community structure and metaproteomics persisted at 3 months follow up.

Overall, the mechanisms by which physical activity may promote a rich bacterial community and increased functional pathways have not been fully elucidated but likely involve a combination of intrinsic and extrinsic factors. For example, physically active individuals are more likely to be exposed to their environmental biosphere (e.g., time spent outdoors) and follow an overall healthy lifestyle and, consequently, harbor a richer microbiota. Simultaneously, intrinsic adaptations to endurance training, such as decreased blood flow, tissue hypoxia, and increased transit and absorptive capacity can lead to changes in the GI tract [114, 115]. Changes in GI transit time have been reported to affect the pH within the colonic lumen which could lead to alterations in the composition of the gut microbiota. For instance, longer colonic transit time is associated with decreased gut microbiota diversity, which is paralleled by an increase in pH during transit from the proximal to the distal colon [116, 117]. Repeated bouts of aerobic exercise can increase GI transit time in healthy individuals and middle-aged patients with chronic constipation [118–120]. However, at higher intensities (e.g., above 70% VO2max), gastric emptying appears to be delayed [121–124]. Aerobic exercise also increases fecal SCFA concentration which can decrease pH in the colonic lumen [125]. Furthermore, metabolites that are a by-product of exercise and circulate throughout the body (e.g., lactate) may filter through the gut and serve as an energy source for certain bacterial taxa (e.g., Veillonella). There is expected competition for nutrients and resources in every ecosystem, including the gut microbiota. Therefore, many of these microbial characteristics may be a result of ‘form fits function’, as communities in the gut are shaped by available resources, as determined by the physiology of their host. These and other potential adaptive mechanisms, such as a change in gut pH, may create an environmental setting that allows for richer community diversity and metabolic functions. Anaerobic capacity and resistance exercise training may also influence community composition, though to date, no work has examined these parameters in relation to gut microbiota.

The current body of research supports the role of exercise as an important behavioral factor that can affect qualitative and quantitative changes in the gut microbial composition and function with benefits to the host. Although these changes may not occur in a similar fashion across individuals and may also depend on baseline characteristics of both the microbiota and host. However, based on the current body of research, exercise appears to enrich microbiota diversity, stimulate the proliferation of bacteria which can modulate mucosal immunity, improve barrier functions, and stimulate bacteria and functional pathways capable of producing substances that protect against gastrointestinal disorders and improve performance (i.e., SCFAs). Indeed, exercise may be an important intervention to alter gut microbiota composition and restore gut symbiosis [100]. However, excessive and/or prolonged high-intensity exercise may not impart these effects. Notably, certain taxa may be enriched in athletes such as the lean phenotype-associated A. muciniphila, and propionate producing Veillonella (via metabolism of lactate). In addition, higher diversity of microbiota composition was associated with lean phenotypes compared to that of obese individuals. It is likely that the diverse, metabolically favorable intestinal microbiota evident in the elite athlete is the cumulative manifestation of many years of high nutrient intake and high degrees of physical activity and training throughout youth, adolescence, and during adult participation in high-level sports [133]. Future areas of gut microbiota research in relation to athletes and exercise is presented in Table
3.

In researching the human gut microbiota, it is difficult to examine exercise and diet separately. This relationship is compounded by changes in dietary intakes often associated with physical activity (e.g., increased protein intake in resistance trained athletes or carbohydrate intake in endurance athletes and increased total energy and nutrient intake in general). Athletes often consume a diet that differs from the general population with implications on the composition of the gut microbiome.

Diet is an established modulator of gut microbiota composition, with significant alterations reported within 24 h of a dietary change [134]. This ability to rapidly change has implications in research design for the timing of measurements in exercise studies, as does dietary composition. Indeed, various food components, dietary patterns, and nutrients all have the potential to substantially alter the growth of different gut microbial populations. Medication and diet are principal environmental factors that influence gut microbiota composition according to large-cohort studies [135, 136]. The gut microbiota is an important factor that shapes both energy harvest and storage through metabolism of proteins and production of several metabolites including SCFAs, ammonia, sulfur-containing metabolites such as hydrogen sulfide and methanethiol, and neuroactive compounds such as tryptamine, serotonin, phenethylamine, tryptophan, and histamine [137, 138]. Moreover, the gut microbiota can also synthesize de novo amino acids and is involved in the utilization and catabolism of several amino acids originating from both alimentary and endogenous proteins. These amino acids can serve as precursors for the synthesis of other metabolites produced by the microbiota including SCFAs [139]. Animal studies have revealed communication between the gut microbiota and muscle, in which gut microbiota can affect muscle energy homeostasis by interfering with fat deposition, and lipid and glucose metabolism through various metabolites including SCFAs and secondary bile salts [17]. Broadly, athletes consume higher energy diets compared to sedentary individuals and are often encouraged to consume a diet high in carbohydrate and protein and lower in fat [140]. During training and competition, fiber intake may be reduced to avoid potential GI issues including gas and distension [141]. Importantly athletes’ dietary plans often account for macro- and micronutrient needs, hydration, the timing of nutrients, and dietary supplements, but rarely is the health of the gut microbiota considered [140]. Here we describe the influence of total energy intake and the principal macronutrient classes (protein, carbohydrate, and fat) on the gut microbiota.

The GI tract represents the interface between ingested nutrients and the host where energy is effectively extracted. In healthy adults, ~ 85% of carbohydrates, 65–95% of proteins, and nearly all fats are absorbed before entering the large intestine [142]. Consequently, indigestible carbohydrates and proteins that enter the colon represent between 10 and 30% of total ingested energy [143, 144]. If not for the colonic microbiota, these nutrients would generally be eliminated via the stool without further absorption due to the limited digestive capability of the human large intestine [142]. Therefore, the gut microbiota plays an important role in energy extraction and, in turn, can be influenced by the composition of the diet and the amount of energy entering this environment [145]. In relation, the gut microbiota produces and releases an enormous array of compounds which may act upon host tissues modulating appetite, gut motility, energy uptake and storage, and energy expenditure [146, 147]. Riedl et al. [148] estimated that for an average 90 kg male, the biomass of bacteria in the gut could be expected to contribute anywhere from 7 to 22% of daily adult human caloric turnover (based on 2000 kcal [kcal] per day). Clearly, the gut microbiota-host interaction can affect energy balance which has implications for weight gain or loss and body composition [149, 150].

Overall, energy balance is an overlooked factor in relation to the athletic gut microbiota. Not only is this relevant to improving performance, but also addressing the health status of those affected by RED-S. Different dietary patterns affecting macronutrient consumption can alter the composition of what enters the large intestine where there is the greatest density of gut microbes. This has a tremendous impact on the human body’s ability to extract and utilize energy from the diet. Moreover, it is difficult (if not impossible) to solely investigate the impact of total energy consumption on the composition of the gut microbiota without considering dietary variability such as the major dietary macronutrient classes.

Despite the difficulties of studying macronutrient effects in isolation, there is evidence to support the assertion that dietary protein (and fat) consumption elicit both compositional and functional changes to the gut microbiota [171]. David et al. [134] showed a rapid shift in gut microbial community composition and increased populations of Alistipes, Bilophila, and Bacteroides after consuming a high-fat/protein diet for 5 days and these changes were thought to be a result of increased bile secretion. Changes to the gut microbiota have also been documented when dietary protein is increased: Bacteroides spp. are highly associated with animal proteins, whereas Prevotella spp. are highly associated with increased intakes of plant proteins [172]. Intervention studies have demonstrated that high-protein diets (animal protein) reduced fecal butyrate concentrations and butyrate-producing bacteria such as Bifidobacteria spp., Roseburia spp., and E. rectale [173–175]. Fecal concentrations of potentially damaging N-nitroso compounds increase markedly in volunteers who consumed a high-protein, low-carbohydrate diet [175]. Furthermore, a study of five male volunteers consuming high intakes of animal protein showed that fecal sulfide production is related to meat intake [176]; notably, hydrogen sulfide is a compound associated with ulcerative colitis [177]. Ma et al. [178] suggested that excessive protein intake or an unsuitable ratio of protein to protein-fermenting bacteria, could potentially produce adverse effects on health.

The source of protein, including its quality and digestibility, may influence the site of fermentation within the gut. Highly digestible proteins, such as whey, can be digested by host enzymes in the proximal intestine, reducing microbial fermentation. Similarly, plant-originated proteins are available for microbial fermentation in a more distal site given incomplete digestion by host enzymes, particularly at a higher protein level. Evidence indicates proteins from vegetable origin have a more marked effect on microbial diversity than animal proteins [201], however investigation in athletes is needed. By selecting dietary ingredients containing protein of rather high digestibility and quality, the amount of dietary protein reaching the large intestine may be diminished, thus limiting the quantity of residual protein available for protein fermenting bacteria. As a consequence, the growth and activity of potential pathogens could be suppressed. These seemingly opposing effects of high-protein diets imply that protein-diet interactions are modulated by factors such as host body composition and exercise intensity. The types and amounts of fats consumed in each of these studies are also likely important for the overall effects on the gut microbiota. For example, a ketogenic diet alters gut microbiota composition leading to an increase in Akkermansia abundance. Moreover, Akkermansia fed to mice has a positive impact on reducing seizures, providing a potential mechanism for the observed neuroprotective effects of a ketogenic diet [66, 202].

As a macronutrient class, carbohydrates (including dietary fiber) have a profound effect on the gut microbiota. In comparison to bacteria, humans have much fewer enzymes to break down carbohydrates [203] and what can be digested by these enzymes is absorbed in the small intestine. Dietary fiber passes undigested from the small intestine into the colonic environment [171] and the gut microbiota relies on these fibers for energy, which they target for disassembly with a combined ‘toolkit’ of thousands of enzymes [204]. Therefore, carbohydrates in the form of dietary fiber represent enormous potential for modulation of gut microbiota based upon the chemistry and accessibility of specific dietary fibers to microbial groups.

Within the SCFAs, distinct clusters (acetic acid, propionic acid, and butyric acid) were observed by Barton et al. [13] to positively correlate with dietary contributors (fiber and protein), while isobutyric acid, isovaleric acid, and valeric acid positively correlated with microbial diversity. The same clusters were observed when positively correlating with individual taxa, in support of purported links between SCFAs and numerous metabolic benefits and a lean phenotype [61–63].

Like protein and carbohydrate, the specific effects of fat on the gut microbiota are difficult to isolate; however, the types of fats consumed appear to be important. In a rodent study, animals fed lard showed increases in Bacteroides and displayed signs of metabolic dysfunction. In contrast, animals fed fish oil showed increased levels of lactic acid bacteria and were protected from metabolic dysfunction [229]. In humans, ingestion of an animal-based diet for 5 days, high in fat (69% of total energy) and protein (30% of total energy) and almost entirely void of carbohydrates (including dietary fiber), induced rapid and significant changes in microbial community structure and overwhelmed inter-individual differences in microbial gene expression. Specific alterations included gut bacterial taxonomic shifts and transcriptional responses characteristic of carnivorous mammals, with higher concentrations of bile-tolerant bacteria (presumably due to the extremely high-fat intake known to increase bile acid secretion) [134]. Diets high in fat could interact in various ways with the gut microbiota to facilitate the translocation of bacterial LPS generating chronic inflammation [171]. LPS can be incorporated into lipid micelles formed during fat digestion, and certain gut microbes may be important in regulating this process.

In a short-term feeding study Wu et al. [172] randomized ten subjects into a 10-day high-fat/low-fiber diet (38% fat, 35% carbohydrate, 27% protein) while others were given a high-fiber/low-fat diet (13% fat, 69% carbohydrate, 18% protein). Although specific taxa changes varied between individuals, the high-fat diet slowed intestinal transit time by as much as 3 days. Metagenomic analysis indicated that functional shifts, including greater protein export and lipoic acid metabolism, were also associated with the high-fat diet. Finally, the Bacteroides enterotype was most strongly correlated with reports of frequent consumption of animal protein and saturated fat. Similarly, Murtaza and colleagues [230] completed a three-week diet intervention in elite race walkers undertaking intensified training combined with a ketogenic, low-carbohydrate, high-fat diet (LCHF; < 50 g day carbohydrate; 78% energy as fat; 2.1 g/kg/day protein) and reported increased relative abundance of Bacteroides and Dorea and reduced Faecalibacterium. In comparison to high or periodized carbohydrate diet groups, the LCHF diet resulted in a more pronounced effect on the gut microbiota increasing the relative abundance of bacterial taxa with recognized capabilities for lipid metabolism. The relative abundance of Bacteroides spp. was negatively correlated with fat oxidation and the relative abundance of Dorea was negatively correlated with an exercise economy test. It appears that individual responsiveness to a high-fat diet may affect the amount of dietary fat that actually reaches the distal gut, where it could have associative effects on the gut microbiota. Furthermore, relative abundance of Faecalibacterium spp. was decreased in athletes after consumption of the LCHF diet. Interestingly, Faecalibacterium spp. is one of the most abundant bacterial taxa present in the gut microbiota of healthy individuals and has been linked to a host of metabolic products with anti-inflammatory effects [231]. Diets high in fat likely increase the pool of bile acids that elude epithelial absorption in the GI tract and interact with the gut microbiota [232]. This interaction can impact the composition of the gut microbiota including reductions in the relative abundance of Faecalibacterium spp. [233]. Faecalibacterium is widely recognized for its production of a suite of metabolites and peptides with anti-inflammatory effects [231].

Overall, there is a need for longer-term studies in different athletic cohorts examining the impact of diet on the structure and function of the gut microbiota. This approach is of particular importance as many athletes follow special dietary practices, such as during periods of intensified training prior to competition and offseason periods. Research studies should investigate exercise-nutrient interactions that underpin adaptation and performance [234]. Finally, further research is needed to determine the synthesis kinetics and clinical consequence of microbial by-products during increased nutritional status and metabolic demands during exercise. Ultimately modulation of the microbiota and its fermentation capacity may be considered in dietary prescription for athletes. This may include specific nutrient recommendations aimed at improving performance by enhancing certain metabolites during exercise and recovery, and limiting those that produce toxic metabolites that may made worsen the consequences of exercise stress [15].

The current body of literature, although limited, indicates that the cluster of athletic components such as exercise, associated dietary factors, and body composition promotes a more “health-associated” gut microbiota. Typical features include a higher abundance of health-promoting bacterial species, increased microbial diversity, functional pathways, and microbial-associated metabolites, stimulation of bacterial abundance that can modulate mucosal immunity, and improved barrier functions. In comparison to sedentary controls, athletes have increased fecal metabolites and improved overall health (unless over-trained or in RED-S). However, in sedentary individuals, exercise appears to positively modulate the composition and metabolic capacity of the human gut microbiota. Given that athletes generally have a distinct diet, research on the gut microbiome in athletes must incorporate dietary and supplemental intake otherwise it might be a confounding factor in determining exercise-specific effects on the composition of the microbiome. While individuals’ microbiotas appear to be driven by their primary dietary patterns, future research is needed to better describe the impact of high-protein consumption and (in conjunction) the types and amount of fiber and fats consumed. Investigators should examine how different types of sport, athlete, and physical training regimens influence the gut microbiota. The present review focuses on the discussion of the results from microbiota-related studies, however, a deep discussion of the methodological approaches of each manuscript was not possible due to the already extended content. Future, more specific reviews in this research area should aim for discussing the results in the frame of their methodological approaches. Finally, much of the current research is cross-sectional and has relied on 16S rRNA sequencing. Therefore, future research should employ longitudinal designs as well as more advanced high-throughput sequencing and bioinformatic analyses to provide deeper understanding and functional causation of the gut microbial influence on athlete health and performance. This information can then be used to develop novel therapeutic and nutritional strategies to modulate the microbiota and enhance the athlete’s overall performance and health. Ultimately this body of work will define how metabolic capabilities of gut microbiota are shaped by exercise and elucidate their functional roles influencing health and disease.

Publisher’s Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

