Evolutionary Significance of the Neuroendocrine Stress Axis on Vertebrate Immunity and the Influence of the Microbiome on Early-Life Stress Regulation and Health Outcomes

Stress is broadly defined as the non-specific biological response to changes in homeostatic demands and is mediated by the evolutionarily conserved neuroendocrine networks of the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis and the sympathetic nervous system. Activation of these networks results in transient release of glucocorticoids (cortisol) and catecholamines (epinephrine) into circulation, as well as activation of sympathetic fibers innervating end organs. These interventions thus regulate numerous physiological processes, including energy metabolism, cardiovascular physiology, and immunity, thereby adapting to cope with the perceived stressors. The developmental trajectory of the stress-axis is influenced by a number of factors, including the gut microbiome, which is the community of microbes that colonizes the gastrointestinal tract immediately following birth. The gut microbiome communicates with the brain through the production of metabolites and microbially derived signals, which are essential to human stress response network development. Ecological perturbations to the gut microbiome during early life may result in the alteration of signals implicated in developmental programming during this critical window, predisposing individuals to numerous diseases later in life. The vulnerability of stress response networks to maladaptive development has been exemplified through animal models determining a causal role for gut microbial ecosystems in HPA axis activity, stress reactivity, and brain development. In this review, we explore the evolutionary significance of the stress-axis system for health maintenance and review recent findings that connect early-life microbiome disturbances to alterations in the development of stress response networks.

William Shakespeare’s “The Tempest” is famed for its literary citation, “What is past is prologue,” suggesting that the context of the present is determined by the precedents of the past. This allegory has often been applied to societal and cultural politics; however, it further extends relevancy to that of biological life and the maturation of its complex and multifaceted physiological systems. The developmental origins of diseases are often best viewed using an evolutionary lens to examine the underpinnings of when the affected physiological systems originated, as well as how and why they have been adaptively selected. Understanding biological systems from their inception provides insights into malfunctions that have occurred under modern environmental conditions.

An evolutionary mismatch that has gained attention in the past decade is the loss of diversity and keystone species from the communities of microbes in the human gut (the microbiota) and their genetic material (the microbiome), which is hypothesized to be at the root of the increased psychological- (e.g., anxiety, depression) and immune- (e.g., allergies, asthma, inflammatory bowel diseases) related chronic diseases (Bilbo et al., 2011; Brenner et al., 2015). The ever-present symbiotic partnership between humans and microbes has brought significant benefits to human evolution, physiology, and health. The loss of these “old friends” and their associated functions (i.e., microbiome depletion) (Rook et al., 2003) with developments to modern society such as sanitation, water quality, antibiotic use, Cesarean (C-) sections, diet, and other factors, termed the microbiome insufficiency syndrome (Sonnenburg and Sonnenburg, 2019), has likely had significant effects on the prevalence of modern diseases (Cryan et al., 2019; Figure 1). In this review, we will examine the evolutionary trajectory and integration of the stress and immune systems in vertebrates to gain a fundamental appreciation of their critical role in animal adaptive fitness. This initial evolutionary assessment will set the stage for the role microbes have had in priming these systems to function as efficient defenders of homeostasis and infection. Finally, this review will examine the consequences of microbiome alterations on stress systems and health and disease outcomes.

All organisms, including humans, continually encounter internal and external changes in the environment (e.g., infections or predatory threats) which may trigger a stress response that overturns their internal rhythms and homeostasis. Sufficient deviations from established set points constitute a “stress” to the organism, which are addressed by various bodily responses to allow the animal to overcome the threat and re-establish homeostasis. Thus, the concept of stress is closely related to the concept of homeostasis, whereby the latter represents an established optimal state for key biological parameters, while the former is a state that arises when homeostasis is disrupted (Monaghan and Spencer, 2014).

Sex differences are another important factor that affects the HPA response to stress in both humans and animals. In general, HPA-related stress molecule levels are higher in female rodents and rise faster than in males following HPA axis stimulation (Yoshimura et al., 2003; Beiko et al., 2004; Kudielka and Kirschbaum, 2005; Lu et al., 2015). Female rats exposed to chronic and unpredictable mild stressors have disordered estrous cycles, decreased estradiol and testosterone levels, increased plasma corticosterone levels, and upregulated gene expression of both CRH and estrogen receptor β (ERβ) (Lu et al., 2015) in the hypothalamic neurons of the PVN. Direct actions by estradiol on the PVN can potentiate the stress axis by targeting neurons expressing ERβ to activate CRH promoters (Miller et al., 2004) and increase CRH gene expression and basal levels of ACTH (Ochedalski et al., 2007). Ovariectomy in females reduces these HPA hormones, while estradiol replacement treatment recovers them (Lund et al., 2004). Male rodents that are castrated have elevated corticosterone and ACTH levels similar to females, which is also reversed using exogenous androgen treatments (Handa et al., 1994). Empirical evidence for sex differences in humans is more equivocal than animal data (Kudielka and Kirschbaum, 2005). Physical stressors do not elicit responses that are different between males and females (Friedmann and Kindermann, 1989), and most psychological stress studies show either no difference, or that males have increased cortisol responses (Kudielka and Kirschbaum, 2005; Liu et al., 2017).

The origin of the vertebrate stress axis is centered on an ancient neuroendocrine circuit (i.e., the HPA axis) that has remained remarkably conserved over vertebrate evolution, despite the emergence of phylogenetically distinct classes of animals (e.g., fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds, mammals) occupying a vast range of habitats over that same period (Denver, 2009; Dores and Garcia, 2015). Its pivotal role in responding to various environmental and internal threats to homeostasis and fitness was likely a key reason for its conservation across species. It is believed that the ancestral endocrine system of the modern stress axis originated in marine organisms for the purpose of eliminating excessive sodium load from seawater (Perlman, 2013). Indeed, osmoregulation is considered one of the more ubiquitous types of environmental stressors in these ancestral marine animals (Lovejoy et al., 2014). The diuresis origin theory is supported from evidence that invertebrates, such as insects and marine worms, secrete ACTH with high structural similarity to mammals and possess diuretic hormones (DH) with remarkable homology to mammalian CRH (Nesse et al., 2016). Within Animalia, CNS molecules that regulate the cascading stress axis also share high sequence homology between classes, with differences seen in the glucocorticoid-producing tissues (adrenal gland in reptiles, birds and mammals; and interrenal cells in amphibians and fish) at the terminal point of stress axis activation (Dores and Garcia, 2015). The capacity to synthesize GCs was an important evolutionary step that occurred under the jawless vertebrates (i.e., cyclostomata like hagfish and lamprey) (Norris and Carr, 2013), and represented a transition in which the central and terminal components of the HPA axis were established (Denver, 2009). The appearance of GR and MR from ancestral corticosteroid receptors (CR) during a gene duplication event 450 million years ago (Thornton, 2001) also created two new receptor lineages with distinct endocrine roles for regulating the ancestral need for osmotic balance (MR preferentially binds aldosterone) and stress responses (GR preferentially binds GCs). Finally, the conserved distribution patterns of CRH and it analogs (urotensins, urocortins and sauvagine that are CRH homologs) within and around the vertebrate hypothalamus of amphibians, fish, birds, reptiles and mammals also supports the theory of positive selection on ancient genes that regulate an evolutionarily conserved HPA axis (Denver, 2009; Figure 2).

The precise mechanisms by which regions of the brain recognize microbial signals from the gut have only recently been investigated, with promising candidate pathways discussed in more detail in later sections of this review. However, on the whole, a clear understanding of the bi-directional communications that exist between the gut and the brain continues to elude researchers. Given the symbiotic history of microbes and vertebrates (Ley et al., 2008), it is not surprising that an essential relationship exists between the highly conserved vertebrate neuroendocrine stress axis system and intestinal microbial communities. This close association between organisms involves the ecological assemblage of a host and its symbiotic microbial species (i.e., microbiota), resulting in an ecological unit that self-supports common outcomes and contributes to the function of the whole via inter-kingdom signaling mechanisms, such as host receptors for microbial enzymes involved in metabolic pathways for catecholamines (Iyer et al., 2004; Li et al., 2012), among many other described microbiome-derived metabolic products.

Understanding the complex relationship between hosts and microbiomes from an evolutionary perspective helps to illuminate the influence the microbiome has had on the physiology of vertebrate hosts (Ley et al., 2008; Sharpton, 2018) and vice-versa. The intricate coexistence between animals and symbiotic microbes likely started with ancestral invertebrates that harbored high percentages of microbial communities, as they do today (Pancer and Cooper, 2006). These microbial relationships were transmitted to vertebrate descendants that still rely on their microbiome to communicate with host immune and stress systems for optimizing their health (Pancer and Cooper, 2006). Recent efforts investigating the contribution of the microbiome to vertebrate evolution have found that the dominant drivers of gut microbiome diversity and composition are diet (David et al., 2014; Maurice et al., 2015; Hicks et al., 2018; Youngblut et al., 2019) and species phylogeny (Groussin et al., 2017; Youngblut et al., 2019). Examination of dietary strategies found that the guts of carnivores were most similar to free living bacterial communities amongst vertebrates, while microbes with plant fermenting capacities contributed most to the divergence of vertebrate gut microbiomes (Ley et al., 2008) and were the best predictors for co-phylogeny with their hosts. Ruminants have evolved specialized digestive organs to enhance gut microbial functionality that they rely upon for accessing nutrients from fibrous plant material. This functional capacity to increase host-access to low quality or difficult to digest energy sources (like woody and cellulose vegetation), could improve niche expansion into other environments that leads to speciation (Sharpton, 2018). Similarly, microbes that produce essential vitamins and other necessary nutrients could also remove selective pressures from the host to obtain them through diet and alter their evolutionary trajectory (Sharpton, 2018). However, little is known about the functions encoded by the microbiome in wild vertebrate populations, and this research gap should be addressed to understand how microbiome functions vary across vertebrates and dictate evolutionary outcomes (Sharpton, 2018). Nevertheless, recent studies have found that mammals in general, have the highest pattern of cophylogeny with microbial species, while fish have the lowest; likely a result of having more transient environmental microbes in their guts (Youngblut et al., 2019). Interestingly, the human microbiota was similar to omnivorous primates, despite the variable and often synthetic nature of the modern human diet (Ley et al., 2008).

The influence of the microbiome on the development of the adaptive immune system in vertebrates is another example where the host and microbiome mutually benefit. For example, adaptive immunity mediates tolerance of the gut microbiome through IgA by driving perpetual surface structure modification in microbes that ultimately results in reduced proinflammatory signaling by immune factors in the host, and maintains a non-inflammatory connection to commensal gut microbes (Peterson et al., 2007). Thus, a key role of the adaptive immune system could be to shape microbial community composition and support microbial diversity (Peterson et al., 2007; Ley et al., 2008). Selective pressures from the host in a nutrient-rich gut environment, with high cell densities and growth rates, is an ideal environment for rapid microbial evolution that is not always found in free-living ecosystems, which can be cold and oligotrophic (Ley et al., 2008).

The development of a robust HPA axis system has clear adaptive advantages for animals to manage various stressors. Coordination with other physiological systems is a critical aspect of the stress response to appropriately deploy necessary resources and efficiently maintain homeostasis (Martin, 2009). The well-defined actions of stress on metabolism, cardiovascular output, glucose transport, and immunity (Sapolsky et al., 2000) are orchestrated by innervating fibers of the SNS that target the gut and other primary and secondary organs of the immune system (e.g., bone marrow, thymus, spleen, and lymph nodes) (Martin, 2009), and circulating hormones like GCs that bind to GRs and MRs present on many visceral organs and immune cells (Thornton, 2001; Petta et al., 2016; Figure 3). Although this multi-systems approach to stress allows for phenotypic variability and adaptability in changing environmental conditions (Brenner et al., 2015), activating a broad array of physiological systems, like immunity, it can come at a long-term pathological cost to the animal if inflammatory and/or stress responses persist chronically or are not appropriately regulated (Brenner et al., 2015).

Although the immunosuppressive and anti-inflammatory actions of GCs cover both acute and chronic exposure scenarios, the beneficial outcomes (i.e., dampening of inflammation) are mostly reserved for short-term scenarios, with detrimental pathologies occurring over the long-term, such as increased infections, prolonged wound-healing, and decreased antibody production following vaccination (Kiecolt-Glaser et al., 1996; Vedhara et al., 2003). Stress-mediated inflammation has also been reported in the skin with increased severity of cutaneous infections (Aberg et al., 2007); in the lungs as asthma from exposure to chronic early-life stressors (Chida et al., 2007); and in various bowel disorders (Buckley et al., 2014). Psychological rodent stressors, like the open field or conditioned aversion stress tests, trigger cytokine release and reduced fevers in the animal (Morrow et al., 1993), while an adrenalectomy (Ruzek et al., 1999; Gómez et al., 2003), hypophysectomy (Edwards et al., 1991) or dosing with GC receptor inhibitors (i.e., RU486) results in elevated fevers (Morrow et al., 1993) and leaves an animal susceptible to infection and sepsis (Sternberg, 2006). Reintroducing GCs following adrenalectomy reverses this susceptibility to infection (Ruzek et al., 1999). Together, this evidence shows that stress-mediated GCs play an important role in maintaining immune homeostatic balance that prevents both over-stimulation or over-suppression of immune responses, particularly during an infection (Sternberg, 2006).

While the HPA axis and immune system exhibit remarkable evolutionary conservation, differences arise when we examine the ontogeny of the HPA axis during gestation across species. For example, the placenta of anthropoid primates, including humans, has evolved the unique ability to produce CRH, forming a cooperative maternal-fetal-placental endocrine unit that is not present in less-derived mammals (Bowman et al., 2001; Power and Schulkin, 2006). Placental CRH is structurally and biologically identical to that of hypothalamic CRH and acts in an allocrine fashion on both maternal and fetal compartments (Karteris et al., 2001; King et al., 2001). However, differences in the expression of placental CRH over the course of gestation exist even between closely related non-human primates, such as monkeys and great apes (Power and Schulkin, 2006), highlighting the divergent influences on HPA axis ontogeny across species. These differences limit our capacity to extrapolate understandings of fetal HPA axis ontogeny from animal models to humans, which remains a key challenge to stress research. As a consequence, this section will focus on the ontogeny of the HPA axis in humans.

Beyond the prenatal period, the development of the HPA axis continues into early life, with stressors and environmental exposures continuing to influence its maturational trajectory either positively or negatively (Lai and Huang, 2011; Mooney-Leber and Brummelte, 2017; Sominsky et al., 2018; Agorastos et al., 2019). The effects of these exposures on the developmental programming of the HPA axis may vary depending on timing, duration, and severity, with a multitude of research highlighting these relationships that will not be examined in this paper (Kuhlman et al., 2017; Agorastos et al., 2019). Recently, the gut microbiome has been recognized as a critical environmental exposure that influences mammalian developmental trajectories, with global influences on the maturation of major body systems, including stress axes (Foster et al., 2017). Subsequently, we will focus on the bidirectional relationship between the developmental trajectories of the gut microbiota and the HPA axis, recognizing the early life microbiota as an exposure that influences stress axis programming, while the establishment of the microbiota itself is influenced by stress. We will then examine the consequences of perturbations to these systems on each other and on disease development.

The gut microbiome represents a complex ecosystem with significant functional capacity, as these microorganisms encode a significant amount of genetic material beyond that of the human genome (Lozupone et al., 2012). This genetic diversity gives the microbiome substantial adaptive capacity, evidenced by its ability to persist with changes in environmental exposures (Lozupone et al., 2012; Armour et al., 2019). The gut microbiome and the host exist in a mutually beneficial relationship, in which the microbiome performs functions essential to human health in exchange for a nutrient-plentiful environment to reside (Flint et al., 2012). This includes, but is not limited to, extensive metabolic activities (Oliphant and Allen-Vercoe, 2019), directing immune system development and responses (Martin et al., 2010; Belkaid and Hand, 2014), maintenance of gastrointestinal homeostasis and integrity (Forgie et al., 2019; Lobionda et al., 2019), and competitive exclusion of pathogens (Pickard et al., 2017).

Clinical evidence of the bidirectional relationship between stress and the gut microbiome has only begun to emerge (Zijlmans et al., 2015; Browne et al., 2019; D’Agata et al., 2019; Hantsoo et al., 2019; Hechler et al., 2019; Naudé et al., 2020), but it is apparent that the interplay between alterations in stress axis activity and microbial colonization patterns have the potential to significantly influence developmental programming in early-life at both the maternal and infant levels. This complex relationship is mediated by gut-brain communication mechanisms, including both microbial- and host-derived signals (Clarke et al., 2014; Cryan et al., 2019), which alert microbial ecosystems and the host of the need to adapt accordingly in the presence of different environmental exposures. Research examining this relationship in clinical cohorts is needed to further elucidate how stress may alter conserved colonization patterns, and likewise, how shifts in microbial colonization as a result of other early-life exposures, such as antibiotics, may inform the development of stress axes, and the mechanisms of gut-brain signaling involved in these adaptations.

Microbial mechanisms that mediate communication between the gut microbiome and the brain are varied and not fully understood, but involve various chemical messengers such as cytokines, chemokines, catecholamines, short chain fatty acids (SCFA), and other neuroactive molecules (e.g., serotonin, melatonin, GABA) derived by commensal gut microorganisms and the host (Sudo, 2012). Multiple direct and indirect neural, humoral, and hormonal pathways have also been identified, creating an intricate signaling network that exerts its effects not only on the gut, but also on the immune and stress response systems (Figure 3). There have been a recent plethora of excellent and comprehensive reviews (Sudo, 2014; de Weerth, 2017; Foster et al., 2017; Farzi et al., 2018; Sylvia and Demas, 2018; Wang S. et al., 2018; Cryan et al., 2019) that explore this important topic in depth. Thus, for this section, the most significant contributors will be highlighted to provide context and breadth of their roles in gut-brain communication, stress responses, and early-life development.

Pioneering studies in the 1990s showed that microbes could not only respond to vertebrate hormones and neuromodulators (Lyte, 1993), but were later shown to also synthesize potent neuromodulators and neurotransmitters (e.g., GABA, serotonin, dopamine, and acetylcholine) (Lyte, 2014) commonly produced by mammals, indicating bi-directional communication with the host gut tissue using molecules that are associated with modulating mood, behavior, and cognition (Cryan et al., 2019).

Gut microbes also communicate with the brain by directly utilizing vagus nerve signaling to send messages to the CNS (Fülling et al., 2019). Approximately 90% of the vagus nerve at the level of the gut consists of afferent fibers that relay information from the viscera to the brain (Powley et al., 2019), providing a key bi-directional conduit for microbial signals to influence brain activity and behavior. It has been demonstrated that rat vagal afferent neurons in the gut express GABA receptors (Ashworth-Preece et al., 1997) that are likely targets for GABA produced by commensal Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium (Barrett et al., 2012). Further, long-term supplementation with Lactobacillus rhamnosus reduced circulating GCs and stress-related anxiety disorders in mice by inducing widespread changes in GABA receptor mRNA expression throughout the vagus nerve and in various regions of the brain (Bravo et al., 2011), with vagotomy abolishing these effects. Ex vivo electrophysiological studies also show that direct intraluminal infusion of L. rhamnosus into the small intestine of mice increases vagal afferent nerve bundle firing within minutes, substantiating a potential psychoactive role for gut microbes (Perez-Burgos et al., 2012). Early-life microbiome colonization also affects vagus nerve functional responses (Forsythe et al., 2014; Wang S. et al., 2018), as well as the developmental trajectory of brain regions in mice involved in motor control, anxiety behaviors, and cognition by regulating synaptogenesis (Diaz Heijtz et al., 2011) and myelination (Hoban et al., 2016).

Vagal afferent gut terminals exist in close contact with the mucosal immune system of the intestine, known as the gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT) (Patterson et al., 2002), where GALT immune cells act as mediators between microbes in the gut lumen and the CNS for important bi-directional communications between the two systems to regulate neuroendocrine activity and behaviors (de Weerth, 2017). It is suggested that the GALT can recognize and communicate with the microbiota (Mayer, 2011), as the GALT contains 70–80% of the body’s immune cells and is largely tolerant to commensal gut microbes, but develops effector functions toward pathogenic ones. The GALT secretes pro-inflammatory cytokines when pathogenic microbial antigens like lipopolysaccharide (LPS) from pathobionts penetrate beyond the protective epithelial layers, and ultimately, activate the HPA axis by binding to toll-like receptors (TLR) (Navarra et al., 1991; Schmidt et al., 2003; Ratnayake et al., 2013). Mice lacking a microbiota have abrogated TLR4 developmental expression in the gut (Hörmann et al., 2014; Inoue et al., 2017), while mice deficient for TLR4 or myeloid differentiation factor 88 (MyD88) (critical for signal transduction cascades) have an abrogated HPA axis response to Gram-negative bacteria (Gosselin and Rivest, 2008). Neonatal rats exposed to Salmonella enteritidis between postnatal days 3 to 5 also have significantly altered neuroendocrine stress responses along the whole HPA axis as adults (Shanks et al., 1995), including elevated ACTH responses to restraint stress, decreased negative feedback sensitivity to GCs, elevated resting CRH levels and mRNA in the hypothalamic PVN, and reduced GR density in several brain regions.

Apart from LPS, other microbiota-derived constituents, like cell wall peptidoglycans, can translocate beyond the BBB during postnatal development in healthy mice and activate neuronal pattern-recognition receptors (PRRs), like nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-containing protein 2 (NOD2) and peptidoglycan recognition protein 2 (pglyrp2), both of which are involved in neurodevelopmental processes (Arentsen et al., 2017). NOD2 is highly expressed by microglia and astrocytes, and these specialized neuroimmune cells are not only critical for inflammatory responses to pathogens (Chauhan et al., 2009), but also for neuronal tissue development during early life (Schafer and Stevens, 2013). These novel findings constitute another signaling mechanism by which commensal gut microbes mediate communication with the brain to influence neuroendocrine development and behavior.

Gut bacteria convert host-indigestible dietary fibers (i.e., prebiotics) into SCFAs (e.g., acetate, propionate and butyrate) through fermentation in the gut. These microbial-derived metabolites are essential for host health and are utilized for many physiological functions, including epigenetic changes in chromatin structure (Licciardi et al., 2011), gut functioning (Parada Venegas et al., 2019), host metabolism (Koh et al., 2016), blood pressure (Miyamoto et al., 2016), neuroimmune function (Erny et al., 2015), circadian rhythms (Tahara et al., 2018), and are implicated in stress and behavior.

More recently, gut fungi have been implicated as important colonizing microbes for appropriate host immune development and functionality in mice by regulating the colonization status of gut bacteria, and in managing peripheral inflammatory diseases like asthma and colitis (van Tilburg Bernardes et al., 2020). Commensal fungal species, like Candida albicans, were also shown to perturb the HPA axis in rats by manipulating the endocannabinoid system, which regulates the stress axis and anxiety-like behaviors. Rats colonized with C. albicans had increased basal circulating corticosterone and anxiety, relative to controls (Markey et al., 2020). Behavioral implications of directly communicating with the brain from the gut are significant and intriguing, but require focused studies to determine the mechanistic modalities from these findings.

Recent evidence has identified microglial cells as key regulators of stress activation and inflammation in the brain (Lenz and Nelson, 2018). Microglia are by far the most abundant and important immune cells in the CNS. They function as scavenging tissue macrophages to maintain tissue homeostasis, and are involved in the propagation of brain inflammatory responses by releasing cytokines and chemokines that not only recruit local immune cells, but also monocytes from the periphery, to help fight infections and clear cell debris (Lenz and Nelson, 2018). Microglia are receptive to many peripheral and gut-derived chemical messengers such as cytokines, chemokines, catecholamines and other neuroactive molecules (e.g., serotonin, melatonin, GABA), and are important for proper early-life brain development and remodeling by pruning synapses (Schafer and Stevens, 2013; Erny et al., 2015). However, over-active microglia lead to stress-related anxiety and depressive disorders (Ramirez et al., 2015; Wohleb and Delpech, 2017; Weber et al., 2019), as well as cognitive deficits and neural inflammation following septic infection (Andonegui et al., 2018). Chemically blocking or eliminating stress-experienced microglia prevents both immune reactivity in the brain and anxiety recurrence following a stress challenge (Weber et al., 2019), suggesting that microglia may directly regulate stress-related behaviors.

Interestingly, microglia from germ-free (GF) mice have altered phenotypic proportions with more cells resembling the ramified, surveying phenotype, and had globally defective immune responses to infection challenges (Erny et al., 2015). These altered phenotypic proportions were rescued with SCFAs supplementation (Erny et al., 2015), insinuating that gut microbial by-products, such as SCFAs are critical for the proper proportionality of microglial cell morphologies. Moreover, transgenic mice deficient for the SCFA receptor, free fatty acid receptor (FFAR2), also had defective microglia that mirrored those observed in GF mice (Erny et al., 2015), despite microglia not expressing FFAR2. Therefore, SCFAs may indirectly modify microglia phenotype and function via their actions on FFAR2 expressed in other tissues and cells. Recently, Luck et al. (2020) showed that colonizing neonatal GF mice with a consortium of Bifidobacterium was critical to the normal phenotypic development of microglial cells, whereas those not colonized had abundant phagocytizing ameboid phenotypes that persisted into adulthood. Further, uncolonized GF mice had disrupted functional neuronal circuits, increased synaptic densities, and decreased firing rates. Since Bifidobacterium produce large quantities of the SCFA, acetate, this may be a mechanism by which microbes mediate early-life development of microglia (Luck et al., 2020). Similarly, prebiotic fiber treatment with 10% oligofructose attenuated impaired hypothalamic microglial activation in neonatal mice exposed to early-life antibiotics (Cho et al., 2020). Despite this recent evidence, the precise microbial pathways involved, and which microbial species or features affect homeostatic regulation of neuronal development and stress and immune systems, remains unclear and a significant research gap to explore.

Early-life environmental exposures play a critical role in the development and functional programming of central neural circuitry, including the HPA axis (Foster et al., 2017), with sex and inter-individual differences in these exposures linked to the degree of stress axis activity and vulnerability to developing stress-related disorders later in life (Cottrell and Seckl, 2009; Shields and Slavich, 2017). Environmental exposures have primarily been considered external in nature, such as the stressful life experiences of abuse, poverty, neglect, and familial conflict, collectively referred to as adverse childhood experiences (ACEs) (Danese and McEwen, 2012). However, novel understandings generated in the gut-brain axis literature suggest, through its communication mechanisms with the brain, that the gut microbiome constitutes another environmental exposure (Cryan et al., 2019). The bi-directionality of this gut-brain relationship is highlighted by evidence that stress exposure shifts the structural and functional status of the microbiome, while in parallel, the absence of early-life microbial exposures (GF status) alters stress axis activity and the developmental programming of stress circuitry (Sudo et al., 2004; Heijtz et al., 2011; Crumeyrolle-Arias et al., 2014; Gur et al., 2017; Huo et al., 2017; Jašarević et al., 2018; Cowan et al., 2019; Lyte et al., 2020). Through this lens, a complex interplay between early-life exposures to stress and microbial colonization is emerging as a central component in the developmental programming and life-long activity of the neuroendocrine stress response.

Given the gut microbiome plays an essential role in gastrointestinal integrity and homeostasis, it is not surprising that early-life stress has also been associated with altered metabolic profiles (Jašarević et al., 2015; Bharwani et al., 2016; Provensi et al., 2019) and increased intestinal permeability (Ait-Belgnaoui et al., 2012; Moussaoui et al., 2017; Jašarević et al., 2018; van de Wouw et al., 2018). These alterations can have detrimental effects on the brain, behavior, and inflammation (Kelly et al., 2015; Witt et al., 2019). As previously mentioned, SCFAs are microbially derived metabolites that are involved in gut-brain communication, mood regulation, and are essential for gut epithelial integrity (Tan et al., 2014; Dalile et al., 2019). In stressed animals, decreases in SCFA profiles have been observed, alongside reduced metabolic activity of pathways involved in SCFA, tyrosine, and tryptophan metabolism and biosynthesis in males (Bharwani et al., 2016; Provensi et al., 2019). Given butyrate is known to have antidepressant effects (Valvassori et al., 2014; Sun et al., 2016), and tyrosine and tryptophan-derived metabolites are precursors for a number of neurotransmitters (O’Mahony et al., 2017; Roager and Licht, 2018), these metabolic shifts have the potential to negatively impact mood, behavior, and brain functioning. Increased intestinal permeability is highly relevant to these outcomes, as resultant inflammatory cascades have been shown to be enriched in the hypothalamus, leading to central neuroinflammation and stress axis activation (Ait-Belgnaoui et al., 2012). Stress exposures in early-life, therefore, have dynamic effects on the gut microbiome, metabolism, intestinal integrity, brain development, and behavior. Emerging evidence suggests these effects are sex-dependent, however, comprehensive research examining stress and microbiome alterations in both sexes is needed to fully understand this relationship.

Inappropriate activation or dysregulation of the HPA axis is involved in numerous pathophysiological outcomes, with many of these processes beginning very early in life. This is in line with the developmental origins hypothesis, which proposes that early-life exposures have extraordinary potency to alter developmental processes and set the stage for disease development in adolescence and adulthood (Gluckman et al., 2005; Waterland and Michels, 2007). Therefore, it is not surprising that parallels exist between the early-life critical windows for the development of major physiological systems, such as the immune and nervous systems, and the establishment of the gut microbiome (Borre et al., 2014; Gensollen et al., 2016; Farzi et al., 2018). A complex interplay exists between these systems, with microbial signals increasingly recognized as important modulators involved in their developmental trajectories, and intricately linked with the stress axis (Farzi et al., 2018; Stiemsma and Michels, 2018). Inter-individual differences in gut microbial community composition (Human Microbiome Project Consortium, 2012) and the variety of factors influencing stress reactivity, amplify the challenge of uncovering causality to this relationship in humans (Box 1). Nonetheless, evidence from animal models has revealed gut microbial colonization is causally implicated in the developmental programming of the stress axis (Foster et al., 2017; Farzi et al., 2018).

Together, it is clear that early-life stress exposures have broad-ranging effects on major body systems, with chronic dysregulation of stress and immune responses emerging as major themes underlying morbidity development (Cohen et al., 2012). Disruption of developmental programming by stress exposure has both central and peripheral effects at molecular, structural, and functional levels (Agorastos et al., 2018), with stress, the gut microbiome, and the development of the immune system all implicated in these complex processes (Foster et al., 2017; Dzidic et al., 2018). As a consequence, it is plausible that alterations in stress axis activity, immune responses, or microbial colonization patterns in the first years of life alone may be sufficient to induce global dysregulation in these systems and increase susceptibility to later life disease development. However, animal model evidence suggests these effects may be reversible. Environmental enrichment (McCreary and Metz, 2016; Dandi et al., 2018), sensitive caregiving (Grant et al., 2009; Thomas et al., 2017), and exposure to beneficial microbes and their by-products (Sudo et al., 2004; Ait-Belgnaoui et al., 2012; Pusceddu et al., 2015; van de Wouw et al., 2018; Cowan et al., 2019; Neufeld et al., 2019; Provensi et al., 2019) during early-life may help prevent the development of adverse behavioral, cognitive, physiological, and neurodevelopmental health outcomes linked to high levels of stress exposure. Further, new understandings of gut microbiota alterations with stress exposure highlight the need to target the bidirectional aspects of this relationship to enable more comprehensive or alternative therapeutic approaches to be developed.

From a microbial perspective, therapeutically targeting the microbiome to recover negative developmental effects from early-life stress is an emerging research area (Table 1). Animal models have primarily focused on supplementation with probiotics, prebiotics, or polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs), but SCFAs have also shown promise for decreasing HPA axis hyperactivity and intestinal permeability in male animals (van de Wouw et al., 2018). The probiotics, Lactobacillus rhamnosus (various strains) and Lactobacillus farciminis, and prebiotics, polydextrose (PDX) and galacto-oligosaccharide (GOS), have beneficial effects following stress insults, including reducing HPA axis reactivity to stress, CRH expression, and intestinal permeability in females; increasing HPA axis negative feedback inhibition through increased expression of GR, MR and CRH receptors; and ameliorating anxiety-like behavior and gene expression alterations in corticolimbic brain regions in males (Ait-Belgnaoui et al., 2012; Cowan et al., 2019; Neufeld et al., 2019). L. farciminis also prevented stress-mediated neuroinflammation in females (Ait-Belgnaoui et al., 2012), whereas PDX prevented accelerated involvement of prelimbic brain regions in fear regulation, and normalized male behavior (Cowan et al., 2019). PUFA supplementation appears to predominantly benefit microbiome-related factors in both sexes, including restoring the Bacteroidetes:Firmicutes ratio and SCFA profiles following stress exposure, and prevents such alterations when administered prior to stress (Pusceddu et al., 2015; Provensi et al., 2019). High dose PUFA supplementation in females reduced Proteobacteria abundance and was associated with increased butyrate-producing bacteria, Butyrivibrio (Pusceddu et al., 2015), both of which represent shifts toward healthier microbial communities (Flint et al., 2012; Human Microbiome Project Consortium, 2012). While these preclinical findings are promising for the amelioration of stress-related insults, additional research is required to determine if these benefits will transpire comparably in the clinic.

The neuroendocrine stress response is a highly conserved physiological system that has persisted in its role as a regulator of homeostasis from the earliest evolved vertebrates to modern humans, highlighting its fundamental role in health maintenance and survival. Developmentally, the plasticity of the stress axis across individuals’ functions to enable appropriate responses to different environments and stressors. In parallel, vertebrates house diverse and abundant microbial communities at multiple body sites, which are known to play an integral role in healthy development. It is thought that these microbes have become an essential environmental exposure informing our developmental trajectories and the programming of major body systems, particularly during the critical window of early life. Compelling evidence of an intricate link between stress and the microbiome has emerged from both experimental animal models and clinical studies examining the relationship between both prenatal and postnatal stress and the composition of the microbiota in mothers and their offspring. This relationship may have profound implications on pathophysiological outcomes, given stress response dysregulation is highly correlated with morbidities emerging in adolescence and adulthood, with these outcomes being sex-dependent.

Given the complex relationship between the development of the immune system, neuroendocrine stress response, and the gut microbiome in early-life, future research examining the relationship between caregiving practices, such as skin-to-skin contact (e.g., kangaroo care), and stress-immune-microbiome interactions may provide valuable insights into strategies to reduce or prevent undesirable health outcomes in infants exposed to significant early-life stress, or microbial alterations. The influence of kangaroo care and tactile stimulation on the microbiota and stress have been evaluated independently, with evidence of benefits for these practices on desired health outcomes (Harrison, 2001; Feldman et al., 2010; Hendricks-Muñoz et al., 2015). However, integrative studies are yet to be performed. While the interplay between stress and the microbiome has only recently been revealed, it is probable that targeting the microbiome in stress-immune pathologies will transform therapeutic approaches in the future.

VO and EM equally conceptualized, researched, and authored the manuscript with editorial assistance from GG and M-CA. All authors approved the final manuscript.

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

Funding. VO is funded by the NSERC Post-Doctoral Fellowship. EM is funded by the CIHR Canada Graduate Scholarships, Alberta Children’s Hospital Research Institute, The Stratas Foundation, and the University of Calgary Faculty of Graduate Studies. M-CA is funded by the Cumming School of Medicine, the Alberta Children Hospital Research Institute, the Snyder Institute of Chronic Diseases, the Canadian Institutes for Health Research, the Sick Kids Foundation, the W. Garfield Weston Foundation, The Koopmans Research Fund, and the Canadian Lung Association. GG is funded by the Canadian Institutes for Health Research and the Alberta Children Hospital Research Institute.

