The Core Human Microbiome: Does It Exist and How Can We Find It? A Critical Review of the Concept

The core microbiome, which refers to a set of consistent microbial features across populations, is of major interest in microbiome research and has been addressed by numerous studies. Understanding the core microbiome can help identify elements that lead to dysbiosis, and lead to treatments for microbiome-related health states. However, defining the core microbiome is a complex task at several levels. In this review, we consider the current state of core human microbiome research. We consider the knowledge that has been gained, the factors limiting our ability to achieve a reliable description of the core human microbiome, and the fields most likely to improve that ability. DNA sequencing technologies and the methods for analyzing metagenomics and amplicon data will most likely facilitate higher accuracy and resolution in describing the microbiome. However, more effort should be invested in characterizing the microbiome’s interactions with its human host, including the immune system and nutrition. Other components of this holobiontic system should also be emphasized, such as fungi, protists, lower eukaryotes, viruses, and phages. Most importantly, a collaborative effort of experts in microbiology, nutrition, immunology, medicine, systems biology, bioinformatics, and machine learning is probably required to identify the traits of the core human microbiome.

The importance of the human microbiome to our health has been demonstrated in numerous studies in recent years. Our microbiome is involved in various processes in our body including nutrient uptake [1,2], defense against pathogens [3], and the development of the immune system in newborns [4]. Microbes that inhabit our gut metabolize carbohydrates, proteins, vitamins, and other nutrients [5]. The human microbiome has been linked to different health conditions such as inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD), in which changes in the gut microbiome were observed in IBD patients, as well as mutations in genes related to the interactions between the immune system and the microbiome [6]. Links between the gut microbiome and the brain (the gut–brain axis) have been reported for multiple conditions such as depression and autism, and animal-based experiments show that fecal transplant can affect neuropsychiatric conditions [7]. While it is still not clear whether the human microbiome is causally related to these and other health conditions, it is clear that our microbiome is central to our health. The human microbiome has been the subject of significant works by thousands of researchers worldwide and multiple large national and international projects such as the Human Microbiome Project (HMP) [8,9] and MetaHIT [10].

In this review, we consider the state of research on the core human microbiome. Other reviews on the topic focused on the concepts and terminology that should be used to define the core human microbiome in terms of common sets of taxa or functions [9,19,21,22,23,24]. Actual attempts to define the core and healthy human microbiome are based on genes and community compositions derived from 16S and metagenomics data [12,13,17,20]. In contrast, we consider the different information sources that can help achieve an evidence-based model of the core human microbiome. We assess the technological, methodological, and conceptual gaps that should be addressed to consider these levels of information. Specifically, we consider the present state and limitations of omics technologies and bioinformatics methods, and estimate the microbial and host dimensions that cannot currently be evaluated or that do not receive sufficient attention, and that may contribute to core human microbiome research.

The concept of the core human microbiome describes the stable components of the microbiome, both over time and between individuals. This contrasts with the transient aspects of the microbiome, which vary according to fluctuations in environmental and individual conditions such as diet, host genetics, and other, mainly exogenous factors. The stability of a microbiome is considered in its capacity to resist changes caused by a perturbation (resistance) and in the capacity to return to equilibrium after a perturbation (resilience) [23,24]. Stability is maintained at the level of the individual over a relatively short-term and over the long-term evolutionary scale at the population/species level, including changes in the microbiome during the evolution of the host species [18]. Early attempts to define the core microbiome focused on the set of genes present in the vast majority of humans [9]. However, the term has evolved as studies have offered different perspectives on the nature of the microbiome [25], including community composition and ecological parameters. For host–microbiome systems, the core microbiome is considered in terms of important microbes and functions for the host [26]. Any definition of a core microbiome should account for the diverse habitats for microbial life in the human body, which harbor their distinct microbiota [27]. Table 1 summarizes the main approaches for defining the core human microbiome. We focus on the two most commonly used approaches, community composition, and functional profile.

The difficulties in identifying a set of universal taxa or human-specific functions that can be regarded as a core human microbiome were also noted in previous studies on the topic [25]. These difficulties may arise because of the algorithms and databases available, or because of our focus on the genomic level instead of other, more relevant levels. It is also possible that our definitions of the core microbiome do not capture its essence. Next, we consider each of these aspects and try to evaluate their importance for the study of the core human microbiome. Table 2 summarizes the issues considered in this review. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 3, we consider the sources of data that are currently available; in Section 4, we describe the state of 16S and metagenomics bioinformatics and data sharing; in Section 5, we go beyond prokaryotic meta-omics to evaluate other fields that may contribute to our understanding of the core human microbiome; finally, in Section 6 and Section 7 we discuss the path forward in core human microbiome research.

Since the development of culturing-free techniques for studying microbial communities, microbiome research has shifted chiefly to relying on amplicon-based community surveys and metagenomics. As of March 2022, the European Nucleotide Archive (ENA) contains more than 610K human microbiome samples, of which more than 85% are estimated to be 16S rRNA amplicon samples (see Supplementary Information for for the analysis information). These, together with numerous samples available through other platforms, provide an amount of data that could potentially have been sufficient for evaluating the core microbiome of humans. The vast majority of available data was achieved using amplicon-based community surveys, which aim—through PCR and a specific set of primers—at a conserved region in the genomes of the target population. In microbiome surveys, one or more variable regions of the 16S rRNA gene are usually used to target prokaryotes. Metagenomics is based on untargeted (“shotgun”) sequencing of potentially all microbial genomes present in a sample [43]. Metagenomics data can be used to assess community composition and functional potential, and even for the reconstruction in silico of the sequences from the original genomes that were present in the samples (also known as “metagenome-assembled genomes” or “MAGs”). Aspects of metagenomics and amplicon data analysis that limit our ability to define the core microbiome will be discussed later. Other omics approaches, such as metatranscriptomics, metaproteomics, and metabolomics, could have been used for characterizing the core human microbiome at levels that represent the actual functional activity of the microbiome. Examples of functions identified at the transcription level and not at the gene level are known [44]. Assuming that the core human microbiome provides specific functions to the human host, these functions, or the lack of them in dysbiosis and disease, may be manifested at the levels of transcription and translation, and not at the genomic level. Currently, only a small amount of omics data beyond the genomics level is available. For example, we were able to identify less than 1500 human microbiome-related RNA-seq samples in ENA, the majority of which have a shallow sequencing depth of <100 Mbp (see Supplementary Information for for the analysis information). To the best of our knowledge, no study to date addressed the core human microbiome topic at a level other than the genomic. Data from large-scale multi-omics projects such as ibdmdb [45] are expected to facilitate such studies.

The core human microbiome differs substantially between geographical locations and populations [46]. Differences are not restricted to the gut microbiome but are also observed in other body habitats such as saliva and the vagina. Defining the core human microbiome therefore requires sufficient data for different populations. However, According to a recent estimate, more than 70% of human microbiome data deposited in public databases have been collected from Westerners [47]. Large-scale national and international efforts to study the human microbiome have mostly focused on American and European populations. These include the Human Microbiome Project [8,27,48], the Dutch LifeLines [49], the Belgian Flemish Gut Flora Project [50], and the MetaHIT Project [10]. However, only a few studies evaluated the gut microbiome in rural communities in Western countries whose diet consists of more traditional products, including those obtained from household plots, yet still in a modern environment [51,52]. In addition, as mentioned above, several studies shed light on the peculiarities of the gut microbiome of non-Western populations, including hunter-gatherers and rural agriculturalists [53,54,55,56,57,58,59,60,61]. While their sample sizes were generally small, these studies consistently reported different composition and functionality of the intestinal microbiome between urbanized and rural populations, with diet, lifestyle, or more generally, the exposome (i.e., the totality of exposures that each individual faces in the course of life) [62] exerting a pivotal role [63,64,65]. Clearly, the human gut microbiome varies across geography and subsistence practices [66,67]. Therefore, more data for rural and non-Western populations are required to obtain a reliable description of the core human microbiome.

The various segments of the gastrointestinal tract of mammals differ in anatomy and function; the microbiome composition of these segments also differs [68]. In addition to the differences between gut segments, within a single gut segment, microbial function and prevalence vary between luminal and mucosal bacteria [69,70,71,72]. Oxygen gradients have been found to correlate with radial partitioning of microbial phylotypes in the colon [72,73]. Still, most reports on the human gut microbiome rely on fecal samples to represent the gut microbiome [74]. Fecal material is easy to access and does not require invasive technology. However, fecal microbiota represents only the last part of the colon’s luminal fraction; microbiota from other segments may elucidate microbe–host interactions and disease progression in the gut [71].

If a core human microbiome exists, we may be able to characterize it in body parts that have fewer microenvironments, or in body parts that are more easily accessible. Compared to the gut, other parts of the human body have been sampled less extensively (see Supplementary Table S1). On the upper end of the digestive tract, the oral cavity represents another environment, whose complex mixture of habitats comprises distinct microbiomes [17,81]. The mouth is much more accessible than the gut and was sampled at nine distinct sites in the HMP [27]. Moreover, specific databases of the human oral cavity exist, such as the extended Human Oral Microbiome Database. This database contains over 700 bacterial species isolated from the human mouth and aerodigestive tract, including the pharynx, nasal passages, sinuses, and esophagus, thus enabling more accurate sample-specific microbiome annotations. However, attempts to define a core human oral microbiome have focused on saliva [82,83,84,85], which also provides a restricted view of the overall diversity.

The analysis of microbial communities at the genomic level heavily relies on 16S rRNA gene surveys, which provide community composition information (“who is there?”), and metagenomics, which also provides functional information (“what can they do?”). Community analysis is performed in terms of ecological measures such as the alpha and beta diversity, lists of taxa and functions, and statistical methods for identifying features enriched in certain groups of samples. Genome reconstruction from metagenomics data helps expand our knowledge of species living in different environments and their potential metabolic and physiological features. Furthermore, 16S surveys and metagenomics are key techniques in defining the core human microbiome. However, both exhibit limitations that affect our ability to define the core human microbiome.

Amplicon-based studies are the most cost-effective option to investigate microbial populations, and several established computational pipelines for evaluating community composition are available [86,87,88]. Furthermore, the high sequencing depth achieved by the most popular Illumina platforms enables in-depth characterization of bacterial/archaeal communities present in an environment, including identification of low abundance microorganisms [89]. Additionally, 16S rRNA gene surveys are considered a semi-quantitative approach as, despite the intermediate PCR step during library preparation, the number of reads obtained for a given taxon is proportional to its abundance in the sample [90].

These issues, in addition to the lack of relevant functional information, limit the contribution of 16S rRNA gene surveys to the study of the core human microbiome. High-level taxa that consistently appear in various populations can be identified using 16S surveys. However, the current methodology cannot evaluate their potential contribution to the core human microbiome, and the exact species and genes that contribute to the core microbiome.

While it is still not clear which taxonomic level (if any) should be considered for defining the core human microbiome, studying the microbiome at the species level is desired. Gene content of the microbiome is essential for applying a functional-based definition of the core microbiome. In theory, metagenomics facilitates characterizing the entire microbial community, including both community composition at the strain level and functional profiling, for both previously seen and unseen species [41,98]. Unlike 16S rRNA gene surveys, in metagenomics, the total DNA extracted from the sample is directly subjected to shotgun sequencing without a targeted PCR amplification step [99]. On the other hand, metagenomics is far more expensive than amplicon-sequencing surveys and is challenging to implement when the studied environment is rich with host DNA, as in mucosal-associated microbiome studies [100]. In addition, metagenomics data analysis requires significant computational resources, and knowledge of bioinformatics and programming is required for analyzing the data [101]. As a result, while the number of publicly available metagenomes is small compared to 16S rRNA gene surveys, analyzing these samples to evaluate the core microbiome is currently challenging.

Both taxonomic composition and the functional profile of metagenomics samples need to be evaluated to identify the core human microbiome. Assembly-free algorithms that rely on read-mapping of the raw data against reference databases can potentially accurately describe the community, including its rare members, with relatively low computational resources. Multiple such methods and pipelines are available, including MetaPhlAn3 [41], Kraken and Bracken [102,103], Centrifuge [104], and mOTUs2 [105], for species-level community composition, and HUMAnN3 [41] for functional profiling. The accuracy and sensitivity of these methods rely heavily on the availability of comprehensive reference databases [106]. Half or more of the species in the human microbiome have been estimated to lack representatives in public databases [67]. Moreover, up to 40–70% of the predicted proteins do not have a known function even for well-studied environments such as the human body [107]. Therefore, to close these gaps, increased effort is required in microbial culturing, biochemical investigations, and genome recovery for uncharacterized species. Assembly-based approaches that rely on de novo assembly of the reads into contiguous contigs and scaffolds can be used. Assembly, followed by gene prediction and the binning of contigs and scaffolds into MAGs that represent community genomes of microbial community members, can enrich our knowledge of microbes that evade culturing [108,109]. Indeed, hundreds of thousands of MAGs were reconstructed from human-associated metagenomes in recent years [67,110,111], contributing to the characterization of previously unknown lineages in the tree of life. Once incorporated into public databases, these MAGs facilitate large-scale and accurate species-level profiling of the human-associated metagenomes needed to evaluate the core microbiome.

Regardless of the adopted theoretical definition of the core human microbiome, its large-scale practical definition will inevitably be subjected to extensive cross-study meta-analysis. In defining the core human microbiome, data from a large number of individuals from several studies should be integrated and analyzed. This requires metadata such as ethnicity, geography, and disease state, and information regarding sample processing. Effective data reuse has been widely explored in all fields of science, especially from the advent of “omics” techniques, and as inspired and guided by the 2016 publication of the FAIR data (findability, accessibility, interoperability, and reuse of data) principle [112]. Unfortunately, performing meta-analyses is still challenging due to biases related to sample processing and the lack of metadata.

Making data public does not guarantee their effective reuse. Journals and funding agencies usually require the upload of raw sequences to public databases; this constitutes a de facto obligation for the authors to make the data publicly accessible. However, the availability of raw data does not in itself ensure effective data reuse, and metadata (i.e., the diversificated set of data and information describing the subjects of a study) are required, but are often missing or incomplete [117]. For successful data reuse, a rich set of metadata that is standardized using ontologies should always accompany raw data. The ENA [118] and NCBI’s Sequence Read Archive (SRA) [119] allow uploading a high volume of metadata as sample attributes, using well-defined checklists derived from templates and suggestions developed by international initiatives as the minimum information about any (x) sequence (MIxS) specification [120]. In addition, users are suggested to employ words derived from well-defined and standardized vocabularies/ontologies such as ENVO (Environment Ontology; [121]), CHEBI (Chemical Entities of Biological Interest; [122]), and DO (Disease Ontology; [123]), for the annotation of metadata of crucial samples. Examples of such data are the material feature that was the sample source (i.e., feces from the human gut environment), the reference to any chemicals used, and the pathology state. Still, the use of most of those metadata is not mandatory, and crucial information for effective meta-analysis, such as the host disease state and demographics, is often missing. We believe that adherence to a few guidelines considering metadata deposition and collection can greatly improve microbiome data reusability. However, given that core microbiome research can greatly benefit from meta-analyses of many datasets, the current state of public microbiome data poses obstacles.

Microbial communities comprise a multitude of species interrelated by the trade of metabolites, some acting as primary energy substrates whilst others (e.g., secondary metabolites, by-products, and wastes) as substrates for other members [124]. The stability of a colonizer is determined by a combination of biotic and abiotic factors; biotic factors are represented by interactions with other members of the community, and abiotic factors by the availability of nutrients or the presence of harmful compounds in the environment. Diet is considered the main determinant of the compositional and functional structures of the human oral [125,126] and gut [127,128,129] microbiomes.

To the best of our knowledge, nutrition by itself is not usually considered an aspect of core human microbiome studies, except for defining populations that are assumed to have separate core microbiomes. Different diets require different functions from the microbiome, many of which must be fulfilled by the core microbiome. Considering nutrition information in core microbiome analysis is currently challenging, because accurate dietary information of individuals is usually not available, and the effects of specific nutrients on specific microbial species are generally not known. Given the high complexity of defining the activity of a certain dietary component (as a substrate) in each individual, such knowledge is unlikely to become available in the coming years for most nutrients and the microbes that process them.

The human body and our microbiome have co-evolved towards mutualism and homeostasis [151]. This coexistence is fundamental for the fine-tuning of the immune system and requires an intimate relation with commensal microbes, especially during early childhood [152,153]. Therefore, it is not surprising that alterations in these close microbiome–immunity interactions are associated with increased susceptibility to pathogenic infections, overgrowth of commensals, and their potential spread throughout the body via impaired mucosal barriers [154,155]. These contribute to the onset and development of several disorders, including IBD [45], rheumatic arthritis [156], neurodegenerative diseases [157], and even tumors [158].

Given its significant interactions with the human microbiome, the immune system is likely involved in defining the core microbiome. As in the example of nutrition, the interactions between the microbiome and the immune system are not taken into account in core microbiome studies. Obtaining accurate data that is related to the immune system may become a more feasible task, and high-throughput methods for characterizing the immune response to microbial species have already been successfully implemented [171]. Such data would enable a better evaluation of the core microbiome in the context of the immune system.

Eukaryotes, eukaryotic viruses, and phages are all part of the human microbiome but currently, relatively little is known about their contribution to the core human microbiome, both as members and in shaping the core microbiome.

Eukaryotes, especially lower-order ones such as protists, fungi, stramenopiles, and helminths, belong to the human gut ecosystem [172,173]. In the past, any protist or helminth species identified in humans was considered a parasite with an obvious harmful effect on its host. However, a number of human-associated lower eukaryotes are now known to play various roles in both health and disease [174]. For example, some stramenopile species (Blastocystis sp.), commonly considered parasites, have been found to be associated with healthy and diverse gut microbiomes [175]; and some helminths and protists are able to stimulate a beneficial immune response in individuals with allergies [176]. Despite their active role in shaping the gut microbiome, unicellular and multicellular eukaryotes are often neglected from microbiome studies. Some major limitations towards eukaryotes in microbiomes include: (i) a limited number of reference eukaryotic species with sequenced genomes, (ii) the common presentation of eukaryotic species at lower abundances than bacterial species and thus the likelihood that they are missed if the sequencing is not deep, (iii) the high diversity and poor taxonomic knowledge of many eukaryotes [177], especially in fungi and protists, for which accurate genus and species level are less determined [178], (iv) the need to elucidate the role of eukaryotes in maintaining eubiosis and homeostasis [179,180], and (v) the lack of standardized methodologies and sequencing designs [181]. Furthermore, eukaryotes are generally not identified with common bacterial 16S rDNA primers, and most universal 18S rDNA primers are limited in their ability to amplify a broad spectrum of eukaryotes. Nonetheless, specific primer combinations and standardization have proven useful sets for stool-based detection of gut eukaryotes [182]. In addition, approaches using RNA shotgun sequencing or “meta-ribosomalomics” of stool samples have successfully detected intestinal eukaryotes that have often been excluded from traditional routine diagnostic protocols [183,184].

Eukaryotes, such as the fungal genus Candida or Rhodotorula, are components of the core microbiome or contribute to its shaping. In Africa, intestinal helminths are common and are estimated to affect a large proportion of the population [185]. Blastocystis sp. were detected in 24% of the sampled population in the Czech Republic [186], suggesting that certain eukaryotes are also prevalent in Western countries. Current development of better bioinformatics algorithms, and databases with eukaryotic genomes, are expected to increase the feasibility of evaluating the contribution of eukaryotes to the core microbiome.

More than 1000 eukaryotic virus species are known that can enter and live within the human body, forming the human eukaryotic virome [187,188]. Human viruses can be present in the gut as residential members, as transient passengers, as commensals, and as an integral part of the microbiome community. Interactions between the eukaryotic microbiome and the other members of the gut microbiome can be direct or indirect, and either cooperative or antagonistic. Multiple examples of these complex interactions are known.

The core microbiome may be involved in defending the human host against eukaryotic viruses. The stability of the core microbiome depends on resisting these viruses and the direct and indirect ways in which they affect the microbiome. The eukaryotic virome cannot be studied through 16S rRNA gene surveys and is rarely addressed in metagenomics studies. Improving bioinformatics methods and reference databases should be a target for evaluating the roles and interactions of these viruses with the core microbiome.

The bacterial virome (phageome) of the gut is composed of free phages (virus-like particles) and prophages and is one of the most complex and poorly understood consortia in the context of the gut microbiome. New scientific work indicates that the pan gut bacterial virome is composed of more than 50,000 candidate viral species [198], and up to 140,000 different phages [199]. The number of bacteria in the microbiome and the number of virus-like particles (up to 1012 per gram of feces) are in about equal proportion [200]. Some large bacterial phages can add more than 500 kbp of genetic information to their host’s genome [201].

Phages can be involved in the core microbiome in various ways. Phages that infect multiple species can be part of gene flow networks across phylogenetically distant bacterial species [202]. This can result in the distribution of core functions between multiple species and increase the stability of the core microbiome. Lysogenic phages can contribute new traits and physical/biochemical properties to their host [203]. As a result, certain core functions may be contributed by phages. Phages/prophages control bacterial cell death by indirectly gaining information of environmental factors such as community composition, nutrient availability, and local bacterial cell density via bacterial quorum sensing [202,204,205]. Phage-programmed bacterial cell death also leads to redistribution of nutrients [201] and, consequently, sometimes to remarkable shifts in the metabolome composition. To this end, phages can serve as both a threat to the core microbiome and as a means of eliminating transient members of the community. The exact roles of the gut phageome with respect to the core microbiome are poorly understood. Work carried out by researchers and data scientists towards developing models of core and healthy phageomes [206] may shed light on this.

The core human microbiome has been the subject of multiple studies due to its potential significance in health and disease. Still, there is currently no consensus as to whether the core human microbiome should be defined at the level of taxa or functions, or some other level; the main forces that shape it, and the consequences of an impaired core microbiome. One major limitation in core microbiome research is the predominantly one-dimensional approach, which focuses on taxa and gene-based functions at the genomic level. Considering other data layers, both regarding the microbiome and the host, will likely help expose relations between these layers that are relevant to the roles and definitions of the core microbiome. Evidently, the core human microbiome should be discussed in the context of its environment. Such contexts include body parts, diet, geography, age, health state, and possibly other factors. Once the true nature of the core human microbiome is understood, accurate definitions and terminology can be developed that will help to uncover the relevance of the core human microbiome to biological, ecological, and evolutionary processes that occur in the human host and its microbiome.

Challenges in characterizing the core human microbiome may be due to our limited understanding of the exact interactions between the human microbiome and its environment, particularly diet and the immune system. As currently, no high-throughput technology provides the necessary information, accounting for these factors in the context of the core microbiome is difficult. The collection of more non-genomic data necessitates computational and statistical approaches to combine data layers and to identify complex patterns in the data. Machine learning is a promising direction that can help reveal such patterns that are difficult to identify by humans. Machine learning has been used to predict disease states, identify biomarkers, and more [213,214]. Interpretable machine learning algorithms such as decision trees and random forest can be used to identify features that are most relevant to groups of samples. For example, functions that are most relevant to the human microbiomes may be identified by comparing samples from humans against samples from mice, gorillas, and other animals. These and other algorithms may identify patterns that involve multiple features (e.g., functions) and are therefore more difficult to discover using standard statistical methods. Clustering algorithms may be used to define the core human microbiome in terms of groups of replaceable species by identifying co-occurring or mutually exclusive microbes. In addition, cloud computing and other high-throughput computational technologies make it feasible to analyze huge amounts of data, potentially even all the data stored in public databases [215]. This requires resolving issues related to the availability of metadata for the various samples. Still, domain expertise in nutrition, medicine, and immunology must be considered to interpret and evaluate the results. Therefore, collaborative efforts between experts in nutrition, immunology, human genetics, the microbiome, bioinformaticians, and machine learning can help design holistic studies that will uncover the patterns and forces that shape the core human microbiome.

The concept of the core human microbiome should be considered in the context of its environment, including body parts, diet, and geography. More data and better bioinformatics are expected to improve our abilities to assess the core human microbiome based on metagenomics, while the contribution of 16S rRNA gene surveys may remain limited. The analysis of previously less explored members of the microbiome will benefit from these trends and enable a more complete view of the core human microbiome. The genomic data should be integrated with other omics data; the technology to collect these data exists, but the bioinformatics and available public data are still lagging. Non-omics data related to diet and immunology are desired, but achieving such data is expected to remain challenging. Implementation of machine learning approaches on large amounts of data may reveal patterns that are otherwise difficult to identify. A collaborative effort of multidisciplinary teams will likely be needed to advance understanding of the core human microbiome.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

