Pharmacomicrobiology of Methotrexate in Rheumatoid Arthritis: Gut Microbiome as Predictor of Therapeutic Response

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a disabling autoimmune disease with invasive arthritis as the main manifestation and synovitis as the basic pathological change, which can cause progressive destruction of articular cartilage and bone, ultimately leading to joint deformity and loss of function. Since its introduction in the 1980s and its widespread use in the treatment of RA, low-dose methotrexate (MTX) therapy has dramatically changed the course and outcome of RA treatment. The clinical use of this drug will be more rational with a better understanding of the pharmacology, anti-inflammatory mechanisms of action and adverse reaction about it. At present, the current clinical status of newly diagnosed RA is that MTX is initiated first regardless of the patients’ suitability. But up to 50% of patients could not reach adequate clinical efficacy or have severe adverse events. Prior to drug initiation, a prognostic tool for treatment response is lacking, which is thought to be the most important cause of the situation. A growing body of studies have shown that differences in microbial metagenomes (including bacterial strains, genes, enzymes, proteins and/or metabolites) in the gastrointestinal tract of RA patients may at least partially determine their bioavailability and/or subsequent response to MTX. Based on this, some researchers established a random forest model to predict whether different RA patients (with different gut microbiome) would respond to MTX. Of course, MTX, in turn, alters the gut microbiome in a dose-dependent manner. The interaction between drugs and microorganisms is called pharmacomicrobiology. Then, the concept of precision medicine has been raised. In this view, we summarize the characteristics and anti-inflammatory mechanisms of MTX and highlight the interaction between gut microbiome and MTX aiming to find the optimal treatment for patients according to individual differences and discuss the application and prospect of precision medicine.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a systemic autoimmune disease characterized by persistent synovitis, chronic and aggressive arthritis. Although the treatment of RA has made great progress in recent years, the overall remission rate of RA is still not optimistic, and it is almost impossible to reverse once bone or joint destruction occurs (1, 2). The pathogenesis of RA is still not fully understood, which may be caused by the complex interaction between genetic environment and immune factors, resulting in immune system dysregulation and lack of autoimmune tolerance. Although several effective treatments have been developed recently, low-dose methotrexate (MTX) remains the anchor agent for RA treatment, which is generally considered to enhance the efficacy of most biologics in RA (3, 4). However, a large proportion of RA patients do not respond to oral MTX or have severe adverse reactions, especially gastrointestinal toxicity is common, which can be troublesome (3–6). Therefore, it is urgent to find out the possible reasons for individual differences and the biological indicators that can predict the clinical efficacy of MTX to guide clinical medication.

Now the most recent view on MTX and the gut microbiota is that gut microbiome can affect the bioavailability of MTX and some characteristics of gut microbiome can be considered as a predictor of clinical response of this drug (17). In addition, gut microbiome is associated with adverse reactions to MTX, especially gastrointestinal reactions (18). Of course, MTX also affects the amount, diversity, and major components of the gastrointestinal microbiota (18, 19). Pharmacomicrobiology, based on drug-microbe potentially complex interactions has been used in various fields (20, 21). Precision medicine based on pharmacomicrobiology, while strictly integrating clinical factors and host genomics will be the development direction of rheumatoid diseases including RA in the near future (17, 21). In this review, we focus on the pharmacology, anti-inflammatory mechanism, adverse reactions of MTX and diagnostic and predictive effect of gut microbiome on clinical efficacy of oral MTX to recognize the role of pretreatment of gut microbiome in improving clinical efficacy of MTX, in order to provide a new therapy for the targeted treatment of RA patients who fail to respond within the early therapeutic window of opportunity.

MTX (4-amino-4-deoxy-N-10-methylpteroylglutamic acid) is an anti-folate cellular immunosuppressant. Low doses (< 15mg/per week) of MTX are widely used to treat autoimmune diseases such as RA or psoriasis (19, 22). However, higher doses of MTX (typically between 15 to 500 mg/kg) are effective in the treatment of cancer diseases, mainly for acute lymphoblastic leukemia, and osteosarcoma and lymphoma (19, 23–25). Ever since Sidney Faber discovered MTX in the 1980s, low-dose MTX is generally the first-line drug for the treatment of RA (26, 27). It is possible that MTX has been enduring because it is well tolerated, safe, and significantly less costly (28–30). It was a long and difficult journey from the initial discovery of MTX to widespread use around the world (26) (see Figure 1 ). Currently, once RA is diagnosed, rheumatologists recommend taking MTX orally. If the patient has a poor respond or strong adverse reaction to MTX, the patient is advised to continue taking it along with the biologic, since MTX appears to have an additive effect on biologic drugs (4). At low doses, MTX exhibits anti-inflammatory properties, but at high doses or for long periods of time, it may cause the pathological multi-organ toxicity, including gastrointestinal, myelotoxicity, cardiotoxicity, nephrotoxicity, and hepatotoxicity, which limits its therapeutic potential (18, 31–33). Why do different individuals respond differently to MTX? As we learn more about the pharmacological effects, anti-inflammatory mechanisms and interactions with gut microbes of MTX, the answer to this question may become more and more clear. In fact, emerging data suggest that it is possible to identify appropriate biomarkers of the gut microbiome to determine who responds best to MTX and has the fewest side effects – that is, who will benefit the most from MTX treatment.

MTX therapy for RA is usually effective in the range of 15 to 25 mg and is usually initiated as monotherapy (22, 27). The intestinal tract has a limited ability to absorb MTX, so oral it has limited bioavailability in vivo (34, 35), which may be related to gut microbiota. The maximal absorption of a single oral dose is <25mg (3). Therefore, rheumatologists recommend that patients take the required dose of medication orally for one day to obtain better clinical response from MTX, rather than taking a daily dose. Due to the complex gastrointestinal toxicity of MTX, attention has shifted from oral to subcutaneous. A recent study (36) retrospectively analyzed for rheumatology clinic attendances at a large North-East England hospital and concluded when the dose of MTX in RA patients > 15 mg/week, subcutaneous method is safer than oral medicine. Specifically, the subcutaneous approach reduced the incidence of neutropenia and gastrointestinal symptoms. One problem, however, is that patients who experience adverse events with oral MTX are less likely to switch to subcutaneous treatment and are likely to experience the side effects of oral MTX again. Therefore, the search for predictors of MTX before treatment is irreplaceable.

Gut microbiome can directly affect the bioavailability of MTX (19). Glutamate carboxypeptidase 2(CPDG2) is an enzyme found in many gut bacteria. The terminal glutamate residues of MTX and 7-OH-MTX can be cleavaged to generate 2, 4-diamino-N-10-methylpteroic acid (DAMPA) and 7-hydroxy-DAMPA metabolites with the assistance of CPDG2, respectively (41, 46, 47). In addition, other bacterial enzymes such as p-aminobenzoyl-glutamate hydrolase, found in E. coli, have also been shown to catalyze this reaction (48) (see Figure 2 ). The hydrolysis of glutamate by CPDG2 is considered to be a detoxification process. Furthermore, CPDG2 has been approved as a palliative for cancer patients with delayed MTX clearance and acute renal toxicity (24). Several clinical studies have also reported the usefulness of CPDG2 as a rescue drug (49, 50). This is just one example of how the gut microbiome influences MTX metabolism, and there are certainly other, deeper connections between MTX and gut microbes that we need to explore.

There is growing evidence that many of the mechanisms by which MTX inhibits the inflammatory response have been hypothesized. In this section, we focused on exploring the anti-inflammatory mechanism of MTX to guide rational clinical drug use.

Other anti-inflammatory mechanisms have also been reported, including inhibition of transmethylation (3), regulation of the expression of some long non-coding RNAs (3), and reduction of chemotaxis and adhesion of inflammatory cells (27) (see Figure 3 ). Considering the important efficacy, wide application and numerous adverse reactions of MTX, further research on the mechanism of action of MTX is to optimize treatment.

In the nearly 40 years of MTX use, an increasing number of toxic effects have been observed, including gastrointestinal, myelotoxicity, cardiotoxicity, nephrotoxicity, and hepatotoxicity. Currently, enterotoxicity is the most common side effect and the main factor limiting its administration, mainly manifested as MTX-induced intestinal mucosal inflammation, which is now increasingly evidenced to be related to gut microbiome (18). It has been suggested in the past that the toxic effects of long-term oral low doses of MTX are inextricably related to the antifolate properties of the drug (3). So it has become common knowledge to take folic acid along with MTX to prevent its toxic effects. Now, the latest international view suggests that the mechanism of folic acid supplementation to reduce the toxic effect may be related to intestinal flora, especially the probiotics such as Bacteroides and Bifidobacterium. And some researchers think that some of the toxic effects of MTX may be caused by MTX-mediated adenosine release. MTX promotes the release of adenosine in the inflammatory sites, which binds to receptors in the brain to suppress the inflammatory response and causes drowsiness (72–74). So many patients feel tired on the day they take MTX and other patients developed rheumatoid nodules (75) and liver fibrosis (76, 77).

However, a recent randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial (86)showed that low doses of MTX reduced the incidence of complications from cardiovascular events in patients with RA and severe cardiovascular risk. Another new and particularly worrisome event is skin cancer (86). Various European biologics registers found a higher incidence of skin cancer in RA patients taking MTX than in the general population (87–89). This has been attributed to long-term immunosuppression, and these new data support this. Long-term oral low-dose MTX, on the one hand, slows disease progression and reduces the risk of subsequent complications such as lymphoma and cardiovascular events, and also increases the incidence of skin cancer.

Since the discovery of rheumatoid arthritis in the middle of the last century, MTX is still the gold standard for RA, despite the recent emergence of various drugs. Factors that can predict clinic response and prognosis to the drug are especially important to reduce disease activity and unnecessary potential toxic effects. Lately, a machine learning analysis of whole blood transcriptome data from RA patients (90) holds that gene expression of multiple inflammatory pathways may have predictive value for clinical response to MTX, and that gene expression of anti-I interferon response is the most valuable predictor. However, the results were not satisfactory, and the whole genes containing all the gene expression had higher predictive value than the individual interferon gene alone (3, 90). Meanwhile, several other studies have sought to identify clinical and/or laboratory markers that might predict clinical responses to MTX, but all ended in failure (91–93). Despite high hopes for genetic markers that identify MTX responses, to date, no factor or biomarker has been definitively proven to be predictive. Instead, there is a growing interest in the gut microbiota to influence MTX bioavailability and as a predictor of subsequent clinical responses to MTX in the RA patients. The next section, we will detail the potential interaction between MTX and the gut microbiota.

Current treatment guidelines for RA [such as ACR (29) and EULAR (94)] recommend MTX for all patients with early RA, because early and aggressive MTX intervention can slow the onset and progression of RA, reduce disease activity, alleviate clinical symptoms, and even radiographic progression in some RA patients. Therefore, there is an urgent need for in-depth understanding to identify factors and predictors that influence MTX in order to maximize clinical efficacy and mitigate toxic effects, thereby eliminating frustration and reducing the waste of medical expenditures. Currently, a variety of candidate biomarkers have been considered to have potential predictive value for clinical efficacy of MTX, including clinical phenotypes, inflammatory pathway gene expression, host genetics, autoantibodies, and cytokines, etc, involving proteomics, metabolomics, transcriptomics and other omics. Unfortunately, none of them has been able to accurately predict clinical response to MTX (95).

A growing body of evidence suggests that non-human genetic factors, particularly from the trillions of microorganisms that is the microbiome, may contribute to the development of inflammatory arthritis in genetically susceptible individuals (96–98). Intriguingly, variability in interindividual microbiome composition and metabolic capacity play a unique role in determining the clinical efficacy (and the development associated with adverse events) of certain drugs (99–101). In turn, drugs may also exert their anti-inflammatory effects by altering a patient’s gut microbiome. The study of the interactions between drugs and microorganisms, known as pharmacobiology, has led us to the concept of precision medicine, which is not foreign to most rheumatologists. The long-term and ultimate goal of this discipline is to manipulate the complex host-associated microbiome (both in vivo and on the surface of the body), in order to predict clinical responses, improve clinical efficacy, and minimize adverse events (17).

What accounts for variation in clinical outcomes between individuals? The answer is not entirely clear. Moreover, to date, known factors such as host genetics, laboratory or host biomarkers cannot be used to accurately predict clinical response to a drug (95). Furthermore, differences in the metagenomes of microorganisms in the gut of RA patients such as bacterial strains, genes, enzymes, proteins and/or metabolites may at least partially determine their bioavailability and/or subsequent response to MTX. So, there is reason to believe that there is some connection between MTX and the gut microbiota.

A preliminary study using red blood cell MTX polyglutamate concentration explained 20% of the variation in MTX response, but unfortunately this finding was not consistently reproduced in other cohorts (102–105). Other possible factors including serum or plasma MTX concentration (106, 107), clinical factors such as sex and disease activity (92, 108–110) and circulating CD39+ regulatory T cells (92, 111), and genetic factors such as gene polymorphism (112) as predictors of MTX efficacy all failed. More than a decade ago, the first clinical pharmacological model (113) was proposed to predict the clinical response or not of MTX monotherapy to newly diagnosed RA. This model does not accurately predict the clinical efficacy of RA and cannot be widely used in the population, although it improves on the original genetic-based model by incorporating multiple variables (114–116).

Taken together, NORA patients who responded well to MTX had a different gut microbiome than MTX-NR, which allows us to predict the clinical absence of MTX by using pretreated microbiota.

Research groups studying human autoimmune diseases use pharmacobiological methods to analyze the gut microbiome and/or its gene coding function as predictors of biotherapy response (17). The use of gut microbiome to predict the clinical respond of MTX in newly diagnosed RA patients was included. These research groups came to two conclusions:”gut metagenome at baseline could differentiate MTX responders from non- responders” and another is that “ex vivo incubation with MTX of samples from patients with treatment-naive, new-onset RA correlated with the magnitude of future clinical response”.And accordingly, a small idea that a new and potentially valuable tool (metagenome-based classifiers) may be available for the decision-making of newly emerging RA was put forward. That’ s exactly what the 2020 study has found.

Taken together, we obtained the conclusion that gut microbiome (more accurately, gut microbiome metagenome) may serve as a predictor of clinical MTX response and the possible mechanism by which gut microbiome acts on MTX, where patients with more abundant gut bacteria were able to efficiently metabolize and/or consume MTX, and were associated with worsening clinical outcomes (see Figure 4 ).

Long-term oral administration of MTX may cause many adverse reactions, including intestinal toxicity, cardiac toxicity, bone marrow toxicity, renal toxicity and pulmonary toxicity, which greatly limits the clinical application of MTX (128, 129). Among them, intestinal toxicity is the most common side effect (18). The main symptoms include nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, bloating, and diarrhea, leading to malabsorption, weight loss, and eventually discontinuation of chemotherapy (25, 128, 130). It is possible that MTX exerts toxic effects on normal intestinal cells by disrupting metabolic pathways such as anti-inflammatory, anti-oxidant and apoptosis (131). Another possible mechanism is that changes in gut microorganisms or their metabolites cause polarization of macrophages, leading to the release of inflammatory factors such as interleukin-12 (IL-12) and tumor necrosis factor (TNF), and ultimately aggravate gut mucosal injury. However, it is a complex process for MTX to cause gastrointestinal damage, which is not entirely clear so far. Therefore, there are no satisfactory therapeutic interventions to prevent or treat this adverse reaction.

To sum up, both diet and LV reduce gastrointestinal toxicity by affecting the gut microbiome. And it has previously been reported that artificially increased probiotics intake or the use of fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) ameliorates drug-induced intestinal damage (140). Therefore, we speculate that probiotics and/or FMT may be a safer and more effective method to reduce MTX-induced gut inflammation. However, a recent experiment seems to disagree. This is a double-blind, parallel-group, placebo-controlled, superiority trial (141), showing that FMT from selected donors can worsen psoriatic arthritis (PsA) symptoms. The failure rate (i.e., patients requiring intensive treatment) was significantly higher in the FMT group than in the control group. Therefore, other mechanisms, such as the degree and persistence of donor microbiota implantation, and some external factors related to FMT, such as aerobic and anaerobic environment (141), need to be further attended in the future.

Gut microbiome can be used as a predictor of clinical response to MTX, so, conversely, does MTX affect gut microbiome? The answer is of course yes. According a using 16 s - seq study (142),with the passage of time, the routine oral dose MTX will not lead to a gut microbial ecology of persistent disturbances. But many subsequent experiments have demonstrated that MTX can also affect the community structure of intestinal microorganisms, regulating their diversity and function (17). It has recently been reported that MTX inhibits the growth of 30% of 40 representative intestinal bacterial strains and 84% of 43 bacterial isolates (143), covering 43% of the human gut microbiota in their combined relative abundance (17).

The gut metagenome of RA patients before treatment determines whether or not they respond to MTX, and that in vitro incubation is correlated with the clinical response intensity. In turn, different doses of MTX altered the species richness and diversity of intestinal bacteria (see Figure 5 ). In other words, there is a dose-dependent bidirectional interaction between MTX and gut microbiota. This interaction between drugs and microbes is known as pharmacobiology, a term not foreign to rheumatologists.

The study of the interaction between drugs and microbes is known as pharmacobiology, leading to the concept of precision medicine, which is particularly important in the field of rheumatic diseases. The research focuses on the genes and enzymes encoded by the entire microbial community, including gut microbiome, as well as the relationship between microorganisms and pharmacokinetics, which ultimately modulates host immune response in order to treat diseases (121). The understanding of pharmacomicrobiology has led to a new level of understanding of the clinical efficacy and adverse reactions of drugs (17). The integration of precision medicine strategies based on the characteristics of gut microbes can help guide the appropriate use of many drugs, including MTX, which often present known and unpredictable individual differences. Interindividual microbial metagenomes such as bacterial species, genes, enzymes, proteins, and/or metabolites affect drug uptake, metabolism, transport, and/or excretion, which allows clinicians to pretreat patients’ gut microbiome and take the best treatment to get the best treatment results (121). At the same time, this information can guide decisions to try to achieve an ideal microbial composition or gene to improve drug bioavailability and improve symptoms. As mentioned above, the use of baseline gut microbiome metagenomes has important predictive value for clinical response to MTX administration, which has been used for inflammatory arthritis. A related example is the FLORA study (149). This is a randomized, placebo-controlled trial of FMT in patients with active PsA who have no response to MTX.

Although FMT has made some progress, other less cumbersome microbial modulators are being tested, including adjuvant probiotics and probiotics, which have shown positive results (137). New technologies such as organ-on-a-chip (150, 151) and bacterial culture (152) help to understand the mechanisms of pharmacomicrobiology via attempting to mimic the gut environment and reproduce the physiological interactions of host microbes. Then, the drugs to be studied are cultivated in these systems to explore the interaction between drugs and microorganisms, including the effects of drugs on bacterial metabolism and reproduction, and the effects and mechanisms of bacteria on drug biotransformation. These pharmacobiological studies will provide a new idea for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and even inflammatory arthritis.

Although several efficacious therapies have recently been developed, MTX has always been the basic and first-line drug for the treatment of RA. Multiple mechanisms may contribute to the anti-inflammatory effects of MTX including inhibition of purine and pyrimidine synthesis, promotion of adenosine and some cytokines release, inhibition of ROS, etc., as well as transmethylation reaction, activator (STAT) pathway and expression of some long non-coding RNAs, which are not described in detail in this paper (3, 27). However, there is still a high proportion of RA patients who do not respond or have major toxic effects to MTX. We speculate that this inter-individual difference is at least partly related to the gut microbes of patients, and more and more trials have proved this speculation to be correct. In other words, gut microbes are associated with MTX resistance or poor response. Gut metagenome at baseline could differentiate MTX responders from non- responders and ex vivo incubation with MTX of samples from patients with treatment-naive, new-onset RA correlated with the magnitude of future clinical response. In turn, MTX affected the composition of intestinal microbes in humanized mice in a dose-dependent manner, inhibiting the growth of certain intestinal bacteria. Although comparison of MTX consumption rate and response probability by metagenome-based models did not find a significant correlation, this may indicate that most gene orthologs included in the model do not appear to play an important role in MTX depletion. A possible explanation is that these gene orthologs may affect the MTX response, but independently of drug metabolism. Future research needs to determine whether the microbiome can directly metabolize MTX in the body, jump-start the immune system to boost the response, or both. The rigorous integration of clinical factors, host genomics, and pharmacobiology will lay the foundation for major advances in rheumatic precision medical. More research is needed on the interactions between drugs and gut bacteria, known as pharmacobiology, which will be a research hotspot now and even in the future in the field of rheumatic diseases including RA.

HY drafted the manuscript, prepared illustrations and discussed the content with the other authors. CW conceived the topic and revised the manuscript. RS intellectually revised the manuscript. HX, CG and XL also critically revised the manuscript for intellectual content. All the authors approved the manuscript for publication.

This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 81971543, No. 81471618); Key Research and Development (R&D) Projects of Shanxi Province (201803D31119).

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

