The current state and future direction of DoD gut microbiome research: a summary of the first DoD gut microbiome informational meeting



The gut microbiome is increasingly recognized as integral to human health, and is emerging as a mediator of human physical and cognitive performance. This has led to the recognition that US Department of Defense (DoD) research supporting a healthy and resilient gut microbiome will be critical to optimizing the health and performance of future Warfighters. To facilitate knowledge dissemination and collaboration, identify resource capabilities and gaps, and maximize the positive impact of gut microbiome research on the Warfighter, DoD partners in microbiome research participated in a 2-day informational meeting co-hosted by the Natick Soldier Research, Engineering and Development Center (NSRDEC) and the US Army Research Institute of Environmental Medicine (USARIEM) on 16–17 November 2015. Attendee presentations and discussions demonstrated that multiple DoD organizations are actively advancing gut microbiome research. Common areas of research included the influence of military-relevant stressors on interactions between the microbiome and Warfighter biology, manipulation of the microbiome to influence Warfighter health, and use of the microbiome as a biomarker of Warfighter health status. Although resources and capabilities are available, they vary across laboratories and it was determined that centralizing certain DoD capabilities could accelerate progress. More significantly, the meeting created a foundation for a coordinated gut microbiome and nutrition research program aligning key DoD partners in the area of microbiome research. This report details the presentations and discussions presented during the 1st DoD Gut Microbiome Informational Meeting.

The human body hosts trillions of microorganisms, whose collective genetic composition is collectively known as the human microbiome [1–3]. The human gut microbiome comprises a diverse, dense and active microbial ecosystem, also known as a microbiota, that resides in the gastrointestinal tract [1] and largely co-exists in a mutualistic relationship with the host. The composition and activity of gut microbes are modulated by changes in host diet and physiology while, in turn, gut microbes support immune health, deter pathogen invasion, regulate central and enteric nervous system activity, and generate beneficial nutrients and metabolites [4–6]. These beneficial relationships, however, can be perturbed by environmental stressors that directly or indirectly modulate the gut microbiome, thereby resulting in a state of dysbiosis that has been implicated in the development of acute health decrements, such as systemic inflammation [7], increased susceptibility to illness and infection [8], cognitive decrements [9, 10] and the development and/or persistence of multiple chronic diseases [8].

The Natick Microbiome Interest Group (NMIG) is a recently formed research cluster exploring interactions between nutrition and gut microbiome to understand influence on Warfighter health and performance. The group is comprised of members from the US Army Research Institute of Environmental Medicine (USARIEM), the Combat Feeding Directorate (CFD) and Warfighter Directorate (WD), US Army Natick Soldier Research, Development and Engineering Center (NSRDEC), all located at Natick Soldier Systems Center (NSSC). Upon its formation in 2014, the NMIG recognized that although multiple DoD organizations were actively supporting gut microbiome-related research efforts, a coordinated gut microbiome and nutrition research program was absent. The group envisioned that enhancing coordination and information exchange across organizations conducting microbiome research could lead to more efficient use of resources and avoid duplication of efforts as DoD nutrition and gut microbiome research developed. To realize this goal, the NMIG hosted an informational meeting at NSSC on 16–17 November 2015 with the objective of aligning key DoD partners in multiple areas of microbiome research. The meeting goals included facilitating collaboration amongst scientists, identifying gaps within DoD gut microbiome research, enhancing knowledge sharing and coordination of research efforts, and identifying currently available resources and capabilities. Attendees represented multiple government organizations conducting microbiome research. On Day One of the event, invited DoD scientists presented an overview of gut microbiome research and areas of interest within their organizations (Table 1). During Day Two, four breakout sessions allowed for deep dives into subject areas relevant to identifying DoD nutrition and gut microbiome research gaps and needs. This report summarizes the discussion and conclusions of the 1st DoD Gut Microbiome Informational Meeting.

Dr. Robert Kokoska (Army Research Office (ARO) Microbiology Program Manager) presented an overview of extramural basic research programs sponsored by the Life Sciences Division of the US Army Research Laboratory (ARL). Dr. Kokoska described ARO programs as contributing to our understanding of the characterization, inherent interactions and downstream effects of various microbial communities, including the gut microbiome. The ARO Program in Microbiology, managed by Dr. Kokoska, has a primary strategic focus on the analysis and engineering of microbial communities. Single Investigator grants and Multidisciplinary University Research Initiative (MURI) awards managed under this program address the challenges of establishing functional links between species with divergent roles within a microbial consortium, understanding the role of spatial order within an interactive microbial consortia and the development of tools, methodologies and engineered systems that can effectively control and analyze the physical and biochemical characteristics of both simple and complex microbial communities. Within this program, research efforts that provide “bottom-up” approaches, i.e., those that examine simple well-ordered communities, hold the promise of uncovering fundamental interactive and control principles within a consortium that can aid our understanding of the forces that drive community structure and function.

Overall, the 711 HPW team along with its service and academic partners are addressing the need to understand and the possibility of controlling the microbiome in order to improve Airman Health and Performance.

Day two of the information meeting featured working group breakout sessions to identify the following within the DoD: 1) current capabilities; 2) research areas of interest; 3) rationale for gut microbiome research and potential impact on the Warfighter; 4) fundamental and applied knowledge gaps; 5) resource gaps; 6) future research directions. Two parallel sessions were held in the morning that focused on programmatic issues, followed by two parallel afternoon sessions that focused on technical aspects of microbiome research. The programmatic sessions described what is needed to create an environment for success in DoD gut microbiome research. The technical sessions discussed the resources needed to execute these research programs.

Discussion on programmatic perspectives was structured around the knowledge that could be gleaned from microbiome research, the impact and implications of the knowledge to the Warfighter, and how that knowledge could be translated into strategies and products for improving Warfighter performance. Open discussions centered on how Warfighters are exposed to multiple unique stressors potentially impacting the microbiome, often in combination, and that gut microbiome research should largely focus on interactions between such stressors, the gut microbiome, and Warfighter health and performance. This focus should complement and build upon, rather than duplicate, the gut microbiome efforts being funded by the NIH and similar organizations, which largely emphasizes disease outcomes and chronic health. Avoiding duplication of efforts within the DoD was also discussed as necessary to maximize resources, knowledge generation and technology transition. To that end, it was suggested each service branch should consider establishing specific expertise within their research programs, making that expertise available to other service agencies, and communicating their research goals, directions and outcomes. This effort could include establishing a centralized infrastructure for some research activities, such as high-performance computing. However, it was recognized that some unique resources are not likely to be replicated within DoD laboratories. As such, partnering with academic institutions and industry to meet gut microbiome-related research goals will continue to be necessary.

The panel recommended establishing a DoD Tri-Service Microbiome Consortium (TSMC) to promote coordination and collaboration of gut microbiome research and to provide a forum for sharing ideas, research activities, resources and data. In order to improve collaboration and research progress, it was recognized that capabilities need to be identified across various organizations. Increasing awareness of existing capabilities within organizations and the development of novel capabilities was recognized as having a clear benefit to DoD gut microbiome research. Finally, it was recognized that microbiome research is resource intensive, requires significant funding, and that one of the primary challenges to existing research includes the current availability and stability of funding. Sharing of resources and leveraging programs such as MURIs, Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)/Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR), Laboratory University Collaboration Initiative (LUCI), and Defense University Research Instrumentation Program (DURIP) will be necessary. Several participants noted that requirements stated in DoD capability documents are particularly influential in setting research priorities and funding, and that funding is often determined by threat; however, at present, there is no established direct threat related to the human microbiome, although microbiome-related interventions are possible solutions. A focus of the TSMC would be championing the need for and importance of gut microbiome research within the DoD, and identifying and securing funding where appropriate.

Discussion of technical issues centered on the mechanics for achieving near- and long-term research objectives in relation to existing technical resources, gaps, barriers, and projected research efforts. Overall, there are sufficient technological resources for developing tangible gut microbiome targeted solutions in the near-term. However, this research, and related capabilities, should also advance to inform future research and develop capabilities that facilitate achievement of longer term research objectives.

Technological discussions considered relevant physiological outcomes for DoD nutrition and gut microbiome research and how to measure them. Relevant outcomes fell into three broad categories: 1) maintaining gut resiliency; 2) optimizing function to improve performance; 3) restoring function after dysbiosis. Measuring resistance to infection should be a top priority for future research as building gut microbiome resiliency to pathogens would directly reduce lost duty time and improve Warfighter readiness. Increased energy and reduced fatigue were short term objectives that may be potentially relevant to gut microbiome homeostasis. During such efforts, multiple biological sample matrices, including real-time tissue/intestinal lining sampling, if possible, will need to be collected and cohesively analyzed to identify mechanisms underlying host-microbe communication. Understanding differences within individual gut microbiomes of responders and non-responders to a stressor or intervention is also critical. Studies should be conducted and outcomes measured in settings closely mimicking mission and/or training environments with detailed cohort studies as a vehicle to both gain knowledge and facilitate translation of data for targeted solutions. Such studies would be aided by the development of novel methods for real-time data assessments.

The 1st DoD Gut Microbiome Informational Meeting on nutrition and gut microbiome research included presentations and discussion among DoD scientists working in the field. Attendees agreed that the microbiome is highly relevant to Warfighter health and performance, and continued research is critical to mission readiness. Several common themes emerged during the meeting: 1) a need for increased collaboration, coordination, and communication, possibly via a central portal 2) a need to establish longitudinal studies of incoming recruits prior to initial military training, as well as pre- and post-deployment 3) although bioinformatics resources exists, the area was identified as a bottleneck that could be remedied by increasing bioinformatics expertise within the DoD 4) gut microbiome research is a relatively new field and rapidly evolving; thus research results must be interpreted within the context of the limitations to the methods used to collect the data, and staying abreast of technological advances is critical 5) many capabilities and resources required for gut microbiome research currently exist within the DoD; 6) collaborative use of these capabilities and resources in addition to method standardization will facilitate the translation/interpretation of results from different studies across the DoD, and ultimately research impact. Also identified were the potential DoD-specific barriers to gut microbiome research, such as funding, security clearances when working with non-DoD partners, contracting requirements that may impede collaboration, and meeting attendance and cybersecurity restrictions. Since 2015, progress has been made in a number of these areas: 1) steps to improve communication, collaboration and coordination have occurred as evidenced by establishment of the DoD Tri-Service Microbiome Consortium (TSMC) and its inaugural workshop held in May 2017; 2) interagency efforts have been undertaken to coordinate and streamline handling of large data sets from bioinformatics analyses (e.g. DoD cloud); and 3) the NIST/NIH sponsored Standards for Microbiome Measurements Workshop held in August 2016 met to prioritize needs for developing standards for microbiome measurements that will enable federal, academic, and industry labs to reliably reproduce and advance research.

Although it was hoped that explicit technical recommendations would be realized during the meeting, breakout panels did not come to a consensus on all technical needs and gaps or approaches to address those topics. This is not uncommon to the field, and indicates a need for continued communication within the DoD and the broader scientific community. The immediate and foremost outcome of this meeting was the identification of DoD organizations active in gut microbiome research and complementary interests and capabilities. Furthermore, inter-institute and inter-agency coordination and communication was improved and/or established, which will allow collaboration within the DoD to leverage capabilities and enhance productivity, which collectively will facilitate working toward the desired relevant outcomes within gut microbiome research. The December 2016 establishment of the TSMC clearly serves as a powerful example of the motivation and momentum of the DoD microbiome community to coordinate and leverage the microbiome as a tool for improving the health and performance of the Warfighter. The outcome of the TSMC workshop in May 2017 determined that methods and analysis standardization, big data sharing and synthetic biology are priority areas that apply to all microbiome research. Similar meetings were deemed necessary to be conducted on a regular basis to continue communication, further identify collaborative opportunities, and continue to refine/update the scientific direction for DoD gut microbiome research. There was overwhelming support for holding future gut microbiome informational meetings, and to integrate academic and industry partners within these discussions.

Congressionally Directed Medical Research Program, Defense Medical Research and Development Program.

Not applicable.

The opinions or assertions contained herein are the private views of the authors and are not to be construed as official or as reflecting the views of the Army or the Department of Defense. Citation of commercial organizations or trade names in this report does not constitute an official Department of the Army endorsement or approval of the products or services of these organizations. Opinions, interpretations, conclusions, and recommendations are those of the authors and are not necessarily endorsed by the US Army.

Not applicable.

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

