The Role of the Microbiota in Graves’ Disease and Graves’ Orbitopathy

Graves‘ disease (GD) is a clinical syndrome with an enlarged and overactive thyroid gland, an accelerated heart rate, Graves’ orbitopathy (GO), and pretibial myxedema (PTM). GO is the most common extrathyroidal complication of GD. GD/GO has a significant negative impact on the quality of life. GD is the most common systemic autoimmune disorder, mediated by autoantibodies to the thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor (TSHR). It is generally accepted that GD/GO results from complex interactions between genetic and environmental factors that lead to the loss of immune tolerance to thyroid antigens. However, the exact mechanism is still elusive. Systematic investigations into GD/GO animal models and clinical patients have provided important new insight into these disorders during the past 4 years. These studies suggested that gut microbiota may play an essential role in the pathogenesis of GD/GO. Antibiotic vancomycin can reduce disease severity, but fecal material transfer (FMT) from GD/GO patients exaggerates the disease in GD/GO mouse models. There are significant differences in microbiota composition between GD/GO patients and healthy controls. Lactobacillus, Prevotella, and Veillonella often increase in GD patients. The commonly used therapeutic agents for GD/GO can also affect the gut microbiota. Antigenic mimicry and the imbalance of T helper 17 cells (Th17)/regulatory T cells (Tregs) are the primary mechanisms proposed for dysbiosis in GD/GO. Interventions including antibiotics, probiotics, and diet modification that modulate the gut microbiota have been actively investigated in preclinical models and, to some extent, in clinical settings, such as probiotics (Bifidobacterium longum) and selenium supplements. Future studies will reveal molecular pathways linking gut and thyroid functions and how they impact orbital autoimmunity. Microbiota-targeting therapeutics will likely be an essential strategy in managing GD/GO in the coming years.

Graves’ disease (GD) is an autoimmune disorder characterized by the unique association of an enlarged and overactive thyroid gland, an accelerated heart rate, Graves’ orbitopathy (GO), and Graves’ dermopathy such as pretibial myxedema (PTM), in its typical presentation. GD is the most common cause of hyperthyroidism. The lifetime risk is about 3% for women and 0.5% for men (Davies et al., 2020). GD is mediated by autoantibodies to the thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor (TSHR). The TSHR is also expressed in orbital fibroblasts. GO is the most common extrathyroidal complication of GD (Covelli and Ludgate, 2017). About 25%–30% of GD patients have GO, but careful orbital imaging analysis can identify subtle orbital soft tissue abnormalities in 50%–70% of GD patients (Smith and Hegedüs, 2016; Perros et al., 2017; Taylor et al., 2020). The annual GO incidence is about 16 cases per 100,000 Europeans and 10 cases per 100,000 Japanese (Hiromatsu et al., 2014; Perros et al., 2017). GO is characterized by orbital tissue remodeling, retro-orbital inflammation, and glycosaminoglycan accumulation (Hansen et al., 1999). The major clinical features include periorbital edema, eyelid lag, proptosis, limited ocular movement, orbital disfigurement, and diplopia (Ludgate, 2020). Glucocorticoids are the primary treatment for GO at the active stage; smoking cessation, selenium supplements, and ocular lubricants are also helpful. Approximately 2% of GO patients will develop moderate to severe disease. These patients can have a visual loss due to corneal ulcers or GO-related optic neuropathy and eventually need decompression surgery (Davies et al., 2020). Thus, GO has a significant negative impact on the quality of life (Taylor et al., 2020).

We will discuss the changes and potential mechanisms of the gut microbiota in the pathogenesis of GD/GO and comment on some possible therapeutic means to treat GD/GO by targeting the gut microbiome in this article.

During the past 20 years, animal model studies have indicated a critical role of the gut microbiota in regulating innate and adaptive immune responses (Virili et al., 2021). Germ-free (GF) mouse models provide the most strong evidence to support that notion, including models of spontaneous ankylosing enteropathy (Rehakova et al., 2000), autoimmune arthritis (Wu et al., 2010), autoimmune encephalomyelitis (Lee et al., 2011), and autoimmune uveitis (Heissigerova et al., 2016; Fu et al., 2021). In these GF animal models, the disease incidence and severity are reduced under the GF environment, indicating the microbiota is crucial for the initiation and progression of these diseases (Vieira et al., 2014; Carding et al., 2015). This conclusion is further confirmed in clinical observations of many patients with ankylosing spondylitis (Ciccia et al., 2017; Wen et al., 2017), rheumatoid arthritis (Gianchecchi and Fierabracci, 2019), uveitis (Huang et al., 2018; Fu et al., 2021), and multiple sclerosis (Tsunoda, 2017; Zeng et al., 2019). GD is an autoimmune thyroid disease (AITD); the role of the gut microbiota in the pathogenesis of GD/GO was only discovered recently, based on both mouse models and clinical investigations ( Table 1 ). These results are supported by findings that therapeutic agents of GD/GO (such as antithyroid drugs, glucocorticoids, immunosuppressants, and biologics) can also change the microbiota composition ( Table 2 ).

GD, Graves’ disease; GO, Graves’ orbitopathy; F/B ratio, Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio; HC, healthy controls.

AZA, azathioprine; GD, Graves’ disease; GCs, glucocorticoids; GO, Graves’ orbitopathy; MMI, methimazole; MMF, mycophenolate mofetil; PTU, propylthiouracil; TNF-α, antitumor necrosis factor-α.

Previously, a GD/GO animal model was established by transferring human TSHR-primed T cells into female BALB/c mice (Many et al., 1999). It was initially established in Brussels, Belgium. Many TSHR-immunized mice developed TSAb (thyroid-stimulating antibody) and GO-like phenotypes. However, this disease model could not be reproduced in Cardiff, UK (Baker et al., 2005). Because both animal facilities in Brussels and Cardiff are not pathogen-free, environmental microbial factors are possible reasons that TSHR-induced GO could not be generated in Cardiff. This result was the first scientific evidence suggesting that gut microbiota may be related to GD/GO pathogenesis (Baker et al., 2005; Masetti and Ludgate, 2020). The commonly used GD/GO mouse models are generally BALB/c female mice, induced by electroporation of DNA plasmids expressing human TSHR A-subunit (Moshkelgosha et al., 2013) or injection of adenovirus expressing human TSHR A-subunit (Ad-TSHR289) (Chen et al., 2006). Both electroporation and Ad-TSHR289 can successfully induce GO-like phenotypes (Zhao et al., 2011).

A recent study investigated the TSHR plasmid-immunized mice in two locations (Essen in Germany and London in the UK) by 16S rRNA gene sequencing and routine microbiological tests (Berchner-Pfannschmidt et al., 2016; Masetti et al., 2018). These female BALB/c mice showed different gut microbiota compositions between these two SPF (specific pathogen-free) facilities. Essen mice had more abundant Lactobacillaceae, Ruminococcaceae, and Porphyromonadaceae, but did not have Bifidobacteria. The Firmicutes : Bacteroidetes (F/B) ratio changed in TSHR mice of both locations. Orbital adipogenesis in Essen mice was correlated positively with Firmicutes OTUs (operational taxonomic units) and negatively with Bacteroidetes phyla. Disease-associated taxonomies have been identified and explained the clinical differences observed between Essen and London ( Figure 1A ). These findings suggest that gut microbiota may modulate the clinical heterogeneity of GD/GO in TSHR-immunized mice (Masetti et al., 2018).

After being immunized with TSHR plasmids, female C57BL/6 mice had produced both TSAb and TSBAb (TSH stimulating blocking antibody). However, none of these mice had GD or any orbital soft tissue changes, while BALB/c female animals showed GD and GO-like phenotypes. Splenic T cells isolated from C57BL/6 mice did not grow upon TSHR stimulation and mainly produced IL-10, but not proinflammatory cytokines such as IFN-γ (Moshkelgosha et al., 2018). 16S rRNA sequencing revealed increased beta-diversity between BALB/c and C57BL/6J gut microbiome and differential abundance of five genera (Paludibacter, Allobaculum, Limibacter, Anaerophaga, and Ureaplasma). These two mice strains had different correlations between gut microbiota and clinical manifestations; for instance, TSAb in C57BL/6J mice was correlated negatively with increased Limibacter. These results indicate that gut microbiota can modulate the immune activity, which explains different thyroid/orbit changes in different inbred mouse strains receiving TSHR immunization ( Figure 1B ).

To investigate whether the above-observed correlation indicates causation, the same research team altered the microbiota composition before the TSHR immunization by antibiotic vancomycin, probiotic Lab4, and fecal material transfer (FMT) from GO patients (Moshkelgosha et al., 2021). The antibiotic vancomycin was administered through drinking water, and probiotic Lab4 and FMT powder were administered through gavage. Vancomycin reduced the richness and diversity of gut microbiota. It depleted Firmicutes genera but increased Bacteroides, thus reducing the F/B ratio. It also significantly reduced CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells (Tregs) in orbital lymph nodes and GD/GO-like clinical features. TSHR mice receiving FMT from GO patients had a similar microbiota composition with their donors at the early stage after the transfer. GD-like features and orbital brown adipose tissue (BAT) volumes increased after FMT.

In summary ( Table 1 and Figure 1 ), experimental GD/GO models of the same mouse strain but housed in two different animal facilities (Masetti et al., 2018), or different mouse strains from the same animal facility (Moshkelgosha et al., 2018), revealed significant differences in gut microbiota composition which explain variations in clinical manifestations. Modulating gut microbiota can change the incidence and severity of GD/GO (Su et al., 2020; Moshkelgosha et al., 2021). These results uncovered a crucial role of gut microbiota in initiating and developing GD/GO mouse models (Masetti and Ludgate, 2020).

There have been more than 10 clinical observational studies since 2018 comparing the gut microbiota of GD/GO patients to healthy controls (HCs). In total, fecal samples from 293 GD patients, 33 GO patients, and 271 healthy controls have been analyzed by 16S rRNA gene sequencing ( Table 1 ).

Until July 2021, there are eight papers, including 263 GD/239 HC samples, studying the gut microbiome of GD patients ( Table 1 ). Overall, about 29 taxa are reported as differentially represented in GDs compared with HCs ( Figure 2 ), and the gut microbial diversity decreased in most studies (Ishaq et al., 2018; Yang M. et al., 2019; Cornejo-Pareja et al., 2020; Su et al., 2020; Yan et al., 2020; Chang et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021; Jiang et al., 2021). However, other results across these studies lack consistency. Differences in sample size, subject heterogeneity, study design, geographical location, and sequencing platform may contribute to the lack of reproducibility. Despite these limitations, several taxa were identified in three or more studies, including Prevotellaceae and Veillonellaceae at the family level and Bacteroides, Lactobacillus, Prevotella, and Veillonella at the genus level ( Figure 2 ).

The abundance of the family Veillonellaceae or the genus Veillonella increased in GD patients (Yan et al., 2020; Chang et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021). Veillonella is a symbiotic bacterium in humans and can become a conditional pathogenic bacterium. For instance, Veillonella acts as a pathogen in various inflammatory diseases such as pneumonia (Shah et al., 2008). Veillonella is also associated with the disease activity of autoimmune hepatitis (Wei et al., 2020) and recurrent Crohn’s disease (De Cruz et al., 2015). The role of Prevotella, Lactobacillus, and Veillonella in the pathogenesis of GD needs further investigation.

There are fewer studies regarding the gut microbiota of GO patients. Until July 2021, there are only three reports from a single institute, including 30 GD, 33 GO, and 30 HC samples ( Table 1 ). In one study, 33 active GO patients and 32 HCs were compared (Shi et al., 2019b). Community diversity decreased in GO patients, consistent with most observations of GD patients (Ishaq et al., 2018; Yang M. et al., 2019; Cornejo-Pareja et al., 2020; Su et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021; Jiang et al., 2021). The F/B ratio decreased in the GO group, consistent with some recent findings in GD patients (Su et al., 2020; Chang et al., 2021; Jiang et al., 2021). Metabolic-network-driven analysis of 31 hyperthyroid GO patients indicated that TRAb was associated with Prevotellaceae OTUs, CAS (clinical activity score) was associated with Bacteroides OTUs, and thyroglobulin autoantibodies were associated with OTUs from the Bacteroides stercoris species (Shi et al., 2019a). They also compared the original GO cohort (33 GO/32 HCs) with 30 GD patients taking antithyroid drugs. They identified bacterial phyla with different abundances between GD and GO patients, including Deinococcus–Thermus, Cyanobacteria, Chloroflexi, and Actinobacteria. At the genus level, Blautia, Anaerostipes, Dorea, and Butyricicoccus were more abundant in the GD group, while Subdoligranulum and Bilophila were more abundant in the GO group. Random forest analysis could differentiate GO patients, GD patients, and HCs with 70%–80% accuracy. Deinococcus–Thermus, Cyanobacteria, and Chloroflexi were the major taxa determining the classification accuracy (Shi et al., 2021). These results need to be confirmed with more studies on larger groups of patients.

In summary, clinical studies concluded that GD/GO patients and healthy controls have a much different gut microbiota composition. Whether these gut microbiota alterations in GD/GO patients could contribute to disease pathogenesis or are just a consequence remains unknown. However, FMT from GD/GO patients significantly increased GD/GO incidence in the GD/GO mouse model, suggesting a fundamental pathogenic role of gut microbiota in the development of GD/GO (Su et al., 2020; Moshkelgosha et al., 2021).

The primary goal in the treatment of GD is restoring normal thyroid hormone levels. To reach this goal, antithyroid drugs (such as thionamides), radioiodine, and thyroidectomy are commonly used. The treatment of GO is stage-dependent. The anti-inflammatory agent is recommended for active progressive disease, and rehabilitative surgery is performed only in the stable inactive stage (Davies et al., 2020). Glucocorticoids (GCs) are the first-line treatment; if an insufficient response is observed after 6 weeks, second-line therapy, including immunosuppressants (such as mycophenolate mofetil and azathioprine) and biologic agents (such as rituximab, infliximab tocilizumab, and teprotumumab) should be considered (Davies et al., 2020; Taylor et al., 2020). Recent studies indicated that some of these therapeutic agents (including antithyroid drugs, glucocorticoids, immunosuppressants, and biologics) could also affect the gut microbiota ( Table 2 ).

Methimazole (MMI) and propylthiouracil (PTU) are the commonly used antithyroid drugs (ATDs). ATD can change the gut microbiota structure in wild-type adult rats (Shin et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2020) and GD patients (Sun et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021; Huo et al., 2021).

In a recent study with 15 GD patients, MMI treatment reduced the abundance of Blautia, Lactobacillus, and Streptococcus but increased Proteobacteria (Chen et al., 2021). In another study with 8 GD patients, MMI treatment for 6 months also reduced the microbial Shannon index and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, Ligilactobacillus salivarius, Lactococcus lactis, and some species of the genera Porphyromonas and Prevotella (Huo et al., 2021).

GCs are the first-line treatments for moderate to severe active GO. GCs are potent immune-modulating drugs with a number of side effects, such as GC-induced obesity or osteoporosis, but little is known about the effect of steroid treatment on gut microbiota in GO patients. In patients with GC-induced obesity, gut microbial diversity decreased, Firmicutes (e.g., genus Streptococcus) increased, and Bacteroidetes were depleted. Concomitantly, the SCFA level decreased in gut microbial metabolites of these patients (Qiu et al., 2019).

GCs can also alter the gut microbiota through changes in brain function. Stress can increase serum corticosteroid levels; stress also changes the mouse microbiome, and it reduces intestinal Bacteroides while increasing the relative abundance of bacteria in the genus Clostridium (Bailey et al., 2011). This effect is similar to the results of long-term subcutaneous prednisolone implants (Schepper et al., 2020).

Recent clinical trials concluded that combining steroids with immunosuppressant drugs (azathioprine and mycophenolate mofetil) has beneficial effects for GO patients (Kahaly et al., 2018; Rajendram et al., 2018). While these effects are generally attributed to their immunosuppressive activity, azathioprine (AZA) and mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) directly affect the microbiota. In liver cells, AZA is metabolized to 6-mercaptopurine (MP), which can inhibit the maturation of B and T lymphocytes and the synthesis of DNA/RNA and proteins in immune cells. AZA can inhibit the growth of Campylobacter concisus, Bacteroides fragilis, Bacteroides vulgatus, Escherichia coli, and Mycobacterium Avium paratuberculosis (Shin and Collins, 2008; Antoniani et al., 2013; Liu et al., 2017). AZA is commonly used to treat inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). AZA can restore intestinal microbial diversity in patients with Crohn’s disease by decreasing Proteobacteria but increasing Bacteroidetes (Effenberger et al., 2021).

MMF treatment can cause gastrointestinal (GI) toxicity in organ transplant recipients. In mice, MMF reduced the overall gut microbial diversity and increased Proteobacteria. MMF-induced GI toxicity could be reversed or prevented using broad-spectrum antibiotics and was absent in germ-free animals (Flannigan et al., 2018; Taylor et al., 2019). Spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR) are commonly used hypertension animal models. They have decreased gut microbial richness and acetate- and butyrate-producing bacteria and increased F/B ratio and lactate-producing bacteria (Yang T. et al., 2019). MMF can reduce blood pressure in SHR (Rodríguez-Iturbe et al., 2002). MMF triggered substantial changes in the SHR microbiota taxa and reduced gut dysbiosis by reducing the F/B ratio and lactate-producing bacteria and increasing acetate- and butyrate-producing bacteria (Robles-Vera et al., 2021).

Several biological agents that can be used as a novel therapy for GO patients. Even though there were very few studies regarding the effects of these agents on gut microbiota, their underlying pathways can interact with gut microbiota. For example, rituximab (RTX), a chimeric human-murine anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody, has been used to treat active moderate–severe GO for more than 15 years (Vannucchi et al., 2021). RTX eliminates orbital and peripheral B cells, therefore, reducing the production of antibodies. B-cell-produced IgA is the most abundant antibody in the mucosa; secretory IgA (SIgA) is secreted into the lumen of the gut. IgA can bind to multiple distinct taxonomic groups of the microbiota and is involved in the elimination, neutralization, and colonization of gut microbiota. IgA can also regulate bacterial gene expression (Weis and Round, 2021). Thus, RTX should have some effects on gut microbiota, but this has not been specifically addressed.

In summary, the fact that ATDs, GCs, AZA, and MMF can change the microbiota composition is consistent with the notion that modifying the gut microbiota may reduce the severity of GD/GO, thus strengthening the concept that GD/GO and dysbiosis are tightly connected. The relationship between biological agents and gut microbiota needs further study in the future.

Two major mechanisms are proposed, namely, molecular/antigenic mimicry and imbalance of proinflammation T helper 17 cells (Th17) and Treg cells ( Figure 3 ).

Yersinia enterocolitica (YE) and Helicobacter pylori (HP) were thought to be possible environmental risk factors for GD for a long time (Wolf et al., 1991). The structural or conformational similarity between different antigens can lead to cross-reactivity, also known as molecular or antigenic mimicry. Cross-reactivity between gut microbial peptides and self-antigens can produce autoreactive T cells and induce autoimmunity (Avni and Koren, 2018; Rojas et al., 2018; Wildner and Diedrichs-Möhring, 2020). If microbes have similar protein structures in their host, they will escape immune detection ( Figure 3A ).

Several recent studies revealed that Prevotellaceae and Prevotella consistently increase in GD patients (Ishaq et al., 2018; Cornejo-Pareja et al., 2020; Su et al., 2020; Yan et al., 2020; Chang et al., 2021). Prevotella has been linked with rheumatoid arthritis (RA), as specific antigens of Prevotella, such as Pc-27 and N-acetylglucosamine-6-sulfatase (GNS), can trigger antigenic mimicry with RA joints (Scher et al., 2013; Pianta et al., 2017; Pianta et al., 2021). If these Prevotella-related antigens have similarities with human TSHR, they need further investigation.

The gut-associated lymphoid tissue has many T-cell populations, including proinflammation helper T (Th) cells and anti-inflammation Tregs. T helper cells include Th1, Th2, and Th17 cells. Th17 cells are the most important autoimmunity-related cells. Autoimmune diseases are closely related to abnormal Th17 cells (Bettelli et al., 2007; Pandiyan et al., 2019). Usually, Th17 and Tregs cells are in a dynamic balance to maintain the immune homeostasis of the gut mucosa. Gut microbiota can keep the balance between Th17/Tregs (Omenetti and Pizarro, 2015) ( Figure 3B ).

These findings suggest that Th17/Treg imbalance is involved in developing GD/GO in some genetic backgrounds or ethnic groups (for instance, all these abovementioned clinical observations are from the Asian population).

Dysbiosis is closely related to the development of GD/GO; therapeutic approaches targeting the gut microbiota may provide potential benefits to GD/GO patients. Currently, antibiotics, probiotics, diet modifications, and fecal microbial transplantation are the four major strategies proposed.

Antibiotics can change the gut microbiome. It was shown that oral antibiotic vancomycin could reduce the GD/GO severity in mouse models by reducing gut microbiota richness and diversity ( Figure 1C ). The reduced orbital pathology was correlated positively with Akkermansia (Moshkelgosha et al., 2021). As HP infection of the gastric mucosa is associated with GD through an increased inflammatory status and molecular mimicry, anti-HP therapy may also benefit GD/GO patients (Figura et al., 2019).

Probiotics are live microorganisms with health benefits, which improve or restore the gut microbiota. Probiotics can promote the differentiation of Tregs, thus modifying the intestine immune homeostasis (Lin, 2019). Probiotics have been tested in GD/GO mouse models (Moshkelgosha et al., 2021) and GD patients (Huo et al., 2021).

Future studies need to optimize the beneficial microbe stains in the probiotics formula; for instance, the formula should not include Lactobacillus, Prevotella, and Veillonella, as their abundance often increases in GD patients (Ishaq et al., 2018; Yang M. et al., 2019; Cornejo-Pareja et al., 2020; Su et al., 2020; Yan et al., 2020; Chang et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021; Jiang et al., 2021).

The diet can shape the microbiome composition. Culture and geographic-related diet differences can cause microbiome composition changes, for instance, Firmicutes enriched in the USA and Russia, Bacteroides spp. enriched in France and China, and Prevotella spp. enriched in Germany and India (Fröhlich and Wahl, 2019). Most GD patients have a reduced microbial diversity, which can be helped by a fiber-rich, low-calorie diet (Meijnikman et al., 2018). Diet with more vegetables increases SCFAs and Bifidobacteria, but animal fat increases the production of secondary bile acids (Ercolini and Fogliano, 2018). Diet with eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) can inhibit IFN-γ and IL-17 productions, thus attenuating experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) (Unoda et al., 2013).

In the 2021 European Group on Graves’ orbitopathy (EUGOGO) clinical practice guidelines for the medical management of GO, oral selenium supplementation is recommended for patients with mild GO (Bartalena et al., 2021). Mild GO patients from selenium-deficient areas can benefit from oral selenium supplementation. A double-blind, randomized clinical trial confirmed that sodium selenite could improve both the quality of life and overall ocular outcome and slow the progression in mild GO patients (Marcocci et al., 2011). These effects may be partially related to the role of selenium on gut microbiota. In adult C57BL/6 male mice, selenium in the diet can increase the microbiota diversity (Kasaikina et al., 2011), increase Turicibacter and Akkermansia, but reduce Mucispirillum (Qixiao Zhai et al., 2018). Turicibacter has been reported to display potential anti-inflammatory activities in the gut, and Akkermansia plays an essential role in the gut barrier protection, immune modulation, and metabolic regulation of the host (Qixiao Zhai et al., 2018). Akkermansia is also correlated positively with reduced orbital pathology in vancomycin-treated GO mouse models ( Figure 1C ) (Moshkelgosha et al., 2021). Thus, selenium supplementation increased the gut microbial diversity and positively modulated health beneficial microbes and negatively modulated the deleterious microbes in mice models. However, the effects of selenium supplementation on human gut microbiota are still unknown (Ferreira et al., 2021).

Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) transfers fecal bacteria and other microbes from a healthy donor into the patient to replace their dysbiotic microbiota. FMT has been successfully used to treat Clostridium difficile infection in colitis by increasing the diversity of the host microbiota (Cheng et al., 2019). FMT has also been used to treat rheumatoid arthritis (Zeng et al., 2021). FMT from GD/GO patients can increase the severity of induced GD/GO-like features in TSHR immunization mouse models (Su et al., 2020; Moshkelgosha et al., 2021), but if FMT from healthy donors can suppress established GD/GO manifestation has not been tested yet.

The relationship between gut microbiota and GD/GO has been uncovered during the past 4 years. Oral antibiotic vancomycin reduces disease severity in GD/GO mouse models, but FMT from GD/GO patients exaggerates the disease. There are significant differences in microbiota composition between GD/GO patients and healthy controls. Lactobacillus, Prevotella, and Veillonella often increase in GD patients. GCs are the first-line treatment for GO and can also change the composition of the microbiota. Two immunosuppression drugs (AZA and MMF) for GO have some antimicrobial properties; two AIDs (MMI and PTU) can change microbiota composition. Antigenic mimicry and imbalance of Th17/Tregs are likely the mechanisms for the effects of dysbiosis on GD/GO phenotypes.

Interventions including antibiotics, probiotics, and diet modification that modulate the gut microbiota have been actively investigated in preclinical models and clinical settings. However, only limited data exist on their effects on GD/GO patients. More research is needed to reveal molecular pathways linking gut and thyroid functions and how they impact orbital autoimmunity. For instance, the gut microbial features of GO patients need to be determined in more geographic locations; the effects of different probiotic formulas on GD/GO mouse model and patients need to be investigated; and how Lactobacillus, Prevotella, and Veillonella affect GD/GO phenotypes is still unknown. We believe microbiota-targeting therapeutics will be an important strategy in the management of GD/GO. This conclusion requires not only a thorough understanding of the distinct gut microbial composition and function of GD/GO patients but also carefully designed clinical trials.

JH, YT, YC, and DC conceived and designed the manuscript, and all authors wrote, edited, and approved the manuscript.

This study was supported by grants to DC from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (81870665, 82171063).

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

