The Gut Microbiome of Children during the COVID-19 Pandemic

The gut microbiome has been shown to play a critical role in maintaining a healthy state. Dysbiosis of the gut microbiome is involved in modulating disease severity and potentially contributes to long-term outcomes in adults with COVID-19. Due to children having a significantly lower risk of severe illness and limited sample availability, much less is known about the role of the gut microbiome in children with COVID-19. It is well recognized that the developing gut microbiome of children differs from that of adults, but it is unclear if this difference contributes to the different clinical presentations and complications. In this review, we discuss the current knowledge of the gut microbiome in children with COVID-19, with gut microbiome dysbiosis being found in pediatric COVID-19 but specific taxa change often differing from those described in adults. Additionally, we discuss possible mechanisms of how the gut microbiome may mediate the presentation and complications of COVID-19 in children and the potential role for microbial therapeutics.

In the COVID-19 pandemic, caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus, over 600 million people have been infected, and over 6 million deaths have occurred globally [1]. Although clinical studies have revealed that adults and immunocompromised patients present with more severe disease, COVID-19 has also significantly impacted the pediatric population [2,3]. While the literature shows that the prevalence of pediatric COVID-19 ranges from 1 to 13.3% of the total cases [4], it is suggested that this is underestimated. As many pediatric cases are asymptomatic or mild, testing is not performed, and therefore these cases are not documented. Due to the differences in overall severity and underreporting of cases, there are fewer pediatric studies related to COVID-19, but these studies are important as children can be severely affected [5,6] and can suffer from long-term health outcomes [7].

Therefore, in this review, the following is discussed: (1) the role of the pediatric gut microbiome in COVID-19 from prenatal exposure through childhood and in long-term outcomes; (2) the underlying mechanisms by which the pediatric microbiome may modulate the presentation of COVID-19 in children; and (3) the potential role for microbiome therapeutics for COVID-19 in children.

COVID-19 infections have a wide range of presentations and are classified clinically as asymptomatic, mild, moderate, severe, or critical [18]. Overall, children have a less severe presentation of COVID-19 than adults [2]. Interestingly, while children with COVID-19 present with typical respiratory symptoms, 15–84% of children with COVID-19 have at least one GI symptom [19], such as vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal pain, all of which are symptoms associated with alterations in the microbiome [20]. The variation in severity and symptomatic presentation complicates identification, containment, treatment, and research as asymptomatic patients have no symptoms of disease, while others experience severe symptoms progressing up to hospitalization, mechanical ventilation in an intensive care unit (ICU), or even death [21]. Limiting the spread of COVID-19 is challenging because, although it is hard to accurately measure, it is predicted that 5–24% of cases are asymptomatic but still infectious [22]. The literature is unclear regarding pediatric asymptomatic prevalence, and the data ranges from 1 to 35% [4,23,24,25]. One study looking at SARS-CoV-2 seroprevalence in children found that 66% of positive children had never had symptoms of COVID-19 [26]. Furthermore, a multi-hospital analysis (n = 438) found that even extensive symptom-based testing protocols failed to identify 45% of pediatric COVID-19 amongst hospitalized children [27]. Thus, the prevalence of asymptomatic children with COVID-19 is unclear, and the full impact in children remains unknown.

Given the frequency of asymptomatic cases, the pediatric population presents an interesting opportunity to analyze the microbiome differences between asymptomatic and symptomatic disease progression. Symptomatic presentation may be correlated with decreases in microbiome diversity, and even asymptomatic presentation may be associated with decreased abundance of anti-inflammatory bacteria [30,38]. In the future, research expanding these findings may provide insight into why the pediatric population in general has less severe disease compared to adults.

* Compared to healthy controls. ** Compared to healthy controls and COVID-19 cases. *** Compared to healthy controls and MIS-C cases.

COVID-19 infection during pregnancy may have consequences for the mother and offspring, some of which can be speculated to be partially microbiome-mediated, both directly and indirectly. Most pregnant patients diagnosed with COVID-19 are discharged without any major complications, yet severe symptoms, maternal morbidity, and perinatal deaths have been reported [40,41]. An increased decidual immune response was associated with COVID-19 later during gestation in pregnancy [42]. The gut microbiome is known to drive various inflammatory responses during different gestational stages of pregnancy and could be speculated to play a role in the varying immune responses to COVID-19 observed during the different stages of pregnancy [43]. More longitudinal studies including pregnant women infected with COVID-19 may detect if there are any significant changes in the microbiome composition correlating to alterations in the immune response against the disease.

Neonates born to mothers with COVID-19 during pregnancy and in the peripartum period should be followed over time to assess whether any of these factors impact the microbiome development. No current data exists regarding these potential long-term health outcomes yet.

While the majority of children show asymptomatic infection or mild COVID-19, some children develop multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C), a post-infectious syndrome resembling Kawasaki disease [33]. MIS-C is a rare but severe condition involving at least two organ systems with inflammation in previously healthy children under 21 years of age. It occurs 2–4 weeks after infection or exposure to SARS-CoV-2. The symptoms of MIS-C include, but are not limited to, persistent fever, abdominal pain, vomiting, diarrhea, skin rash, mucocutaneous lesions, and, in severe cases, hypotension and shock. Patients with MIS-C have elevated inflammatory markers, such as C-reactive protein (CRP) [71]. GI symptoms are one of the predominant MIS-C symptoms, which suggests that the gut microbial community might serve as local and systematic inflammatory modulators through interactions with SARS-CoV-2 [72]. Moreover, gut barrier dysfunction has been reported in MIS-C [73]. Immunological features in MIS-C have been reported; however, research examining the role of the gut microbiota in the pathogenesis of MIS-C is limited and is important to study given the interplay of the gut microbiome and host in other autoimmune diseases [74,75].

In a larger cohort, Suskun et al. analyzed the gut microbiota composition of 64 children (n = 25 MIS-C, 20 COVID-19, 19 healthy) [16]. The Shannon index was higher in the MIS-C cohort compared to healthy controls, although there was no difference in other alpha diversity measures (Table 1). A significant difference in beta diversity was also seen between MIS-C and healthy controls. Of note, lower Firmicutes and higher Bacteroides have been reported in Kawasaki disease, which resembles MIS-C symptomatically [76]. Consistently, compared to the healthy control and the COVID-19 groups, an increased abundance of Bacteroidetes and decreased ratio of Firmicutes:Bacteroides was seen in the MIS-C cohort [16]. In children with MIS-C, there was a decrease in the anti-inflammatory taxa and an increase in pro-inflammatory taxa. Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, which has been reported to maintain gut physiology and reduce intestinal mucosal inflammation through butyrate [77,78], was underrepresented in children with MIS-C and COVID-19 [16]. Additionally, an increased relative abundance of Eggerthella lenta, previously described to be involved in autoimmunity [79,80], and Eubacterium dolichum, previously implicated in metabolic dysfunction [81], were observed in children with MIS-C [16]. Proteobacteria have been associated with metabolic disorders and inflammatory bowel disease [82], and an increased abundance was seen in MIS-C (11%) compared to healthy controls (5%) [16]. In summary, the gut microbiota changed dramatically, reflecting an increase in opportunistic pathogens and a depletion of beneficial commensals in MIS-C children. However, a limitation of this study was that the samples were taken at a single time point during the MIS-C illness, and conclusions cannot be drawn as to whether these microbiota changes were a cause or consequence of the inflammation observed in MIS-C. Longitudinal studies are needed to elucidate the cause-effect relationship between microbiota alteration and symptomatology seen in MIS-C, which are difficult to conduct given that MIS-C is a rare consequence of COVID-19 and it is unclear which children will develop it.

Post-acute COVID-19 syndrome or “long COVID” is characterized by persistent symptoms after COVID-19 infection [83,84]. This has been reported in children, with the most common features being fatigue and mood symptoms [85]. In adults, prolonged gut microbiome dysbiosis has been associated with long COVID, with higher levels of Ruminococcus gnavus and Bacteroides vulgatus and lower levels of Faecalibacterium prausnitzii [9]. To our knowledge, the gut microbiome has not yet been studied in children with long COVID but doing so may help to gain insight into why some children have prolonged symptoms.

From the limited number of studies available, there is evidence of gut microbiome dysbiosis in children with both asymptomatic and symptomatic COVID-19, in addition to MIS-C. However, specific microbiome changes vary between studies, likely from differences in methodologies and cohorts. High-quality, large, controlled longitudinal studies are needed to further elucidate the role of the gut microbiome in children with COVID-19 and how it may influence long-term health outcomes.

While there are thousands of documented SARS-CoV-2 mutations, only some have made a significant impact throughout the pandemic. The Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has classified 12 variants of interest or concern that have circulated or are currently circulating in the US population [86]. Although there is high similarity between all variants of SARS-CoV-2, some of the variants have increased infectivity compared to the initial wild-type virus [87]. This complicates the pandemic, as certain treatments and vaccines work for some variants but are ineffective against others [88]. Moreover, different variants seem to have different clinical presentations in children. For example, there was an increase in hospitalization rates for 5- to 11-year-olds during the predominance of the Omicron variant [89], although the disease progression was less severe compared to the hospitalizations observed during the Delta-predominant period.

Moving forward, computational research is needed to model interactions between variants and important gut microorganisms and metabolites to predict variant pressures and future mutations. In addition, this will help to determine the most vulnerable populations based on their typical gut profile.

The risk of severe COVID-19 illness has been associated with multiple underlying medical conditions in children [92,93,94]. Some of the most common comorbidities found amongst more severely affected children are also related to imbalances in the microbiome, such as obesity [95,96].

These multiple comorbidities related to the underlying gut microbiome provide sufficient reasoning to conduct further research into the role of the existing dysbiosis of the gut microbiome in COVID-19. Improving dysbiosis in the pediatric microbiome may decrease the risk factors for contracting severe COVID-19 infection.

Although specific results between studies varied, overall, the gut microbiome has been associated with COVID-19 in both children and adults. The developing gut microbiome of children is known to differ from the adult microbiome and educates immune health and inflammatory pathways. It is important to elucidate the mechanisms behind the bidirectional interaction between the gut microbiota and SARS-CoV-2, and how they might shape the intensity of infection and different clinical outcomes in children. Possible mechanisms of the gut microbiota that contribute to the different clinical outcomes in children and adults, including the difference in microbiota composition/metabolites, gut barrier integrity, ACE2 receptor expression, and the immune system, will be reviewed (Figure 1).

It has been well documented that the gut microbiota undergoes significant changes in composition and function throughout the lifespan, with the most substantial changes in early childhood shaping the immune and metabolic systems [13]. There is rapid, dynamic development of the microbiome over the first few years of life, with increasing α-diversity [11]. A cross-sectional study performed on Japanese subjects showed that the variations between gut microbiota profiles were derived from the relative abundances of major phyla from newborns to adults: Actinobacteria (from ~50% to ~10%), Bacteroidetes (from ~15% to ~10%), Firmicutes (from ~25% to ~75%), and Proteobacteria (from ~6% to ~2%) [111]. With the maturation of the microbiota, the relative abundance of Firmicutes, the predominant phyla in adults, increased, while the others decreased. Previously, it was thought that the developing microbiota gains an adult-like configuration by three years of age, but recent studies have suggested that complete microbiota maturation may take longer [111,112,113,114,115]. Taxa from Bacteroidetes and Actinobacteria (Bifidobacterium) were found to be enriched in the gut microbiota of children [110,112,113,116,117], including in adolescence [118]. The numbers of taxa and functional genes are similar between healthy children and adults. However, the composition and functional potential are significantly varied [114,119]. The difference that separates older children and adult microbiota is the relative abundance of the genera, not the presence or absence of a specific genus (Figure 1a) [112].

Numerous studies have shown that gut microbiota composition correlates with disease severity and levels of cytokines and inflammatory markers in adult patients with COVID-19 [8,119,120]. Nevertheless, it is unclear if the variation in the microbiome at baseline prior to COVID-19 infection influenced the severity of the COVID-19 infection and the resultant microbiome. Lymberopoulos et al. examined the association between the gut microbiota and COVID-19 severity by applying a population-based association approach to 3055 healthy gut microbiome samples from adults and children over the age of two in 12 countries [121]. The 12 countries were grouped into a high-severity group and a low-severity group, according to COVID-19 infection data. At the phyla level, Actinobacteria and Firmicutes were enriched in the low-severity group, while Bacteroidetes and Proteobacteria were higher in the high-severity group (Figure 1b). Eubacterium rectale and Bifidobacterium were identified as the most beneficial taxa, which were reported to be decreased in COVID-19 patients. Moreover, Prevotella copri, a member of the Bacteroidetes phylum that has been associated with the development of rheumatoid arthritis, was shown to be increased in the high-severity group [121,122]. These results suggest the potential preventative resilience of the baseline microbiome of the population, and possibly a role for future preventative microbiome treatments for various disease states. Thus, it can be hypothesized that the microbiota in children may be of high preventative resilience due to features such as the relatively high abundance of Actinobacteria (Bifidobacterium). High preventative resilience could be achieved through inter-bacterial communication, various metabolites/products (including anti-microbial peptides and short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs)) and communication with various distal organs through gut–lung, gut–brain, gut–liver, and other axes. Further research with larger cohorts of healthy children and adults, as well as COVID-19-infected cohorts, is needed to assess this.

In addition to gut microbiota alteration, intestinal inflammation, microbial translocation, and gut barrier dysfunction have also been implicated in COVID-19 patients; these may result from microbiota alterations [123]. Mucus is the first line of defense in the GI tract, physically separating environmental pathogens and antigens from the intestinal epithelium (Figure 1a). Additionally, the mucus layer provides attachment sites and nutrients to support the symbiosis of the gut microbiota [124]. Impaired mucus allows the invading pathogens to reach the intestinal epithelium, potentially contributing to inflammatory diseases [125,126]. The gut microbiota has been implicated in the formation of a proper mucus layer, evidenced by the increased penetrability of the thin mucus in germ-free mice due to the lack of gut microbiota stimulation [127]. In addition, gut microbiota composition has been shown to shape mucus properties, such as thickness and penetrability [128]. Furthermore, the bacterial products lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and peptidoglycan (PGN) may stimulate mucus secretion and restore the mucus layer of germ-free mice to the level of control mice [129]. Collectively, these bidirectional interactions between the gut microbiota and mucus layer help maintain mucosal homeostasis [130,131,132,133,134,135].

Fecal calprotectin, a marker of intestinal inflammation, has been shown to be increased in COVID-19 infections [129]. Increased fecal calprotectin is associated with higher levels of microbiome dysbiosis, indicating a role of gut-microbiome-associated intestinal inflammation in COVID-19 [130]. Interestingly, however, increased calprotectin levels in COVID-19 did not correlate with GI symptoms [129]. Increased levels of intestinal inflammation can also lead to microbial translocation in the gut, which is the movement of bacteria and other microorganisms through the intestinal epithelial barrier into mucosal tissue and beyond. The presence of bacteria and non-indigenous microorganisms in this sterile environment triggers an immune response, and continued exposure can result in prolonged damaging inflammation [131]. The gut microbiota and immune response is heavily implicated with gut barrier integrity. While the bidirectional relationship is not fully characterized, there is concern that COVID-19 infection can further gut permeability, putting patients at higher risk for microbial translocation. This, in turn, can increase COVID-19 severity, feeding into a cycle of worsening dysbiosis, translocation, and COVID-19 pathogenesis [132,133,134].

Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2), the receptor for SARS-CoV-2 to enter the host cells, is highly expressed in various human organs, including the lung and gut. The expression level of ACE2 is known to be higher in the GI tract than in the lungs [142,143]. Moreover, ACE2 expression in the small intestine was 2.5-fold higher in children compared to adults (Figure 1) [143]. This may explain previous findings that GI symptoms manifest in children with COVID-19 more than they do in adult patients [144]. Additionally, ACE2 functions as a chaperone protein of B0AT1 and regulates the uptake of dietary amino acids, such as tryptophan [145,146]. Tryptophan preserves the symbiotic gut microbiota composition via improving gut barrier function, reducing proinflammatory cytokines, and inducing the release of antimicrobial peptides [147,148]. ACE2-deficient mice showed microbiota alterations, low plasma levels of tryptophan, and increased susceptibility to chemical-induced colitis [146]. Bacteroides spp. (B. dorei, B. thetaiotaomicron, B. massiliensis, and B. ovatus) were shown to downregulate ACE2 expression in the mouse intestine [149]. Interestingly, these Bacteroidetes members were reported to be inversely correlated with SARS-CoV-2 viral load in patient fecal samples [150]. ACE2 has been shown to be downregulated in COVID-19 infections [151]. Moreover, ACE2 expression in Caco-2 cells was downregulated by A. muciniphila, F. prausnitzii, B. thetaiotaomicron, and B. fragilis, and their postbiotics [152].

Taken together, the differences between pediatric and adult populations in the expression of ACE2 and the interaction of ACE2 with the gut microbiota may contribute to the varied clinical outcomes. A better understanding of the interaction between ACE2 and different gut microbiota communities is crucial for developing age-appropriate therapeutic strategies and preventive measures against COVID-19.

The differences in the immune responses of children and adults have been well reviewed elsewhere [73,156]. In addition to the known data, we hypothesize a possible role of endogenous retroviruses (ERVs) in mediating the communication between the gut microbiota and the immune system during COVID-19 infection (Figure 1b). Lima-Junior et al. reported that the skin microbiota may induce the expression of ERV in keratinocytes, which triggers an antiviral immune response [157]. This response supports tissue homeostasis by favoring the generation of beneficial commensal-specific T-cell subsets under healthy conditions [157,158]. Furthermore, with systemic inflammation, the enhanced ERV expression led to a dysregulated immune response and ultimately resulted in tissue pathology [157,158]. This groundbreaking research sheds light on the field of host–microbiome interactions. Given the critical role of the gut microbiota in the immune system, it can be hypothesized that the developing microbiota in children and the mature microbiota in adults may activate distinct ERV expression patterns in gut epithelial cells with different expression patterns favoring different immune responses and clinical outcomes in COVID-19 infection. This is an unstudied area that warrants further investigation.

Vaccines are an important mechanism of immune protection against diseases, and in recent years, researchers have started to study their connection to the microbiome. Studies have shown that the gut microbiome plays a critical role in the establishment of vaccine immune response and efficacy [159]. Tests on murine models showed that TLR5-mediated sensing of the microbiota was relevant to the development of immune responses for the polio vaccine [160]. Furthermore, correlations have been identified between the gut microbiome and vaccine responses to different viruses, such as rotavirus [161,162,163]. In studies with rotavirus, the microbiome was significantly different between the group that effectively responded to the vaccine and the group that did not. However, the fact that rotavirus affects the GI tract, and that the vaccine is given orally, must be taken into consideration as the gut microbiome may have more of an impact in this instance.

Further understanding of how the gut microbiome modulates the SARS-CoV-2 vaccine response in humans, using novel multi-omic techniques, may lead to increased responses using adjuvant microbial therapies [183,184]. It is also essential to study pediatric cohorts as the gut microbiome of a young child differs significantly from the adult microbiome, and results from adult studies may not be directly applicable. Moreover, early life microbiome development educates the immune system, so the impact of the baseline microbiome and microbial adjuvants in vaccines may be more pronounced in children. However, there is concern regarding the alteration of the microbiome during this critical period of development.

There are many microbial therapeutics with the potential to support development of a healthy gut community, including probiotics, prebiotics, synbiotics, specific dietary interventions, and fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT). Probiotics are generally defined as live microorganisms used to promote human microbial health. While their role in different areas of medicine is still being determined, it is known that they may promote a healthier microbial space through competition and other roles [185]. Prebiotics work similarly to probiotics but are composed of oligosaccharides that encourage growth of beneficial bacteria in the host [186]. Synbiotics have live microorganisms and microbe-supporting compounds, making them a synergetic combination of both [187].

Finally, fecal microbiota transplant (FMT) is the transfer of a healthy microbial community from a donor to a recipient with an altered gut microbiome. It is an effective treatment for Clostridioides difficile infection (CDI) in both adults and children [215,216] with the potential to treat a variety of illnesses with underlying gut microbiome dysbiosis, including COVID-19. Two cases have been described with COVID-19 occurring shortly after patients were treated with FMT for CDI [217]. The first patient was an 80-year-old with comorbidities, and the second patient was a 19-year-old on immunosuppression medicines. Both patients and their fecal transplant matter tested negative for SARS-CoV-2 prior to FMT procedure. However, the CDI patients tested positive for COVID-19 post-procedure. The 80-year-old patient received remdesivir and convalescent plasma (CP). Both patients were at high risk for severe COVID-19 progression, but only experienced mild progression. The first patient saw clinical improvements two days after the FMT and COVID-19 treatment began, although it typically takes ten days for clinical benefits to begin. These findings suggest that the FMT may have helped mediate the immune response during COVID-19 infection before the standard care treatments could take effect. Some suggest using convalescent fecal microbiota for FMT as opposed to healthy donors, but this raises concerns for the transfer of fecal matter with persistent dysbiosis [218]. Overall, more research is required to fully examine the role of FMT in COVID-19 treatment. An active clinical trial (Identifier No. NCT04824222) aims to understand the potential of FMT to reduce the risk of COVID-19 progression and complications [219]. Others have published a protocol to test the efficacy of washed microbiota transplantation (WMT), a more processed version of FMT, for COVID-19 patients [220]. Nevertheless, there is concern about the potential transmission of SARS-CoV-2 with FMT given the virus can be detected in the stool; therefore, all donors and FMT material should be screened for SARS-CoV-2 [221,222]. Due to this concern and other factors, including lack of access to screened FMT material, FMT rates for CDI in children decreased significantly during the first year of the pandemic, so there is currently no data available on the effects of FMT in children with co-existing CDI and COVID-19 [223,224].

The COVID-19 pandemic may have implications on the human microbiome of individuals, even if they have not been infected. The effects of the pandemic on the human microbiome have been referred to in other sources as part of the “hygiene hypothesis”. Finlay et al. explained that measures to avoid viral infection have led people to have less interactions with each other, and that, in conjunction with increases in their hygiene methods, can potentially impact the microbiome [225]. Human interactions are essential to increase and sustain the diversity of our gut microbiota. For example, studies have found that close relationships between individuals led to microbial communities with greater diversity and richness relative to those living alone. Furthermore, a study demonstrated that children living on farms with animals had a wider range of microbes and fewer risks of developing diseases like asthma [226]. This means that not only interactions with humans, but interactions with animals and our environment in general are important to mature our microbiome. Eventually, these long-term consequences in the human microbiome as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic may not only affect susceptibility to SARS-CoV-2 but also lead to diseases associated with microbiome abnormalities [227]. This may be especially important for young children during their critical window of microbiome development early in life, which is crucial for immune education. Conversely, antibiotic use, which can have a profound negative impact on the developing microbiome and is associated with obesity and other inflammatory diseases later in life, was found to be reduced in children, especially during the start of the pandemic, which may possibly counteract some of these effects [228].

Now that vaccines are available for most people, some may argue that the extreme hygiene cycle should be over. As the pandemic is still ongoing, it is important to take protective measurements against COVID-19. With this purpose, researchers developed probiotic-based sanitation that may stably decrease pathogens on surfaces while avoiding the promotion of antimicrobial resistance for use in a children’s hospital [229]. In this way, the probiotic cleaner better conserves beneficial bacteria and stops pathogenic bacteria from acquiring mutations that improve their pathogenicity [228,229,230]. The development of alternative methods to counter the effects of the pandemic should be promoted to avoid potential changes in the microbiome that may result in the worsening of health outcomes.

The gut microbiome is an essential component in regulating the immune response against the SARS-CoV-2 virus. Although most children show mild symptoms or asymptomatic infection, gut microbiome dysbiosis can occur during infection, with potential long-term consequences. The mechanism for the role of the gut microbiome in COVID-19-infected children is still not well understood, but it is suggested that there is important microbial mediation of ACE2 interactions and gut barrier integrity. Further, the gut microbiota may play a key role in vaccine efficacy, as well as variant evolution. For this reason, there is a need to perform additional clinical and mechanistic studies to understand the role of the pediatric microbiome in response to SARS-CoV-2, which may differ from adults given differences in the microbiome and immune system between children and adults. This knowledge may lead to increased treatments available for children, such as microbial therapeutics, and improved health outcomes.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

