Influence of Foods and Nutrition on the Gut Microbiome and Implications for Intestinal Health

Food components in our diet provide not only necessary nutrients to our body but also substrates for the mutualistic microbial flora in our gastrointestinal tract, termed the gut microbiome. Undigested food components are metabolized to a diverse array of metabolites. Thus, what we eat shapes the structure, composition, and function of the gut microbiome, which interacts with the gut epithelium and mucosal immune system and maintains intestinal homeostasis in a healthy state. Alterations of the gut microbiome are implicated in many diseases, such as inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). There is growing interest in nutritional therapy to target the gut microbiome in IBD. Investigations into dietary effects on the composition changes in the gut microbiome flourished in recent years, but few focused on gut physiology. This review summarizes the current knowledge regarding the impacts of major food components and their metabolites on the gut and health consequences, specifically within the GI tract. Additionally, the influence of the diet on the gut microbiome-host immune system interaction in IBD is also discussed. Understanding the influence of the diet on the interaction of the gut microbiome and the host immune system will be useful in developing nutritional strategies to maintain gut health and restore a healthy microbiome in IBD.

The gut microbiome, or gut microbiota, also termed commensal, refers to the entire microbial community that populates the mammalian gastrointestinal (GI) tract, with the majority residing in the colon. The human gut microbiome reaches 3.8 × 1013 microbes in a standard adult male, which outnumbers the human host cells (3.0 × 1013) [1]. Each individual hosts at least 160 species out of the total 1150 species that colonize the human GI tract [2]. There are five major phyla for the human gut microbiota, namely Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, Actinobacteria, Proteobacteria, and Verrucomicrobe, with the two dominating phyla, Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes, representing 90% of the gut microbiota [3]. Some bacteria termed “pathobionts” can become pathogenic under specific conditions. For example, members of the phylum Proteobacteria belong to “pathobionts”, and a bloom of them is seen in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) [4]. Accumulating evidence has shown that a diversified and well-structured gut microbiota is critical in maintaining health. Dysbiosis, defined as reduced diversity and alterations of the composition of the gut microbiota, is associated with obesity, diabetes, and gastrointestinal diseases such as IBD [2,5,6]. Diet is a driving factor in shaping human gut microbiota composition and function [3,7,8,9,10,11]. There is growing interest in targeting the gut microbiota through diet and nutritional approaches either to promote gut health or as an adjunct therapy for treating IBD [10,12,13].

Through generating a diverse array of metabolites, the gut microbiome interacts with the gut epithelium and the intestinal mucosal immune system to maintain gut homeostasis, thus forming a symbiotic relationship with the host. Diet can disturb gut homeostasis by influencing the diversity, composition, and function of the gut microbiome. A nutritionally balanced diet is critical for maintaining a healthy gut microbiome, the integrity of the intestinal barrier, immune tolerance, and normal gut physiology, whereas an unbalanced diet, like the typical western diet, results in reduced diversity and dysbiosis of the gut microbiome, which can lead to a leaky gut and chronic inflammation, as seen in IBD. This review focuses on food and nutrition factors that affect gut health by influencing the interplay of the gut microbiome with the epithelium and intestinal mucosal immune system.

The human GI tract is covered by a single layer of epithelial cells held together by tight junction proteins such as claudins, occludins, and zonulae occudens (ZO) [15]. The intestinal epithelial cells form a physical barrier as they are impermeable to luminal contents. There are at least seven types of intestinal epithelial cells: enterocytes, goblet cells, Paneth cells, microfold cells, enteroendocrine cells, cup cells, and tuft cells [16]. Enterocytes are the most abundant cells responsible for nutrient uptake [17]. Goblet cells, with more abundance in the distal direction, are responsible for producing mucus [17]. Most Paneth cells reside in the small intestine and secret antimicrobial peptides [17]. The intestinal epithelial cells and the secreted factors form the intestinal barrier [15].

Bacterial stimulation is essential for the development and function of the intestinal barrier. In germ-free mice, the mucus layer is extremely thin [18]. The permeability of the intestinal barrier is tightly regulated in a healthy gut. The commensal bacteria maintain the epithelial barrier by providing energy in the form of short-chain fatty acids and also releasing antimicrobial substances to inhibit pathogens. Some nutrients are important regulators of tight junction protein levels, which are critical in maintaining the epithelial barrier [15]. An increase in intestinal permeability, termed a “leaky” gut, can be induced by dietary factors and may trigger inflammatory responses [19]. In a healthy gut, a balance exists between commensal bacteria and the mucus layer. Some gut bacteria, termed mucin specialists, specifically metabolize mucins and are the major mucin degraders when the diet is rich in dietary polysaccharides. There is a balance of production and degradation of mucus, which maintains the thickness of the mucus layer. Dietary fiber-derived SCFAs promote the integrity of intestinal epithelium by inducing goblet cells to increase mucin production [2] and enterocytes to secret IL-18, which is important for epithelial repair [20]. SCFAs can also directly modify tight junctions to strengthen the gut barrier [15]. When the diet is devoid of dietary fibers, some mucin generalists switch metabolism from plant polysaccharides to host mucin glycans. Expansion of mucus-degrading bacteria and an increase in the metabolic activity in utilizing mucin glycans lead to erosion of the mucus layer [18]. Reduced dietary fiber correlates with the thinning of colonic mucus. Different protein sources also affect the thickness of the mucus layer [21]. High saturated fats impair intestinal barrier integrity by reducing tight junction protein occludin and ZO-1 [22,23]. Simple sugars [24,25] and emulsifiers [26] negatively affect the intestinal barrier by inducing the expansion of mucin lytic bacteria such as Akkermansia muciniphila, which leads to a thinning of the mucus layer. Some food components (milk fat) promote the growth of Proteobacteria, which produces compounds that are toxic to the intestinal epithelial cells [26]. A leaky gut is involved in the pathogenesis of many inflammatory diseases, including IBD [19].

Underneath the intestinal epithelial layer is the lamina propria, where most of the intestinal mucosal immune system resides [17]. Here, various types of innate and adaptive immune cells are found: dendritic cells, macrophages, innate lymphoid cells (ILCs), CD4+ T cells (Th1, Th17, Treg cells), CD8+ T cells, and IgA-secreting plasma cells. These cells work in concert in defense against pathogen infection and in the maintenance of the intestinal mucosal barrier. Unrestrained inflammatory responses to food antigens or commensal bacteria are the main causes of chronic intestinal inflammation and tissue damage in human IBD patients [12]. Under normal conditions, the mucosal immune system is tightly regulated. Local Tregs play a critical role in colon homeostasis [27,28]. Many bacterial metabolites induce colonic Tregs, such as SCFAs, certain secondary bile acid conjugates, and tryptophan metabolites [29,30,31,32,33]. The commensal bacteria and the immune system evolve and interplay with each other. Diet influences this interplay by providing substrates for the gut bacteria, and some nutrients can directly modulate immune cells.

The commensal microbes play a major role in shaping the population of Foxp3+CD4+ T regulator cells in the colon. Colonic Tregs are reduced in germ-free mice or following antibiotic treatment. A number of individual gut microbes strongly induce colonic Tregs, including Clostridia clusters IV, XIVa and XVIII, and some Bacteroides species [28]. These bacteria produce SCFAs by fermentation of dietary fiber. The very low number of colonic Tregs in germ-free mice can be rescued by acetate, propionate, or butyrate, indicating these SCFAs work independently [24]. Different SCFAs induce colonic Treg population through multiple mechanisms. For example, acetate promotes the expansion of pre-existing colonic Tregs by activation of FFAR2 on T cells, whereas butyrate increases the de novo differentiation of colonic Tregs by inhibiting histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity [30]. SCFAs also indirectly promote colonic Tregs expansion by affecting DC maturation through activation of GPR109A on DCs [29].

The definition of dietary fiber dates back to the 1950s and has evolved in the last several decades. The same basis remains in carbohydrate polymers that are resistant to digestion and absorption in the human small intestine [37]. Although dietary fibers are found in a wide range of plant-based foods such as cereals, legumes, nuts, tubers, vegetables, and fruits, fiber intake is far below the recommended levels in Western countries [37]. Dietary fiber is classified into different types based on chemical structures, including resistant starches (RS), nondigestible oligosaccharides, nondigestible polysaccharides, and chemically synthesized carbohydrates [38]. Nondigestible polysaccharides include cellulose, hemicellulose, polyfructoses, gums and mucilages, and pectins. Not all dietary fibers are fermentable [38]. Cellulose is not fermented by gut microbes and only has bulking effects [39]. Most dietary fibers are fermentable. Several terms are used to define subsets of dietary fiber with respect to their effects on the modulation of the gut microbiome. “Prebiotics” refers to a “nondigestible food ingredient that beneficially affects the host by selectively stimulating growth and/or activity of one or a limited number of bacteria already resident in the colon, and thus helps to improve host health” [38]. As more up-to-date knowledge builds up in terms of the health benefits of dietary fiber on the gut microbiota, the prebiotic concept is becoming considered outdated. A new term “MACs” is introduced as “microbiota-accessible carbohydrates” [40] to stress the capacity of GI microbiota to utilize fermentable dietary fiber.

Besides maintaining the diversity of the gut microbiota, sufficient fiber in the diet helps maintain the integrity of the mucus barrier and eliminates the risk of pathogen infection. A low-fiber diet promotes the expansion of colonic mucus-degrading bacteria, leading to erosion of the intestinal mucus barrier, thus enhancing pathogen susceptibility. Using a gnotobiotic mouse model, Desai et al. [18] showed that, during chronic or intermittent dietary fiber deficiency, mucin-degrading species such as A. muciniphila and B. caccae increase rapidly with a corresponding decrease in the fiber-degrading species. Consistent with changes in the microbial community abundance, transcriptomic changes also reveal elevated transcripts encoding enzymes to metabolize host sugars in fiber-free diet-fed mice and more abundant transcripts encoding enzymes that target dietary polysaccharides in fiber-rich diet-fed mice. Reduction of mucus thickness by the fiber-free gut microbiota brings luminal bacteria closer to the intestinal epithelium and some host responses, including increased fecal levels of a neutral protein lipocalin, shorter colon length, and changed transcriptomes in immune response pathways in the cecal tissue. When infected with Citrobacter rodentium, a murine pathogen that models human enteric E. coli infection, fiber-deprived microbiota promotes greater access to the pathogen, wider areas of inflammation in colon tissue, and lethal colitis. Importantly, adding purified soluble fiber to the fiber-free diet does not alleviate the degradation of the mucus layer, highlighting the importance of complex plant fiber with intact plant cell walls in maintaining a functional mucus layer.

Since dietary fiber is a chemically heterogeneous group of molecules with different structures and different physical forms, many factors affect microbial utilization of dietary fiber, including source, chain length, sugar types, linkages types, particle size, and association with other compounds [39]. Although there is only a small number of the composing monosaccharides (glucose, galactose, mannose, fructose, arabinose, xylose, rhamnose, fucose), a wide range of structures exist due to combinations of different linkages between two sugar moieties as well as the next-level branching units [39]. Since the bacteria is specific at cleaving different linkages of carbohydrate polymer, chemically different dietary fibers are selectively used by different gut bacteria equipped with different degrading enzymes. Cellulose with a structure of β-(1,4)-linked poly-D-glucose is generally not fermentable, although cellulose-degrading bacteria are identified in the human gut [39]. Resistant starch (α-(1,4)-linked glucose with α-(1,6)-linked glucose branches), pectin (α-(1,4)-linked D-galacturonate), and inulin (β-(2,1)-linked fructose) are all fermentable and associated with distinct gut microbiome compositions [39]. Even subtle variations in chemical structures of arabinoxylan (AX) isolated from three wheat classes influence the composition and function of gut microbiota [43]. The AX with a shorter backbone and more branches leads to much higher diversity and evenness compared with two AXs with a longer backbone and fewer branches. The AX with a shorter backbone is favored by Bacteroides, whereas the AXs with longer backbones and fewer branches are favored by Prevotella. Both Bacteroides and Prevotella are degraders of arabinoxylans. Prevotella competes better for fewer-branched AXs, but Bacteroides compete for more branched AXs.

Different types of dietary fiber vary greatly in terms of fermentability and therefore produce quite different metabolic and immunological consequences in the host. For example, carboxymethylcellulose (CMC), a synthetic fiber commonly used in research rodent diets, is not fermentable. Mice fed a high-fat diet containing CWC gained weight rapidly and were associated with a high Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes (F/B) ratio [46]. In contrast, the same amount of bamboo shoot fiber, an insoluble fiber rich in fermentable hemicellulose, almost completely suppressed high-fat diet-induced weight gain and counteracted all the effects of high fat on the gut microbiota, including reduced diversity and F/B ratio and detrimental effects on metabolism [46]. Therefore, bamboo shoot fiber can be considered an MAC, conferring beneficial effects in the context of a high-fat diet. Surprisingly, the same amount of inulin had little effect on high-fat diet-induced body weight gain. Similarly, wheat bran and soy fiber also promoted weight gain as CMC in the high-fat diet context. Not all soluble fibers are similar in their physiological effects [47]. For example, both inulin and pectin are rapidly fermented, but they have contrasting effects on colitis. In αIL-10R-induced colitis in mice, compared with the cellulose control, pectin attenuated colonic inflammation, decreased abundance of Proteabacteria, enhanced gut barrier function, and increased colonic Tregs. On the contrary, the same amount of inulin exacerbated colonic inflammation, increased levels of Proteobacteria and SCFA-producing bacteria, including Clostridia cluster XIVa, Lachnospiraceae, and Ruminococcaeae, and worsened gut barrier dysfunction [48]. Suppressing butyrate production mitigated colonic inflammation in inulin-fed mice, suggesting a role of excessive butyrate produced by inulin-exacerbated colitis. More research is needed to understand the mechanisms of the differential modulation of the gut microbiota by different dietary fibers on host metabolism and immune function.

A high-fat diet leads to reduced diversity of the gut microbiota in humans and rodents compared with low-fat diets, regardless of the fat source being lard, milk, safflower oil, or palm oil [46,49,50,51]. Different dietary lipids have differential effects on the composition of gut microbiota due to their difference in fatty acid profiles. In rodents, a high amount of lard-based saturated fat increased the ratio of Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes [49,50], induced a reversible bloom of Firmicutes class Mollicutes [49] or Firmicutes class Clostridiales, and a decrease in Bacteroidetes class Bacteriodles [50]. Palm oil strongly increased Verrucomicrobia (due to increased abundance of Akkermansia muciniphila) at the phylum level and increased the Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio [46]. All these microbial changes promote obesity. A supplement of 0.5% w/w conjugated linoleic acids (CLAs) in the regular mice diet was shown to influence the ratio of Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes at the phylum level [52]. Omega-3 PUFA supplementation in healthy middle-aged volunteers with a daily 4 g dose induced a reversible increase in the abundance of several genera, including Bifidobacterium, Roseburia and Lactobacillus but had no effect on microbial diversity and no taxa changes at the phylum level [53]. High dietary milk fat (rich in saturated fatty acid), but not safflower oil (rich in n-6 polyunsaturated fatty acids), induced a bloom of a sulfate-reducing microbe Bilophia wadsworthia [51]. Milk fat increased the incidence of colitis with typical Th1 inflammatory response in genetically susceptible IL10−/− mice but not in wild-type mice. These effects are mediated by a milk-fat-induced increase in taurine-conjugated bile acids [51]. Thus, by influencing the bile acid metabolism, a high intake of certain dietary fat promotes pathobiont expansion, which leads to intestinal inflammation in a genetically susceptible host. Altered bile acid pool composition is associated with IBD [2]. Besides diet, bile acid pool size also depends on the gut microbes. About 5% of bile acids in the colon are transformed into secondary bile acids, and some secondary bile acids are known to induce colonic Tregs, which control gut inflammation [31,32]. Although n-3 fatty acids show some protective effects in animal models of colitis, their benefits in human IBD remain inconclusive [54]. Some dietary fibers are very effective in counteracting high-fat diet-induced alterations in the gut microbiota and related metabolic or immune dysfunction [46,48]. Future research is needed to address the question of how n-3 fatty acids, CLA, and dietary fibers affect bile acid metabolism. Further exploring the complex regulation of the bile acid pool by different nutrients and bacterial metabolism of bile acids will help better understand the pathology of IBD and establish proper nutritional advice on dietary fat and dietary fiber for IBD patients.

Low vitamin D status has been observed in IBD patients [55]. Diet can only provide 10–20% vitamin D; about 90% of vitamin D is synthesized in the skin through ultraviolet B light [56]. Not having enough sun exposure is a major cause of vitamin D deficiency. Vitamin D deficiency in mice led to reduced microbial diversity, altered composition of the gut microbiota, and susceptibility to colitis [58]. VDR dysfunction also plays a role in IBD. Lactobacillus is depleted, and Clostridium and Bacteroides are increased in VDR KO mice [59]. Parabacteroides is found to be the most significant taxon correlated with the human Vdr gene [60]. The VDR KO mice had impaired colonic antibacterial activity and were predisposed to colitis. IL-10 knockout mice have lower intestinal VDR expression and develop spontaneous colitis. VDR-IL10 double knockout mice develop even more severe colitis than IL-10 knockout mice [55].

Protein intake in a typical Western diet is about 1.2–1.4 g/kg, which is well in excess of the recommended level of 0.6–0.8 g/kg/d [61]. Some high-protein diets aimed at weight loss recommend even higher protein intake, typically 25–35% of energy intake [62]. Dietary protein is not 100% digested. Digestibility of animal protein exceeds 90%, and plant protein digestibility is in the range of 70–90%. On a normal mixed diet, the amount of protein rather than its source determines the amount reaching the colon [63]. Undigested protein is mainly fermented in the distal colon and produces far more complex metabolites than carbohydrate fermentation, including SCFAs, branched-chain fatty acids, carbon dioxide, hydrogen, hydrogen sulfides, ammonia, phenols, and indole derivatives [64]. Some of these metabolites (hydrogen sulfides and ammonia) are toxic compounds and could be potentially detrimental to colonic epithelium at excessive amounts [63], while others (indole derivatives) are essential for the expression of IL-22, a cytokine that supports the integrity of intestinal mucosa [2].

L-serine catabolism has a minimum role in a healthy gut. However, during intestinal inflammation, the ability to utilize L-serine confers Enterobacteriaceae growth advantage against their competitors and thus plays a key role in the pathogenesis of E. coli-driven colitis. In CD microbiota-driven colitis, dietary restriction of L-serine reduces gut colonization of pathogenic Enterobacteriaceae, thus attenuating colitis [79].

Some minor food components, such as polyphenols [80] and the micronutrient selenium, promote the growth of beneficial bacteria species [81], whereas many others, such as certain food additives and alcohol, can influence the intestinal barrier negatively and lead to a leaky gut which potentially facilitates the translocation of a large number of gut bacteria, pathogen infection, and subsequent gut inflammation [82].

Food additives are widely used in processed foods produced by the modern food industry. Although they are generally regarded as safe, recent studies suggest they may contribute to the increased incidence of metabolic syndrome and inflammatory diseases by negatively influencing the gut microbiota [82]. For example, two commonly used emulsifiers, carboxymethylcellulose (CMC) and polysorbate-80 (P80), administered in mice at relatively low concentrations, resulted in decreased mucus thickness by more than half and microbiota encroachment [26]. CMC and P80 did not change the total levels of faecal bacteria but dramatically changed the microbiota composition, including reducing Bacteroidles and increasing Ruminoccus gnavus, which is mucolytic. In IL-10−/− mice, both CMC and P80 induced a marked reduction of microbial diversity, highly increased Verrucomicrobial phyla (Akkermansia muciniphila), and increased Proteobacteria. Emulsifier-treated mice have much higher colitis incidence and severity, indicating the emulsifiers increase the pro-inflammatory potential in susceptible subjects.

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a chronic and relapsing disorder of the gastrointestinal tract which is characterized by debilitating relapsing and remitting intestinal mucosal inflammation [83]. Two major types are ulcerative colitis (UC) and Crohn’s disease (CD). The precise etiology of IBD is not completely understood; multiple factors, including genetics, host immune dysregulation and environmental factors, are involved. Current theories believe that alterations of the gut microbiome trigger aberrant immune responses in genetically susceptible individuals, leading to chronic mucosal inflammation [12]. The prevalence of IBD in Western countries is high and rising in developing countries with ongoing industrialization [13]. Diet plays a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of IBD. The Western diet is characterized by high intakes of red meat, butter, dairy products, refined grains, sugar drinks and a lower intake of fruits and vegetables. In contrast, the generally considered healthy Mediterranean diet, characterized by a high intake of fruits and vegetables, whole-grain cereals, poultry and fish, is proven to promote diversity and richness of the gut microbiota [11]. A Western diet is identified as a risk for IBD pathogenesis by epidemiological studies [12,13]. Specific dietary components such as saturated fatty acids, animal protein, and simple sugars may promote dysbiosis of gut microbiota, increase the mucosal barrier, and promote inflammation. Other dietary components, such as docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and high total fiber intake, are associated with a lower risk of IBD [13].

Restoring the gut microbiome composition and function in IBD through diet, prebiotics, antibiotics and fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) has been investigated [12]. Several diets have proven to have positive effects, including exclusive enteral nutrition (EEN), the specific carbohydrate diet (SCD), the Crohn’s Disease Exclusion Diet (CDED), and the low FODAMP (fermentable oligosaccharides, monosacchardies, disaccharides and polyols) diet [12,13]. A low-fat, high-fiber diet led to reduced inflammation and improved quality of life in patients with ulcerative colitis compared with an improved standard American diet [87]. The difference in macronutrients induced microbial changes at all taxonomy levels, with a significant increase in the relative abundances of Bacteroidetes at the phylum level and Prevotella at the genus level. Increased dietary fiber intake is partly responsible for the benefits of UC in remission. However, fructans, but not galacto-oligosaccharides or sorbitol, are shown to exacerbate gut symptoms, including the severity of pain, bloating, and flatulence in quiescent IBD patients, indicating differential impacts of FODMAPs on gut physiology depending on type and quantity [88]. Restriction of FODMAP intake can relieve symptoms of IBD without affecting gut microbiome diversity and inflammation markers despite a decline in Bifidobacteria and F. prausnitzii abundance and lower concentrations of SCFAs [89]. The detrimental effects of high amounts of FODMAPs on gut health have been demonstrated in many animal studies, and high concentrations of SCFAs produced from rapid fermentation are the main mechanism for epithelium injury in the inflamed colon [90]. In contrast to FODMAPs, many plant polysaccharides with distinctive complex structures from various edible plant foods, including tubers [91,92,93,94], bamboo shoots [95], fruits [48,96], and mushrooms [97,98,99], have been proven to promote gut health. In animal models of colitis, these plant polysaccharides are able to reduce mucosal inflammation, strengthen the intestinal barrier, increase SCFA production, correct dysbiosis, and modulate T cells (Table 1). In most of these studies, the soluble fibers are used in a preventative way. Only the mannoglucan from Chinese yam can heal diseased colitis mice [92]. Future studies are required to verify these plant polysaccharides in the treatment way in animal models of colitis and their usefulness in IBD patients. In view of the more complicated diet-gut microbe interaction in IBD, combined therapy of Treg-producing bacteria Clostridia and Bacteroides with certain polysaccharides supplementation with current drug therapy will likely yield better results in treating IBD.

The human gut microbiome varies in each individual due to differences in type of delivery, infant feeding methods, age, as well as medications such as antibiotic treatment [100]. Considering the huge influence of food components and nutrients on the gut microbiome, future investigations need to examine their roles in more dysbiosis-related intestinal disorders beyond IBD, for example, antibiotic-related adverse effects and gastrointestinal cancers. Moreover, their roles in the pathology of IBD may be investigated from a broader perspective and by a more integrative approach, such as the new paradigm widely applied in cancer research, namely molecular pathological epidemiology (MPE), which incorporates molecular pathology into epidemiological research [101].

Clearly, a nutritionally balanced, whole food-based fiber-rich diet not only provides the host with all necessary nutrients but also nourishes a healthy gut microbiome with high diversity and well-balanced composition. Many ingredients in modern food processing have detrimental effects on the intestinal barrier and lead to reduced diversity and compositional changes in the gut microbiota, which promote obesity and may predispose to intestinal inflammation in susceptible subjects. Food choices must take the gut microbiome into account for intestinal and overall health, and this is particularly important for IBD or CRC patients. As shown by a diet intervention in IBD patients, a low-fat, high-fiber diet increased fecal tryptophan levels compared with a high-fat diet [87], and macronutrients can have a strong impact on the gut microbiome and metabolites from other macronutrients. Certain dietary fibers can effectively counter the effects of a high-fat diet on the gut microbiome and should be explored as functional ingredients for healthy meat product development by the food industry [46,119]. More research is needed to look at diet-gut microbe interactions in health and the molecular mechanisms of how dietary components or nutrition status contribute to intestinal immune homeostasis. As the effects of more and more novel dietary components and their microbial metabolites on the gut microbiome are discovered by basic research, their usefulness in improving gut health and in the prevention and treatment of gastrointestinal diseases remains to be clarified by human population studies using the MPE approach.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

