Lignocellulose degradation in Protaetia brevitarsis larvae digestive tract: refining on a tightly designed microbial fermentation production line

The Scarabaeidae insect Protaetia brevitarsis (PB) has recently gained increasing research interest as a resource insect because its larvae can effectively convert decaying organic matter to plant growth-promoting frass with a high humic acid content and produce healthy, nutritional insect protein sources. Lignocellulose is the main component of PB larvae (PBL) feed, but PB genome annotation shows that PBL carbohydrate-active enzymes are not able to complete the lignocellulose degradation process. Thus, the mechanism by which PBL efficiently degrade lignocellulose is worthy of further study.

Herein, we used combined host genomic and gut metagenomic datasets to investigate the lignocellulose degradation activity of PBL, and a comprehensive reference catalog of gut microbial genes and host gut transcriptomic genes was first established. We characterized a gene repertoire comprising highly abundant and diversified lignocellulose-degrading enzymes and demonstrated that there was unique teamwork between PBL and their gut bacterial microbiota for efficient lignocellulose degradation. PBL selectively enriched lignocellulose-degrading microbial species, mainly from Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes, which are capable of producing a broad array of cellulases and hemicellulases, thus playing a major role in lignocellulosic biomass degradation. In addition, most of the lignocellulose degradation-related module sequences in the PBL microbiome were novel. PBL provide organic functional complementarity for lignocellulose degradation via their evolved strong mouthparts, alkaline midgut, and mild stable hindgut microenvironment to facilitate lignocellulosic biomass grinding, dissolving, and symbiotic microbial fermentation, respectively.

This work shows that PBL are a promising model to study lignocellulose degradation, which can provide highly abundant novel enzymes and relevant lignocellulose-degrading bacterial strains for biotechnological biomass conversion industries. The unique teamwork between PBL and their gut symbiotic bacterial microbiota for efficient lignocellulose degradation will expand the knowledge of holobionts and open a new beginning in the theory of holobionts.

Video Abstract video file.(105M, mp4)

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s40168-022-01291-2.

Animal domestical and agriculture play an essential role in food supply, especially in the conversion of plant biomass to proteins, ranging from dairy products to beef, poultry, fish, eggs, and pork [1]. Currently, great pressures imposed by the global population growth have not only increased the scale of the livestock industry but have also facilitated a search for novel, sustainable protein sources. Domestic insects that convert agricultural waste to edible proteins have been acknowledged as a feasible strategy due to their broad range of feed sources and high feed conversion rates [2, 3].

Lignocellulose is mainly composed of lignin, cellulose, and hemicellulose, forming a highly complex and varying polymeric structure that is highly recalcitrant to degradation and thus requires a consortium of carbohydrate-active enzymes (CAZymes) that act in synergism to provide its complete decomposition [11]. Lignin degradation is an enzymatic oxidation catalyzed by two main groups of enzymes, namely, lignin-modifying enzymes (LMEs) and lignin-degrading auxiliary (LDA) enzymes [12]. In contrast to lignin degradation, enzymatic degradation of cellulose and hemicellulose is mainly mediated by a process of hydrolysis through the action of glycoside hydrolases. Commonly, the process of cellulose degradation involves a set of three enzymes, endoglucanase, exoglucanase, and β-glucosidase, while the depolymerization of hemicellulose requires endo-hemicellulases, exo-hemicellulases, and debranching enzymes that cleave side chains of the polymers or associated oligosaccharides [11, 13]. In addition, recent studies have indicated that the efficiency of lignocellulose degradation can be remarkably improved by the cooperative action of lytic polysaccharide monooxygenases (LPMOs), which are able to directly oxidize and depolymerize insoluble crystalline substrate surfaces or soluble hemicellulosic substrates such as xyloglucan, xylan, and β-glucans [14–16]. In natural ecosystems, the degradation of lignocellulosic biomass is mainly dependent on a repertoire of enzymes produced by bacteria and fungi [11, 12]. However, more efficient degradation can be achieved by host eukaryotes working together with their gut microorganisms (often referred to as a “holobiont”) [17–19]. Recent data have suggested that isopod holobionts are promising models for lignocellulose degradation and that terrestrial isopods usually obtain complementarity benefits from their microbiota [19]. Compared with other lignocellulose decomposers, such as the termite gut [20, 21], earthworm gut [22], or cattle rumen [23], PBL possess more abundant gut microbial communities [24], which may indicate the availability of abundant and novel lignocellulosic enzymes or microbial candidates in the PBL gut ecosystem. In the present work, we combined genomic, transcriptomic, and metagenomic approaches at the holobiont level for the first time to provide new insights into the mechanisms underlying highly efficient lignocellulose degradation by PBL. The investigation included (i) identifying lignocellulose-degrading CAZymes and lignocellulose-binding modules present in both the host and microbiota, (ii) characterizing microbial taxa that contribute lignocellulose degradation-related genes, and (iii) recovering individual lignocellulolytic species from the microbiota through a metagenomic binning approach. This investigation improves our understanding of the lignocellulose degradation mechanisms in PBL and also contributes to applications in edible insect farming as well as in biofuel and biomaterial production.

The PB laboratory population was derived from a field population collected in Gongzhuling, Jilin Province, China [25], and reared in a constant environment in an incubator at 26°C, 40–60% relative humidity, and a photoperiod of 12-h light to 12 h dark. The larvae were fed corn straw, which was crushed into approximately 1-cm pieces with 50% moisture content. Third-instar larvae were selected and chilled on ice for dissection. After surface sterilization using 70% ethanol, the midgut and hindgut were dissected for subsequent analysis.

To prepare midgut and hindgut tissues, the dissected midgut and hindgut were washed in a cold 125-mM NaCl solution after removing gut contents. Subsequently, the washed gut tissue was transferred into a homogenizer and homogenized with TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen, USA), and the RNA was extracted according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The RNA quality and quantity were determined with gel electrophoresis and a NanoDrop spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher, USA). Then, RNA sequencing libraries were generated using an Illumina TruSeq-stranded mRNA Library Prep Kit (Illumina, USA), and sequencing was performed on an Illumina HiSeq 2500 sequencer (Illumina, USA) to produce 2 × 150 bp paired-end reads. When the raw reads were produced, quality control, adapter trimming, and quality filtering were performed by Fastp (version 0.21.0) [26]. Finally, clean reads were deposited in the NCBI Sequence Read Archive (SRA). The SRA accessions SRR5038971, SRR5039436, SRR5039445, and SRR14128221, SRR14132028, and SRR14132050 correspond to midgut and hindgut samples from three larvae, respectively (Additional file 1: Table S1).

To determine the transcriptomic expression profiles in the PBL gut, the clean reads were aligned to the PB reference genome [25] using Spliced Transcripts Alignment to a Reference (STAR, version 2.7.8a) [27], and the resulted read alignment was sorted using SAMtools (version 1.15.1) [28]. Subsequently, the expression of genes was analyzed using StringTIE (version 2.1.5) [29] in terms of the fragments per kilobase of transcript per million mapped read (FPKM) values of encoding genes. Each gene expression level was normalized to its length for each replicate using the FPKM method which eliminates the influence of varying gene lengths and sequencing discrepancies in the calculation of gene expression. The paired Student’s t test was used to evaluate the significance of the differences between the FPKM values of the midgut and hindgut sample groups.

To prepare enough DNA for gut metagenomic sequencing, ten 3rd-instar PBL fed with corn straw were dissected, and the midgut and hindgut contents were pooled together. The DNA of the pooled midgut or hindgut contents was extracted using an Axyprep Multisource Genomic DNA Miniprep Kit (AxyGen, USA).

High-quality reads from midgut and hindgut samples were pooled, and the metagenomic classifier MetaPhlAn (version 3.0.13) [31] was employed for profiling all the reads in the community with default parameters to infer the taxonomic composition of the microbial community. Subsequently, MEGAHIT (version 1.2.9) [32] was used for coassembly with default parameters. Following assembly, reads were mapped to assembled contigs using the BWA-MEM algorithm [33] and SAMtools (version 1.6) [28] to obtain coverage information. Contig binning was conducted to recover individual genomes based on both tetranucleotide frequencies and sequence coverages. MaxBin 2.0 (version 2.2.7) [34] and MetaBAT 2 (version 2.12.1) [35] were used for independent binning using contigs longer than 1500 bp and clean reads from each sample. All generated bins were aggregated and then dereplicated using dREP (version 1.4.3) [36] with default parameters. CheckM (version 1.0.7) [37] was used to estimate the genome completeness and contamination of all dereplicated bins. The binned genomes were assigned to taxa following the procedure proposed by Stewart et al. [38] using the MAGpy [39] program. The phylogenetic tree of bins was built based on a concatenated protein sequence alignment using PhyloPhlAn (version 3.0.60) [40] and was annotated through iTOL (version 5, https://itol.embl.de) [41]. The relative abundance of individual taxa was measured by mapping the clean reads against binned scaffolds after a normalization step based on the size of the relevant genome bins.

Before functional annotation, gene prediction of metagenomic contigs or bins was performed. Protein-coding sequences (CDSs) from coassembled metagenomic contigs were predicted using Prodigal (version 2.6.3) with the option –p meta [42]. The CDSs, rRNAs, and tRNAs of each metagenomic bin were predicted using the Prokka (version 1.13) [43] included in the metaWRAP [44] pipeline, with default parameters.

To assign the microbial sources of lignocellulose degradation-related genes, all protein sequences identified as lignocellulose-degrading CAZymes and lignocellulose-binding modules were searched against the NCBI non-redundant (NR) protein database (ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast/db/, March 2021) using DIAMOND (version 0.9.24.125) [48] with an E-value cutoff of 0.0001. Then, the DIAMOND outputs were imported into MEGAN (version 6.21.5) [49] for taxonomic assignment on the basis of the lowest common ancestor (LCA) algorithm. The Wilcoxon test was employed to compare the sequence identity differences of lignocellulose degradation-related proteins between the midgut and hindgut microbiome sample groups.

To understand the lignocellulose degradation mechanism at the holobiont level, PBL gene transcripts in the gut were determined by transcriptome sequencing. After adapter trimming and quality filtering, a total of 104,357,624 and 134,887,484 high-quality clean reads, encompassing 13,044,703,000 and 20,171,214,779 bp of sequences, were generated from midgut and hindgut libraries, respectively. After alignment to the PB reference genome, a total of 8505 genes were identified to be expressed in the midgut and hindgut (Table
1). Among these, 8391 genes were expressed in the midgut, 8159 genes were expressed in the hindgut, and 8045 of them were expressed in both the midgut and hindgut (FPKM > 0, Additional file 2: Table S2).

For PBL gut metagenome sequencing, we obtained 1,643,212,636 and 1,985,361,688 high-quality clean reads from midgut and hindgut samples, respectively, encompassing 165,332,536,581 base pairs (bp) and 199,652,618,725 bp of sequences. These were assembled into 1,337,306 contigs coding for 2,184,816 genes in the midgut and 3,930,676 contigs coding for 6,438,643 genes in the hindgut (Table
1).

To examine whether a unique lignocellulose-degrading microbial community was enriched in the PBL gut, taxonomic distribution based on the reads from midgut and hindgut metagenome samples was analyzed at the species level (Additional file 3: Table S3). Consistent with our previous analysis based on 16S rRNA gene pyrosequencing [24], the microbial composition of the PBL midgut and hindgut was similar, but the relative abundance was different. Our taxonomic profiling analysis indicated that the microbial communities of the midgut and hindgut were composed of six and ten phyla, respectively (> 0.1% abundance). The phyla Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, and Proteobacteria were the predominant bacteria in the hindgut, accounting for approximately 80% of the hindgut microbial communities. In contrast, Firmicutes and Proteobacteria were the most abundant phyla in the midgut, accounting for 76.31% of the midgut microbial communities found in this work. In addition to the above phyla, Fusobacteria (8.14%) and Elusimicrobia (6.25%) were also abundant in the hindgut but were not detected in the midgut microbial communities (Fig.
1A). At the family level, 26 and 23 families (> 0.1% abundance) were detected in the midgut and hindgut microbial communities, respectively (Additional file 3: Table S3). Bacillaceae from the phylum Firmicutes was the most abundant family in both the midgut and hindgut, accounting for 50.44% and 33.24% of the microbial communities, respectively. Bacteroidaceae from the phylum Bacteroidetes was abundant in the hindgut, accounting for 23.25% of the microbial communities; however, it represented only 0.01% in the midgut. These data suggested that many bacterial species were enriched in the hindgut.

To identify CAZy modules from the PBL holobiont, the coding genes from the PB genome and PBL gut transcriptome and metagenome were screened against the CAZy database (http://www.cazy.org). The results indicated that a total of 344 CAZy families were identified in the PBL holobiont (Additional file 4: Table S4). For the host, a total of 700 CAZy modules from 89 CAZy families were identified in the genome, and 149 CAZy modules from 58 CAZy families were confirmed to be expressed in the gut, where 149 modules were expressed in the midgut and 142 were expressed in the hindgut (FPKM > 0, Additional file 5: Table S5). Among these modules, 45 modules were expressed at a significantly higher level in the midgut than in the hindgut, while 17 were expressed at a significantly higher level in the hindgut than in the midgut (p < 0.05, Additional file 5: Table S5). For the PBL gut microbiome, a total of 166,020 CAZy modules from 343 CAZy families were identified, including 40,338 CAZy modules from the midgut microbiome and 125,682 CAZy modules from the hindgut microbiome, accounting for 1.76% and 1.75% of the total genes in the midgut and hindgut gene catalogs, respectively.

CAZymes often display a modular structure with noncatalytic modules, i.e., CBMs, appended to the adjacent enzymatic modules. In the PBL holobiont, we identified 73 CBM families with 26,662 modules in the microbiome and 269 modules in the host. In addition to CBMs, 15,731 S-layer homology domains (SLHs) and 1072 cellulosome-binding domains (548 cohesins and 524 dockerins) were also detected and identified as docking modules in the PBL gut microbiome. The presence of these modules suggested the potential for active cellulosome-mediated lignocellulose plant cell wall degradation in the PBL gut.

Then, we focused on the CAZymes known as lignocellulose-degrading enzymes (cellulases, hemicellulases, and ligninases) and CBMs known as lignocellulose-binding modules among all identified CAZy families in the PBL holobiont (Fig.
2; Table
1; Additional file 6: Table S6). In total, 40,117 lignocellulose-degrading CAZymes were identified in the PBL holobiont, including 39,969 modules in the microbiome and 148 modules in the host (33 in the transcriptome) (Additional file 7). These modules were from 78 lignocellulose-degrading CAZy families composed of 59 GH families, ten CE families, and nine AA families. Additionally, 13,526 lignocellulose-binding modules from 46 CBM families were found in the PBL holobiont, including 13,492 modules in the microbiome and 34 modules in the host (seven in the transcriptome). The hindgut microbiome contained most of the lignocellulose-degrading CAZymes and lignocellulose-binding modules, representing 74.10% (N=29,642) and 81.34% (N=10,974), respectively.

Hemicellulose is a polysaccharide formed from monomeric sugars and sugar acids linked together by β-1,4- and β-1,3-glycosidic bonds [51]. Therefore, compared with that of cellulose, the degradation of hemicellulose requires a more extensive enzymatic arsenal. The current data showed that hemicellulases were the most abundant lignocellulose-degrading CAZymes in the PBL holobiont, representing 87.24%, 89.47%, and 70.27% of the identified LDMs in the midgut microbiome, hindgut microbiome, and host, respectively. Among these hemicellulase families, fifty-seven (ten CE families and 47 GH families) were identified in the microbiome, and twelve (one CE family and 11 GH families) were identified in the gut transcriptome (Fig.
2; Additional file 6: Table S6). Xylan is the main carbohydrate in hemicellulose. The functional prediction of the enzymatic activities demonstrated a multifunctional xylanolytic enzyme system present in the PBL microbiome. As shown in Fig.
3, xylan hydrolysis is involved in several enzymatic hydrolysis processes. First, the xylan backbone is randomly cleaved by endoxylanase (EC 3.2.1.8), and in the PBL microbiome, 1101 endoxylanase modules were identified, with 79.65% of them present in the hindgut microbiome. Then, the xylose polymer is broken down to its monomeric form by the action of β-xylosidase (exoxylanase, EC 3.2.1.37); 272 modules from the midgut microbiome and 1058 modules from the hindgut microbiome were predicted to have exoxylanase catalytic activity. In the PBL microbiome, various enzymes with debranching activity were also predicted, which are essential for xylan hydrolyzation [13, 52], including 137 α-glucuronidases (EC 3.2.1.139) and 460 acetylxylan esterases (EC 3.1.1.72) responsible for removal of the acetyl and phenolic side branches, 806 α-L-arabinofuranosidases (EC 3.2.1.55) catalyzing the removal of side groups, 152 feruloyl esterases (EC 3.1.1.73) cleaving the ester bonds present on xylan, and 672 α-galactosidases (EC 3.2.1.22) catalyzing hydrolysis of the terminal α-galactosyl moieties. Additionally, in softwood, mannan is the major component of hemicellulose. In the PBL gut microbiome, a total of 181 endomannosidase (EC 3.2.1.78) and 121 exomannosidase (EC 3.2.1.25) modules were also identified for mannan hemicellulose degradation. For the PBL host, only one α-galactosidase module (GH27) and one exomannosidase module (GH2) were identified in the gut transcriptome (Additional file 8: Table S7).

Genes encoding lignocellulose-degrading CAZymes and lignocellulose-binding modules were searched against the NCBI NR protein database to assign taxonomic origin. In total, 12,280 genes from the midgut microbiome and 38,287 genes from the hindgut microbiome were analyzed. The results showed that 11,095 (90.35%) genes from the midgut microbiome and 33,132 (86.54%) genes from the hindgut microbiome were assigned to prokaryotic species.

When focused on sequence novelty, our results indicated that most of the lignocellulose degradation-related genes from the PBL gut microbiome were novel. Sequence identity analysis indicated that only 5.48% of the predicted lignocellulose degradation-related proteins were highly conserved and shared more than 90% identity with the best-hit homologs in the NCBI NR database. Regarding the gut compartment, the lignocellulose-degrading enzymes and lignocellulose-binding modules enriched in the hindgut were more novel than those in the midgut. The Wilcoxon test demonstrated that the amino acid identity of LDM proteins in the hindgut was significantly lower than that in the midgut (p < 0.001, Fig.
1C), suggesting the potential for discovering valuable and novel enzyme resources for lignocellulose degradation from the PBL hindgut.

To further analyze the lignocellulolytic potential of the community at the individual microbial species level, metagenomic contig binning was performed to reconstruct the genomes from PBL gut microbial communities. In this investigation, a total of 2526 metagenomic bins were obtained (Additional file 9: Table S8), and 48.48% and 54.61% of the midgut and hindgut metagenomic reads mapped back to these bins, respectively. Completeness assessment analysis showed that 1110 bins were substantially complete (≥ 70% completeness) and that 574 bins were near complete (≥ 90%). Then, 164 substantially complete bins with low contamination levels (≤ 5%) [37] and high relative abundance were selected for subsequent analyses (Additional file 10: Fig. S1; Additional file 11: Table S9). The phylogenetic reconstruction of these 164 bins indicated that Firmicutes was the dominant phylum and comprised 56.10% (N=92) of all bins, followed by Bacteroidetes (N=21), Actinobacteria (N=13), and Proteobacteria (N=9). To evaluate the lignocellulose degradation potential of the 164 selected bins, the lignocellulose-degrading enzyme and lignocellulose-binding module of bins were analyzed. The data showed that most of these bins (N=156) possessed LDMs, and 71 of them were specifically notable because of their possibility of independent lignocellulose degradation, based on the possession of endo-hemicellulases, exo-hemicellulases, and debranching enzymes as well as endoglucanases and β-glucosidases.

Regarding the taxonomic assignment of these bins with independent lignocellulose degradation capability, the results indicated that more than half of these bins could be novel species. Among the 71 bins, 36 bins were assigned only to the above-species level, including 19 at the phylum level, one at the order level, eight at the family level, and eight at the genus level, suggesting the presence of valuable novel microbial species resources in the PBL gut microbiota for lignocellulosic biomass conversion.

The highly efficient lignocellulose degradation mechanism of the larvae of the saprophagous insect PB has recently gained increasing research interest due to their potential not only in farming edible insects but also in biotechnological applications. Recently, to better promote PBL biological research and understand the genetic basis of PBL biological characteristics, we sequenced and assembled the first PB genome [25]. The subsequent gene annotation showed that PBL are not able to complete the process of lignocellulose degradation by themselves, indicating that the highly efficient lignocellulose degradation in PBL may be attributed to their microbial symbionts. In this work, we investigated for the first time the complete enzyme repertoire for lignocellulose degradation on the scale of holobiont in PBL. Combining the host gut transcriptome with the gut metagenomic data, we established a complete gut reference gene catalog that allowed us to further characterize both endogenous and microbial enzymes associated with the breakdown of lignocellulose in the PBL gut.

Regarding the microbiota, further taxonomic assignment at the individual microbial species level proved the existence of diverse and novel lignocellulosic microflora present in the PBL gut. A total of 156 high-quality metagenomic bins showing lignocellulolytic potential were reconstructed in this work, and as expected, 70% of these bins were associated with species belonging to Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes. Among these, 71 bins were identified with independent lignocellulose degradation capability and most (50.70%) of these genomes represent previously unsequenced strains and species, demonstrating discovery of novel bacterial species associated with lignocellulose degradation in the PBL microbiota. To assess the reliability of the metagenome binning results in this work, for 35 bins resolvable to the species level, we collected the public genomes of the same species from the NCBI database and analyzed the potential of lignocellulose degradation for these published genomes. The data indicated that the LDM genes were also present in all these published genomes (Additional file 14: Table S12). Some of the species these bins assigned to were isolated from known lignocellulolytic organisms, such as ruminants or termites, and have been proven to have lignocellulose degradation capability. For instance, Bin-2127 was identified as a strain of Bacteroides faecis, a species isolated from human feces and confirmed to be a decomposer of various mono/polysaccharides [69]. Bin-2127 possessed the highest number (273) of LDMs, which was similar to the 189 LDM genes in the published B. faecis strain genome (GCA_000226135.1). Another Bacteroidetes bin (Bin-821) was assigned to Sporocytophaga myxococcoides, a species that has been regarded as a highly efficient carbohydrate metabolizer possessing a wide array of cellulolytic enzymes [70]. The annotation of its public genome (GCA_000426725.1) revealed a complete set of endoglucanases, exoglucanases, and β-glucosidases for cellulose degradation. Among Firmicutes species, Bin-1076 was assigned to Clostridium cellulosi, Bin-1067 to Clostridium sartagoforme, Bin-526 to Herbinix luporum, and Bin-2333 to Ruminococcus bromii, which are also capable of utilizing various carbon sources, including inulin, mannitol, sucrose, crystalline cellulose, or plant polysaccharides [71–74]. These bins and corresponding public genomes also possessed a high number of cellulase and hemicellulase genes (Additional file 14: Table S12). Overall, the consistency of LDM genes between the reconstructed bins and the corresponding species’ genomes further illustrated the representativeness of the PBL metagenomic features we demonstrated in this study, as well as the research value and application prospects of the PBL lignocellulose degradation model.

In summary, a comprehensive reference catalog of gut microbial genes and host gut transcriptomic genes was first established in this work for PBL at the holobiont level. The investigation not only elucidates the microbial species that contribute to lignocellulose degradation but also reveals a new association between host and symbiotic microorganisms in the PBL holobiont. The traditional hologenome theory mainly focuses on the genetic wealth of diverse microbial symbionts and suggests that they can play an important role both in the adaptation and evolution of hosts. However, in the PBL holobiont, we illustrated that the host’s organic functional complementation may play a more durable and stable role for the holobiont in lignocellulose degradation and may facilitate its survival and multiplication in the ecosystem. Therefore, this discovery will expand the knowledge of holobionts and open a new beginning in the theory of holobionts.



Publisher’s Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

