The Interface of Vibrio cholerae and the Gut Microbiome

The bacterium Vibrio cholerae is the etiologic agent of the severe human diarrheal disease cholera. The gut microbiome, or the native community of microorganisms found in the human gastrointestinal tract, is increasingly being recognized as a factor in driving susceptibility to infection, in vivo fitness, and host interactions of this pathogen. Here, we review a subset of the emerging studies in how gut microbiome structure and microbial function are able to drive V. cholerae virulence gene regulation, metabolism, and modulate host immune responses to cholera infection and vaccination. Improved mechanistic understanding of commensal–pathogen interactions offers new perspectives in the design of prophylactic and therapeutic approaches for cholera control.

Vibrio cholerae is a Gram-negative bacterium and the etiologic agent of the severe human diarrheal disease cholera. Cholera affects millions of individuals yearly, and causes over 100,000 deaths per year.1 The voluminous watery diarrhea and vomiting characteristic of cholera can rapidly lead to severe dehydration, hypovolemic shock, and death if left untreated, with case-fatality rates in excess of 50%.2 While the development of oral rehydration therapy has dramatically reduced the treated case fatality, cholera continues to represent a severe global health and economic challenge,3 and thus demands better prophylactic and therapeutic interventions.

Recent advances in gnotobiotic animal models with defined microbial content and multi-omics approaches in both human and animal studies have dramatically expanded our ability to examine the diversity and function of these microbes in the intestine, and to mechanistically dissect drivers of microbiome diversity and how microbiome diversity in turn interacts with invading microbes such as V. cholerae. This work suggests that differences in the microbiome, which is highly diverse from individual to individual, may drive personalized outcomes to V. cholerae infection through multiple mechanisms, and define several emerging areas of commensal-pathogen-host interaction research, including (i) microbiota-mediated manipulation of chemical signaling in the gut, (ii) the role of diet and nutrition in inter-microbial interactions during infection, and (iii) modulation of host immunity after infection and vaccination. A better understanding of the mechanistic underpinnings of these interactions may have profound implications on the design of cholera prophylaxis and treatment. Here we will focus on just a subset on the rapidly expanding field of how inter-bacterial and host–microbe interactions with commensal microbes influence V. cholerae behavior, pathogenesis, and host response to infection (Figure 1).

Tractable animal models for V. cholerae are essential in order to define the underlying molecular mechanisms contributing to in vivo pathogen fitness and behavior. It was not until 1954 that a successful cholera animal model was developed in infant rabbits, which under certain conditions were highly susceptible to V. cholerae infection leading to diarrhea and death, the most relevant clinical outcomes.14 The infant rabbit model is still used today to model the next generation of cholera vaccines,15 and allows for the study of gross pathological characteristics of diarrhea and death. However, as the small intestinal tissue in infant rabbits is not fully developed, the ligated ileal loop adult rabbit model was developed to examine Vibrio-host interactions in developed small intestines with mature immune tissues and with reduced peristalsis, though this requires considerable surgical expertise.16–18 The most commonly used V. cholerae model of animal colonization and infection is the infant mouse model, which is accessible and offers the advantage of similar virulence gene expression and requirements for colonization compared to humans.19 Notably, the infant mouse model was influential in elucidating the essential role of toxin-coregulated pili (TCP) during the pathogenesis of cholera as evidenced by several key studies.20–23 Additionally, the suckling mouse model was used to effectively examine morphological changes of V. cholerae in vivo24 as well as additional colonization factors such as GbpA, which were found to modulate V. cholerae attachment to epithelial cells.25 Although suckling mice do not display diarrhea, this model remains a very important in vivo model system for examining V. cholerae colonization factors.19,26

An ideal disease model would combine a physiologically and immunologically mature animal with inoculation through the oral route, activation of virulence factors, and subsequent diarrhea. As such, a model does not currently exist, it is necessary to choose the appropriate animal model for the hypotheses being tested. It is also important to note that all these animal systems have very different microbiome structures from that of humans, though mouse systems are much more similar.36 As such, the ability to manipulate microbiomes in a targeted fashion is critical to understanding pathogen-commensal interactions in a colonization or infection model. Several studies, reviewed below, have employed both gnotobiotic and antibiotic-treatment techniques to establish human-associated microbes in various animal colonization models, to determine the effects of commensal microbes on V. cholerae infection outcome.

Until recently, the impact of cholera on the human gut microbiome was much better understood than the role of the gut microbiome on V. cholerae infection outcomes. The profuse watery diarrhea associated with cholera has long been associated with changes in commensal microbial populations; culture-dependent studies have shown that cholera leads to a multi-log reduction in non-Vibrio bacteria during acute diarrhea compared to convalescent populations.37 Recent studies by Hsiao et al. using deep sequencing of fecal 16S ribosomal RNA gene amplicons examined the fecal microbiomes of adult cholera patients in Bangladesh from clinical presentation to 3 months convalescence after the end of diarrhea.7 In concordance with culturing studies, the diversity of the gut microbiome during cholera dropped dramatically during acute disease, becoming overwhelmingly dominated by Streptococci, Enterococci, and Proteobacteria. Species more characteristic of healthy human gut microbiomes were detected as very low abundance reservoirs during disease, but over the course of convalescence expanded to reestablish the gut in a manner similar to microbial succession, the ordered process of microbial colonization seen from infancy. Several other culture-independent studies have demonstrated that this transient dysbiosis in microbiome structure seen in cholera can also be caused by malnutrition,8 and diarrhea of multiple etiologies including rotavirus and pathogenic Escherichia coli infection.9,38 These environmental insults can be common in cholera-endemic areas and thus potentially drive a reinforcing cycle of microbiome-dependent vulnerability to infection.

In addition to causing diarrhea that disrupts native gut microbial communities, V. cholerae can also directly compete with commensals through the use of contact-dependent killing via the T6SS.39,40 T6SS delivers toxin to ‘prey’ cells by puncturing the bacterial membrane using a spike and tube structure that also shares functional homology with the T4 bacteriophage, while T6SS-encoding cells are protected via the production of cognate immune proteins.41–44 In vitro, V. cholerae is capable of reducing S. typhimurium and E. coli survival up to 105 fold using T6SS.45 In vivo, mutations in T6SS have driven colonization defects compared to wild-type in suckling mice,44,46 infant rabbits,44 and Drosophila.47 Zhao et al. showed that V. cholerae was able to directly attack host commensal E. coli in the suckling mouse model of infection; commensal E. coli load was lowered by ~300 fold in the wild-type group compared to a vipA− T6SS mutant.48 Interestingly, T6SS-mediated killing of E. coli led to an additional upregulation of tcp and ctx virulence genes during infection compared to mice lacking T6SS target microbes via an as-yet undefined mechanism. Separately from contact-dependent T6SS killing, V. cholerae can also use T6SS to increase host gut contractility to expel resident bacterial species, for example the expulsion of Aeromonas veronii in a zebrafish colonization model.49 Taken together, these findings suggest that in vivo T6SS interactions with the microbiota play a complex role in inter-bacterial competition during infection and driving V. cholerae fitness in the gut.

Only a limited number of host genetic factors have been associated with susceptibility and resistance to cholera. The ABH blood group antigens found on the surface of numerous cell types, and specifically the O phenotype that expresses an unmodified H antigen, have been associated with increased severity of cholera symptoms. Indeed, the prevalence of O blood group is low in the Ganges River Delta, a historically significant focal center of cholera infection, suggesting that cholera-associated selective pressures may have driven evolutionary changes in human populations.50 A growing body of work, however, has focused on the gut microbiome, the co-evolving native microbial community of the gut. Limitations in the ability to define, culture, and manipulate microbial populations in animal systems have stymied detailed molecular characterization of microbe–microbe and microbe–host interactions in the context of infection and colonization. However, a growing body of work, leveraging advances in germ-free animal systems and multi-omic approaches applied to commensal microbial communities, has elucidated several molecular mechanisms underlying the role of human microbiome structure in susceptibility to V. cholerae infection.

Taken together, the emerging data suggest that disruption of the microbiome by other infectious diarrheas or malnutrition may be a risk factor for cholera, but emphasize that modulation of disease susceptibility by commensal microorganisms is not strictly a dichotomous comparison between “normal” and “diseased,” but rather varies on an interpersonal basis, potentially as the result of multiple specific drivers. Importantly, experimental manipulations of the microbiome, where specific microbial taxa can be added or removed, allows for determination of causal effects on colonization/infection outcomes. In human populations, the effects of specific commensal microbes can be confounded by other factors associated with major environmental insults to microbiome structure, for example, diarrhea from different infections, or malnutrition. Some studies have indicated modified immune responses to V. cholerae as a function of helminth co-infection.53 While malnutrition itself has not been significantly associated with cholera susceptibility,54 the numerous other effects of malnutrition on intestinal and immune function may have microbiome-independent effects on infection outcome.55

V. cholerae is a native organism of aquatic environments such as brackish water and estuaries, often complexed with marine organisms such as zooplankton (Figure 1).56–59 In the aquatic reservoir, V. cholerae is often found within biofilms that enable attachment to nutritive substrates such as plankton exoskeletons.58,59 These biofilm structures also represent an important host infection mechanism60 as biofilm-associated V. cholerae are much more acid-tolerant than planktonic cells, which are essential for passage through the stomach acid barrier at the beginning of human infection.61 Upon transition into the gut, V. cholerae undergoes a carefully orchestrated set of gene expression changes in order to adapt to host-specific environmental stresses and cause disease. This transcriptional program is triggered by a series of environmental signals such as temperature, osmolarity, oxygen concentration, and exposure to host-specific molecules such as bile acids, and leads to the elaboration of a number of virulence factors critical to colonization, persistence, and pathology (Figure 2). The two major virulence determinants of V. cholerae are Cholera Toxin (CT), which is responsible for the characteristic diarrhea of cholera, and the Toxin-Coregulated Pilus (TCP), which is required for colonization of the intestinal mucosa in both humans and mice.22,62 CT is encoded by the ctxAB genes on the lysogenic CTXΦ bacteriophage,63 and TCP serves both as the receptor for CTXΦ63,64 and in microcolony formation at the intestinal epithelium.65 TCP biosynthetic genes, including that of the primary structural subunit TcpA and accessory colonization factor (acf) genes and several transcriptional activators of virulence gene production, are found on a 40-kb Vibrio pathogenicity island.66 Both ctxAB and tcpA are activated by the activity of the AraC/XylS-family transcriptional regulator ToxT,67–70 which binds to a degenerate 13-bp DNA sequence known as the ‘toxbox’ in target promoters.71 Several factors comprise a complex regulatory path to ToxT expression. ToxR was the first identified positive regulator of V. cholerae virulence,72 and together with the regulator TcpP activates transcription of toxT.73–75 The expression of tcpP is in turn regulated by the transcriptional regulators AphA and AphB, which cooperatively binds to the tcpP promoter, while AphB is able to enhance the toxR transcription.76

A growing body of work has identified several microbiota-driven factors that influence this tightly controlled program of virulence gene regulation during infection, thus providing a mechanistic basis for the role of microbiome variation in driving divergent outcomes of cholera infection. We will review just a subset of this work, focusing on direct interactions with V. cholerae.

Quorum sensing (QS) is a bacterial communication system that uses the production and sensing of diffusible signaling autoinducer (AI) molecules to monitor intra- and inter-species population density, allowing coordinated regulation of effector functions by microbial populations (Figures 2, Figure 3a).77,78 In V. cholerae, QS is capable of repressing the expression of virulence- and biofilm-associated genes at high cell density (HCD), while at low cell density (LCD), such as during early infection, QS is inactive and virulence gene and biofilm biosynthetic gene expression is active. At LCD, the V. cholerae QS regulatory system acts to phosphorylate the regulator LuxO via a phosphorelay protein LuxU.79,80 Phospho-LuxO is then able to activate the expression of a set of small non-coding regulatory RNAs, Qrr1-4 (quorum regulatory RNAs)81 that employ a number of mechanisms to suppress QS gene activation, including the hapR gene encoding the master QS regulator HapR, and activate production of the virulence activator AphA.82 At HCD, when autoinducer concentrations are high, LuxO becomes de-phosphorylated and Qrrs are not produced, allowing for the expression of HapR. HapR is then able to repress virulence gene expression, via direct repression of aphA, as well as the expression of biofilm biosynthetic genes.81,83,84

These recent advances in studying cross-species QS signaling in the gut, and the ability of these pathways to interfere with key V. cholerae infectious processes such as TCP biogenesis and biofilm production suggest that further characterization of QS in the microbiome may yield novel clinical therapeutic and prophylactic targets for cholera management.

In addition to QS systems, the action of commensal microbes can affect the levels and function of several other components used by V. cholerae to appropriately time virulence gene activity in the gut. One of these major virulence-regulatory components is bile, a digestive secretion that aids in emulsification and solubilization of dietary lipids. Bile is a complex mixture of compounds comprising bile acids, cholesterol, phospholipids, and immunoglobulins.122 The synthesis of the predominant bile component, bile acids, occurs in the liver from cholesterol, often in amino-acid conjugated forms containing taurine and glycine. Bile is stored in the gall bladder and secreted into the small intestine in response to food intake. The local pH of the intestine means that bile acids are often found as primary bile salts and can be further modified by the action of gut bacteria into secondary forms.123–125 Up to 95% of secreted bile acids are reabsorbed within the distal ileum and passed via portal circulation back to the liver to be re-conjugated to amino acids and re-secreted.126,127

A combination of microbiota-driven effects on chemical signals in the gut may also be important for the regulation of T6SS-mediated pathogen-commensal competition. Several studies have demonstrated a link between QS and regulation of T6SS; HapR directly regulates T6SS genes143 and indirectly through the action of QstR,144 and QS sRNAs can repress T6SS-related gene expression.95 T6SS regulation is also affected by several processes that intersect with the functions of the microbiota. Bile acids are also able to regulate T6SS gene expression, with deoxycholic acid, a secondary bile acid generated via microbial 7-α-dehydroxylation of cholic acid, shown to inhibit assembly of the T6SS apparatus.145 Components of mucus, the protective glycoprotein coat at the intestinal mucosa, are able to de-repress T6SS gene expression.145 Since numerous commensal microbes have been shown to metabolize mucus in the gut environment (see below), and the role of microbes in bile metabolism has been intensively investigated, complex microbiota-driven mechanisms may thus serve as triggers for the control of inter-microbial killing mechanisms during infection.

Environmental factors, especially diet, play a dominant role in shaping the human gut microbiota.146 Long-term diet shapes the composition of the gut microbiota: high protein and high fat diet (western diet) lead to a Bacteroides dominated enterotype, while the high carbohydrate diet yields a Prevotella dominated enterotype.147 Short-term dietary intervention of shifting macronutrients is also able to dramatically alter the structure and function of the gut microbiome in several human studies.148,149 For example, a high fat diet caused an increased secretion of bile acids, enriching for bile resistant microbial taxa such as Bilophila wadsworthia, Alistipes putredinis, and Bacteroides sp., and the expression of bacterial genes encoding bile salt hydrolases, compared to a plant-based high fiber diet.149 Some studies have used targeted dietary manipulation to drive the expansion of specific taxa within the gut microbiome,150 but despite the importance of understanding dietary contributions to microbiome structure and V. cholerae metabolism during infection, this area of research remains comparatively underdeveloped.

V. cholerae has evolved the ability to vary the regulation of a variety of virulence and metabolic genes to better colonize and compete with resident gut microbes. While V. cholerae is able to rapidly grow to high cell density during infection, the nutritional requirements of this pathogen in vivo have not been well defined. Several studies have shown that central metabolism affects colonization and virulence gene regulation. Deletion of edd, which encodes 6-phosphogluconate dehydratase in the Entner-Doudoroff (ED) pathway for sugar catabolism, causes the decreased expressions of virulence genes ctxA and tcpA, and the regulator toxT, as well as diminished colonization in suckling mice and reduced fluid accumulation in a ligated rabbit ileal loop model.151 Activation of the ED pathway can inhibit biofilm formation in vitro.151 Gluconeogenesis, which converts the non-carbohydrate precursors to glucose, also affects V. cholerae pathogenesis. The phosphoenolpyruvate synthase (PpsA) converts pyruvate into phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP), and the phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PckA) converts oxaloacetate into PEP. Deletions of the ppsA and pckA genes resulted in decreased V. cholerae colonization in both adult and infant mouse models, and decreased motility and biofilm formation.152 This may be especially important in the context of competition with members of the gut microbiota, as colonization defects in these mutants were worsened by approximately ten-fold in the presence of commensal microbes. In vitro, manipulation of TCA by inhibition or supplementation with citrate has been shown to increase toxT expression and acetate secretion under aerobic conditions.153 In vivo studies demonstrated V. cholerae can use citrate as a carbon source during infection and to improve fitness in the presence of commensal microbes. Supplementation of citrate in an adult mouse colonization model led to a loss of fitness of a citrate fermentation mutant (ΔcitAB) compared to wild-type in the presence of gut microbes, and promoted microbial growth in general in the small intestine.154 The role of general nutrient availability is also highlighted by several studies focusing on the role of cyclic AMP (cAMP) receptor protein (CRP) on the regulation of various virulence-associated pathways in V. cholerae. In the absence of preferred nutrient sources, possibly via inter-microbial competition in vivo, CRP-cAMP is able to activate components of the T6SS.155 The cAMP-CRP complex also negatively regulates the expression of CT and TCP,72 and directly binds and negatively regulates the promoter of the virulence activator genes tcpPH.156 Chromatin immunoprecipitation mapping of CRP binding sites suggests a substantial overlap of CRP-regulated genes and the ToxR regulon.157 These findings suggest that complex commensal microbial communities in vivo are able to modulate nutrient pools available for V. cholerae, which may have profound influences on the regulation of virulence associated factors during infection.

V. cholerae is a facultative anaerobic bacterium, capable of adapting to fluctuating oxygen levels. V. cholerae in vivo expansion is driven largely by aerobic metabolism, consistent with observations that V. cholerae preferentially replicates within the epithelial crypt spaces with greater oxygenation that enables oxidative metabolic pathways.158 V. cholerae uses pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) to expand in the small intestine, rather than pyruvate formate-lyase (PFL) mediated anaerobic metabolism to convert pyruvate to acetyl coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA), which provides growth support during infection.159 Moreover, the cholera toxin (CTX)-induced increase of cAMP can induce host cells to switch to anaerobic respiration, leading to host reduced consumption of oxygen.160 However, under hypoxic conditions, V. cholerae is able to employ several alternative electron acceptors (AEA) such as fumarate, trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO), and NO3－.161 Many enteric pathogens contain the NO3－ reduction pathway that can convert NO3－ to N2 gas or NH4+,162 but V. cholerae contains only the nitrate reductase Nap and lacks the downstream reductases,163 leading to NO2－ accumulation that can inhibit glycolysis. However, V. cholerae is capable of undergoing NO3－ respiration using pH-dependent responses. Under alkaline conditions typically found in the small intestine, V. cholerae can reduce nitrate to support growth, and NO3－ respiration may play an integral role in interspecies competition against commensal organisms.164 Under low pH co-culture conditions in vitro where V. cholerae NO3－ respiration is inactive, V. cholerae was outcompeted by E. coli K12, which retains NO3－ respiration activity at this pH, while under alkaline hypoxic conditions where V. cholerae NO3－ respiration is intact, the pathogen efficiently competed with E. coli. The small molecule TMAO has been shown to have a positive correlation with increased risk of cardiovascular disease165 and metabolic syndrome,166 and can be produced by the metabolism of commensal microbes. Gut microbes can affect TMAO levels through the fermentation of choline or L-carnitine to the intermediate compound trimethylamine (TMA), followed by oxidization of TMA by flavin monooxygenases to TMAO in the liver.167 The addition of TMAO to an infant mouse model of V. cholerae infection promoted CT production during colonization, a process that accelerated in the presence of reactive oxygen species (Figure 4).168 Since several commensal gut microbes have been implicated in the accumulation of TMAO,169,170 the differential ability of different microbiomes to affect TMAO levels may thus be a metabolic factor in promoting or inhibiting V. cholerae pathogenesis.

Short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), produced by the gut microbiota fermenting non-digestible dietary fibers and resistant starch, have been highlighted as key-signaling molecules that connect gut microbiome and host health, including inflammatory bowel diseases, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, as well as pathogen resistance.148,171–173 SCFAs play a marked role in maintenance of gut barrier function, immune homeostasis, anti-inflammatory effects, and also act as energy sources for epithelial cells.171 Anaerobic fermentation of dietary fibers by the gut microbiota produces acetate, propionate and butyrate, which represent 90–95% of the SCFAs in the intestine. The animal-based diet results in a higher concentration of the branched chain fatty acids, such as isovalerate and isobutyrate, which are mainly derived from the amino acids valine, leucine, and isoleucine.149,174 The production of SCFAs by the gut microbiota may benefit cholera treatment via improvement of sodium and water absorption, and the promotion of host immune response to cholera toxin (Figure 4).175 The application of the unabsorbed carbohydrates that can be fermented by gut microbes has also been shown to improve cholera management: addition of maize starch resistant to digestion but able to be fermented to the standard glucose-based oral rehydration therapy reduced the fecal fluid loss and shortened the duration of diarrhea in one human study.176 Using a germ-free mouse model with gut microbiota derived from undernourished Bangladeshi children, Di Luccia et al. conducted a combined prebiotic and probiotic intervention that successfully improved mucosal IgA responses to cholera toxin, associated with the level of SCFAs.177 Another recent study with murine commensal microbes demonstrated that antibiotic treatment of animals led to a depletion of colonization-resistant taxa such as Bacteroides vulgatus and V. cholerae-inhibitory microbiota-derived SCFA metabolites, and an ablation of mucus catabolism.178

To adapt to colonizing in a mammalian environment, the gut microbiota evolved characteristics to maximize access to food. When pathogens invade the nutrient-limiting intestinal habitat, they have to compete with the predominant residents for resources (Figure 4). One example is the competition for amino acids, an essential macronutrient. The enteric pathogen Citrobacter rodentium is forced to activate amino acid biosynthesis pathways to survive in conventionally raised mice, but not in germ-free or antibiotic-treated animals, highlighting the importance of nutrient-competition and cross-feeding between pathogens and commensal microbes.179 At the intestinal mucosa, the thick layer of mucus glycoprotein serves as a barrier to reduce bacterial access to epithelial cells, but also as an important nutrient source for gut microbes. Mucus can serve as a carbohydrate reservoir, providing a variety of carbohydrate nutrients to bacteria, such as N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc), N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc), galactose, fucose, and sialic acid (N-acetylneuraminic acid, Neu5Ac).180 Mucin degradation is also associated with the pathogenicity of enteric invaders.159 Toxigenic strains of V. cholerae contain the nan cluster on the pathogenicity island VPI2, which allows the use of sialic acid as a carbon source.181 Inactivation of sialic acid utilization caused a decreased colonization of V. cholerae in an infant mouse model,182 while the mucus components GlcNAc and NeuAc promote V. cholerae motility.183 Genes involved in the metabolism of those mucin glycans can be found in gut microbial commensals, such as species from Bacteroides, Lactobacillus, Bifidobacterium, and Akkermansia muciniphila.159,184,185 Thus, the ability of different assemblages of commensal bacteria to metabolize mucin may be an important driver of V. cholerae fitness in the gut. Prior work highlights the potential for this interaction; the presence of mucin glycan utilizers in the gut such as A. muciniphila, Bacteroides intestinihominis, and the generalist carbohydrate utilizers Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, and Bacteroides caccae can increase C. rodentium susceptibility due to the enhanced mucus degradation,186 while other studies have used consortia of commensal metabolizes of mucus components to deny these resources to C. difficile and thus inhibit colonization.187

Vertebrates have also evolved mechanisms to tightly regulate metal levels that either restrict access to the nutrient metals or direct excess metals that can be toxic to the enteric pathogens, known as nutritional immunity.203 Trace metals are essential for approximately one-third of proteins, acting either as the cofactor or as a prosthetic group for essential enzymes.204 Those essential metals, such as Fe, Zn, Mn and Cu are required for bacterial pathogens to invade the host.203 Competition for these metal ions is an important factor in the invasion and colonization of complex microbial environments by gut pathogens. Deletion of zinc utilization genes or zinc-regulated genes limits V. cholerae growth and also causes colonization defects, and these in vivo effects are greatly exacerbated in the presence of the gut microbiota during colonization of adult mice.205 Calcium does not affect virulence directly, rather it enhances bile salt-dependent virulence activation through modulating the dimerization of TcpP, a membrane-bound regulator of virulence gene expression.134 Most Fe in vivo is complexed with heme as a cofactor in the oxygen transport protein hemoglobin. CTX can induce the congestion of the capillaries in the ileum with red blood cells and releases free heme, promoting iron accessibility for V. cholerae.206 Iron supplementation can also alter gut microbiome composition, stimulating the growth of enteropathogenic bacteria, and reducing the abundance of beneficial commensals from genus Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium, thus increasing the risk of diarrhea.207 As further improvements in experimental models of microbiome–pathogen interactions are made, we can expect additional mechanistic studies on macro- and micronutrient competition during infection, and a further delineation of the critical limiting nutrients for V. cholerae growth and population expansion in vivo.

Vaccination is a key preventative strategy for improving health worldwide, and a critical consideration in the success of vaccination strategies and design is ensuring uniformly high immunogenicity and efficacy. However, several studies have demonstrated differences in immune responses to both infection and oral cholera vaccines (OCVs) between different human populations. A recent clinical study compared serological correlates of protection in age-matched North America and Bangladeshi adults who were voluntarily infected with V. cholerae O1 Inaba El Tor N16961. In general, anti-serum antibody responses were predominantly anti-OSP IgA and IgM. Notably, at most timepoints serum anti-CtxB IgA and IgM responses were greater in the naïve North American population than the Bangladeshi participants.208 Vaccines developed for gastrointestinal infections such as cholera and rotavirus exhibit less than favorable responses in developing populations as compared to industrialized countries, particularly in children and elderly populations. Several hypotheses for this variation include maternal IgA protection from breast milk,209 small bowel overgrowth,210 and blood type.211,212 Another key difference in the gut environments of individuals in different geographical contexts is the composition of the gut microbiome,8,11,213 whose important immunomodulatory functions, including in vaccine response, are supported by a large and growing body of literature (Figure 5).177,214–220

Both killed and live oral cholera vaccines have performed less well in populations of developing countries as compared to developed countries, particularly in younger children. The first licensed killed WC oral vaccine was Dukoral in 1991. It consists of recombinant cholera toxin subunit B (CTB) and three strains of inactivated O1 Classical and one strain of O1 El Tor. It showed a 50% efficacy against all age groups in a large field trial in Bangladesh,221 while it resulted in significant vibriocidal titers in 89% of volunteers in the US.222 Another study compared the vibriocidal responses in age-matched Swedish children and although they had a lower baseline titer, there was a greater vibriocidal response.223 Another second widely approved WCK vaccine, Shanchol, consists of a mixture of serotype O139 and O1 strains without rCTB, and is given in a two-dose regimen over 2 weeks. Shanchol has demonstrated safety and immunogenicity in children and adults224 but a broad range of 37%-69% efficacy225 across several studies in cholera-endemic areas. Live attenuated cholera vaccines have also been developed and are considered to be more immunogenic and generate stronger mucosal vaccine responses as compared to WCK vaccines.226 A live attenuated vaccine strain (CVD103-HgR, manufactured as Vaxchora) has been developed, consisting of the V. cholerae O1 classical Inaba strain with 94% of the ctxA gene encoding for the enzymatic subunit of CT deleted, and with a mercury resistance cassette inserted into the gene for hemolysin to aid in identification.227 A single oral dose was found to be safe and immunogenic, with up to 91% protective efficacy, in US and Swiss volunteers,228–230 but exhibited an overall efficacy of 55% in a large-scale field trial in a cholera endemic area.231,232 Development of OCVs is continuing; another promising live-attenuated vaccine is CholeraGarde, consisting of O1 El Tor Inaba with CT deleted. This was safe and immunogenic in US and Bangladeshi adults as well as Bangladeshi toddlers and infants, albeit with lower cholera toxin responses as seen in Bangladesh adults.233–235 Most recently, the Waldor group has developed a live attenuated cholera vaccine based on the wild-type Haiti outbreak strain.15 The live-attenuated strain, HaitiV, has nine modifications that render it to be less virulent but still impart long-term immunity. Their results indicate that HaitiV mediates colonization resistance to wild type V. cholerae when given 24 hours prior to wild-type infection. While long-term protection was not measured, the vaccine exhibits probiotic-like protection,15 and HaitiV elicits strong correlates of protection in offspring of immunized dams, independent of HaitiV colonization.236,237

While an expanding body of work has demonstrated that microbiome structure is able to drive various aspects of V. cholerae pathogenesis and in vivo fitness, the majority of studies demonstrating a microbiota link to vaccine responses has been done with vaccines of other pathogens. Nonetheless, these studies are instructive of the potential for commensal microbe-driven individual variations that might inform future OCV strategies and design. Rotavirus is a prevalent gastrointestinal viral infection that results in significant childhood mortality and is a major component for hospitalized gastroenteritis cases.238 There are currently two main attenuated rotavirus vaccines: RV5 (Rotateq) and RV1 (Rotarix). Rotateq is a pentavalent bovine strain, and Rotarix is a live attenuated monovalent human rotavirus vaccine. Rotateq was very effective in a European population, as it was 98.3% effective against severe rotavirus gastroenteritis.239,240 However, when the clinical efficacy was tested in patients in Bangladesh and Vietnam, the overall efficacy was 64% in Vietnam and 43% in Bangladesh.241 A recent study compared age-matched rotavirus vaccine responders and non-responders in rural Ghana with Dutch infants and showed that vaccine responses were highly associated with gut microbial compositions.242 In particular, there was an increased Streptococcus and reduced Bacteroides species in Ghanaian children with poor responses to rotavirus vaccination compared to the Ghanaian responders and healthy Dutch infants, though whether these microbiome differences were causal of divergent vaccine responses remains to be determined. A subsequent study sought to further define rotavirus vaccine immunogenicity by targeted antibiotic usage in adults.220 While anti-RV IgA titer did not vary over time, treatment with vancomycin led to an increase in Proteobacteria and an increase in anti-RV IgA at day 7.

Several studies have directly implicated microbiota structure in vaccine responses. Oh et al. showed that the murine microbiota is able to drive responses to vaccines in a flagellin-dependent manner; flagellin-sensing by TLR5 is necessary to stimulate immune responses in the trivalent influenza vaccine (TIV).216 TLR5 is not known to be a viral sensor, rather it is known to sense bacterial flagella. Initially, they tested whether TLR5 plays a role in viral vaccine immunity via Tlr5 −/- mice. As compared to the wild-type, there were significant reductions in TIV-specific antibodies in the TLR5 deficient mice. Since TIV did not directly stimulate Tlr5, antibiotic-treated and germ-free mice were immunized to understand the effect the microbiota may have on the antibody response. Accordingly, compared to wild-type mice, TIV-specific IgG decreased significantly to levels comparable to the Tlr5 −/- mice. A similar effect was observed in another study that showed that use of flagellin as a TLR5 agonist during vaccination resulted in increased IgG responses as well as a significant increase in influenza virus-specific T cells.217 A subsequent study compared antibody responses in human volunteers who were given antibiotics prior to TIV vaccination. Interestingly, vaccine-specific IgG1 responses were dampened in participants who were given antibiotics and had low preexisting titers.218 While the role of the microbiota has been shown to modulate viral vaccine responses, the effects of microbiome manipulation on responses to bacterial vaccines such as OCVs are still to be determined and represent an important avenue of future research.

Modulation of the immune response against a live oral rotavirus vaccine has been reported with the probiotic Lactobacillus casei strain GG.243 Probiotic administration improved humoral immune responses; infants that received LGG or placebo showed a higher rate of rotavirus seroconversion. The whole cell killed cholera vaccine Dukoral has also been used in conjunction with various probiotic strains such as Bifidobacterium lactis and Lactobacillus acidophilus.244 Blood and saliva samples from human patients were analyzed and there was a significant increase in serum IgG at day 21 post-infection in patients receiving the previously mentioned probiotic strains as compared to the placebo. However, there were no differences in serum IgA or IgM. As shown by several studies, microbial colonization of the gut is an important immunomodulatory factor for stimulating IgA responses in the gastrointestinal lumen.245,246 For example, bacterial metabolism of bile acids has shown a role in promoting the differentiation of Treg and TH17 cells, which are crucial for maintaining intestinal homeostasis.247–249 The effects of these interactions still remain to be elucidated in relation to protection against V. cholerae (Figure 5). Diet is also a strong modulator of gut microbial communities, and as malnutrition is often a co-morbidity in cholera endemic regions, nutrition as a driver of microbiome structure leading to immune responses to cholera infection or vaccination is an important avenue for research. Studies by the Gordon lab identified promising nutritional supplements that consist of various local food sources such as spirulina, amaranth, flaxseed, and micronutrients, with the aim to curb childhood malnutrition.177 Germ-free mice were given fecal microbial transplants from malnourished Bangladeshi children along with nutritional supplementation and immunized orally with cholera toxin. Gut microbiomes responsive to nutritional supplement exhibited increased CT-specific fecal IgA antibody, and were capable of invading hyporesponsive microbiomes and augment CT-specific immune responses. While there are various studies that show the promise of probiotics as vaccine adjuvants, there are also conflicting studies that suggest limited impact on vaccine efficacy. A study by Matsuda et al. investigated whether Bifidobacterium breve strain Yalkult (BBG-01) enhances immunogenicity of an oral cholera vaccine for children in Bangladesh. In the healthy children aged 2–5 y, Enterobacteriaceae count was significantly lower in the BBG-01 group than in the placebo, but vibriocidal antibody responses were similar.250 These divergent results highlight the need to further examine the role of specific microbiota members in modulating host immune responses to V. cholerae and OCVs.

Despite advances in treatment, cholera remains a serious global health challenge. Even with control of mortality as a result of effective oral rehydration therapies, the high morbidity associated with cholera demands new therapeutic and prophylactic approaches. The increasing rate of antibiotic resistance in V. cholerae also suggests that approaches targeting virulence gene regulation and nutrition using the gut microbiome, which are less likely to engender pathogen resistance mechanisms, may be required for cholera control. Over the last decade, many large-scale metagenomic studies have demonstrated that great bacterial genetic diversity exists between people of different cultures and geography, underpinning the gut microbiome’s potential to variably influence numerous phenotypes from nutrition to infection to immune responses.5,10,11,213 A growing body of research, only a subset of which can be reviewed here, has established several mechanisms and lays the foundation for future studies linking microbiome structure/function and V. cholerae interactions with the host and host-associated commensal microorganisms (Figures 1, Figure 2). Given the temporal, geographical, and inter-individual diversity of microbiome and microbial functions in the gut, the biology of commensal microbes may serve as a personalized susceptibility factor for V. cholerae infection, pathogen fitness in vivo, and ultimately host responses to infection and vaccination.

The gut microbiome sits at the nexus of a complex network of interactions between pathogens, gut chemical microenvironment, microbial and host nutrition, and host immunity. By attaining a better mechanistic understanding of these networks, we may be able to develop rationally designed probiotic and prebiotic strategies for the durable control of V. cholerae and cholera in human populations.

The authors declare no competing financial interests.

