Gut microbiome of helminth-infected indigenous Malaysians is context dependent

While microbiomes in industrialized societies are well characterized, indigenous populations with traditional lifestyles have microbiomes that are more akin to those of ancient humans. However, metagenomic data in these populations remains scarce, and the association with soil-transmitted helminth infection status is unclear. Here, we sequenced 650 metagenomes of indigenous Malaysians from five villages with different prevalence of helminth infections.

Individuals from villages with higher prevalences of helminth infections have more unmapped reads and greater microbial diversity. Microbial community diversity and composition were most strongly associated with different villages and the effects of helminth infection status on the microbiome varies by village. Longitudinal changes in the microbiome in response to albendazole anthelmintic treatment were observed in both helminth infected and uninfected individuals. Inference of bacterial population replication rates from origin of replication analysis identified specific replicating taxa associated with helminth infection.

Our results indicate that helminth effects on the microbiota were highly dependent on context, and effects of albendazole on the microbiota can be confounding for the interpretation of deworming studies. Furthermore, a substantial quantity of the microbiome remains unannotated, and this large dataset from an indigenous population associated with helminth infections is a valuable resource for future studies.

Video Abstract video file.(76M, mp4)

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s40168-022-01385-x.

Industrialization is associated with reduced diversity of the microbiome in the human population [1], which could influence a range of physiological processes including nutrition, metabolism, immunity, neurochemistry, and drug metabolism [2]. Traditional indigenous populations have substantially greater microbial diversity than individuals living in industrialized societies. Nonetheless, our current knowledge of the human gut microbiome [3] is overrepresented by data available from industrialized countries and does not fully address the undersampling of indigenous populations.

In this study, we generated shotgun metagenomics data from 650 Malaysian stool samples to investigate helminth-gut microbiome interactions by both cross-sectional and longitudinal analyses. The large sample size allowed us to examine these interactions in five different villages from different locations with different lifestyles. Examination of anthelmintic-treated uninfected individuals in the longitudinal phase enabled assessment of albendazole effects on the gut microbiome independent of helminths. Metagenomic data enabled investigation on the replication rates of individual bacterial species under different conditions. Since a substantial quantity of the microbiome remains undescribed, this large dataset from indigenous populations with traditional lifestyles from the underrepresented South East Asian region provides new insights into helminth-gut microbiome interactions and more comprehensive metagenomic sequences for future human gut microbiome studies.

To identify and characterize helminth-associated microbiome effects, this study consisted of a cross-sectional component that compares urban individuals (n = 56) living in Kuala Lumpur (KL) with indigenous Orang Asli (OA) (n = 351) from five different villages (Figs. S1 and S2), as well as a longitudinal component to examine changes to the microbiome after anthelmintic (albendazole) treatment. A total of 650 fecal samples (including longitudinal samples) were processed for metagenomic sequencing, resulting in 11,480,206,516 paired reads after quality control and contamination removal (Supplementary Fig. S3). We compared different OA villages, which have different prevalence of soil-transmitted helminth infections (Supplementary Figs. S1 and S2). In the longitudinal phase of the study, consented OA subjects were treated with 400 mg albendazole for 3 consecutive days after collection of the first fecal sample. At 21 and 42 days following treatment, additional fecal samples were collected; however, this phase of the study was disrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic, reducing the number of paired samples available. KL subjects were not treated with albendazole, and they provided only one sample. Questionnaire data were collected and analyzed for some of the study subjects (n = 340).

The Orang Asli live in different geographical settings and have distinctive cultures and lifestyles. We found that KL subjects have higher mapped reads than all OA villages (Fig.
1D; Supplementary Fig. S7 B and C), and the percentage of mapped reads from both villages Rasau (p = 2e−16) and Legong (p = 2e−16) was markedly lower compared to KL (Fig.
1D; Supplementary Fig. S7 B and C). To compare pairwise beta diversity at the species level within each village group to the KL cohort and to use a reference independent strategy as an alternative approach, we assessed Jaccard distances using 21 nucleotide k-mers and genus-level annotations from HRGM, which showed similar results (Fig.
1E). In addition, we observed that Rasau and Legong had the highest beta diversity and nucleotide dissimilarity compared to KL (Fig.
1E). Moreover, comparison of bacterial communities at species level across geographical locations using Jaccard distance revealed substantial differences between villages (ADONIS: p = 0.001, R2 = −0.073; analysis of similarity [ANOSIM]: p = 0.001, R = 0.215) (Fig.
1F, Supplementary Table S2). From the principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) plot (Fig.
1F), we observed clustering of the samples from Rasau and Legong. Conversely, the samples from Bangkong and Sepat were clustered together with KL, while Judah exhibited a more dispersed distribution. Hence, OA subjects in Rasau and Legong were more similar in gut microbial composition and were different from KL and other villages. Equivalent beta-diversity results were observed with other k-mers sketches (31 and 51) and at the species level (Fig. S8 A–G).

We determined the infection intensity and the prevalence of intestinal helminth infection among the 351 OA subjects and found that Trichuris infection (61.8%, n = 217) was the most predominant, followed by hookworm (20.8%, 73) and Ascaris (17.9%, 63) infections (Fig.
2A). The distribution of age and gender of these subjects is shown in Fig. S9 A and B. The overall prevalence of helminth infection was 67.2% (n = 236) (Fig.
2A), and infection intensity was summarized in Fig. S9C. For beta diversity at species level, based on PCoA, there were differences in gut microbiome between infected and uninfected individuals; however, statistically, the effect size was small (ADONIS: p = 0.001, R2 = 0.024; ANOSIM: p = 0.001, R = 0.145) (Fig.
2B, Supplementary Table S2), which was also the case for Bray-Curtis distance and nonmultidimensional scaling (NMDS) ordination (Supplementary Fig. S10 A–C).

To identify bacterial features that are significant in helminth-village interactions, as well as independent of these covariates, we used MaAsLin2 with helminth and village as fixed effects, to identify bacteria that are independent and associated with the interaction between helminth and village. Of the 230 helminth-associated bacteria, more than 55% (n = 135) were associated with village (Fig.
2I). Hence, most of the effects of helminth-associated bacteria are village dependent, and in different villages, there are different bacteria associated with helminth infections. Several Lactobacillus species, including Lactobacillus gasseri and Lactobacillus crispatus, were associated with helminth infection independent of village (Supplementary Fig. S14 and Table S3).

Longitudinal interventional approaches provide stronger assessment of cause-and-effect relationships. Fecal samples analyzed at pre- and post-anthelmintic treatment provided insights into the effects of deworming on the gut microbiome. Individual subjects were grouped into four categories (i.e., full responders [n = 43 paired; from 26–33,099 to 0 epg], partial responders [n = 23 paired; from 281–119,875 to 26–71,579 epg], nonresponders [n = 5 paired; from 204–1097 to 281–1632 epg], and uninfected [n = 58 paired]), based on the Trichuris infection intensity before and after deworming (Fig.
3A). While mixed infection was present in some individuals, hookworm and Ascaris infection were always cured after deworming (Supplementary Fig. S15A).

In some individuals, we conducted a follow-up study 42 days post-anthelmintic treatment. There were no differences in alpha diversity on day 42 (Supplementary Fig. S20A), and although beta-diversity analysis at species level showed significant differences between three timepoints (i.e., pre, 21 days, and 42 days) (Supplementary Fig. S20 B–C, Supplementary Table S7), these differences are driven by the pre-treatment samples (Supplementary Fig. S20D). Therefore, the changes in the gut microbiome in both responders and uninfected individuals after albendazole treatment remain stable by day 42.

Actively replicating bacteria can be identified by calculating the index of replication based on coverage trends of bidirectional genome replication from a single origin of replication. We used the algorithm growth rate index (GRiD) to estimate the growth rate of gut bacteria in relation to helminth infection status. Spearman correlation analysis on Trichuris egg burden with the growth rate of the bacteria identified 350 bacterial species with growth rate associated with Trichuris egg burden (Fig.
4 A and B, Supplementary Fig. S21, and Supplementary Table S8). Prevotella stercorea replication was most positively associated (p = 1.58e−14, R = 0.39) with egg burden, while Bifidobacterium longum (p = 1.30e-11, R = −0.35) and Phocaeicola vulgatus (p = 3.45e−9, R = −0.31) were negatively associated with egg burden. Using a linear mixed model of Trichuris egg burden while controlling for village, Prevotella stercorea and Bifidobacterium longum were significantly associated with egg burden (p = 4.89e−06 and p = 7.99e−08, respectively). The predicted replication rate of Prevotella sterorea was higher in Trichuris-infected individuals (p = 1.30e−09), while the predicted replication rate of Bifidobacterium longum and Phocaeicola vulgatus was notably lower in Trichuris-infected individuals (p = 4.50e−09and p = 9.80e−09, respectively) (Fig.
4C).

For the longitudinal deworming component of the study, we observed that the growth rate of 93 bacterial species was different between pre and post treatment samples among the responders. Among these bacterial species, slightly more than one-third of them (n = 33) were also identified from the cross-sectional analysis (Supplementary Fig. S22A). Spearman correlation analysis demonstrated that the growth rate of uncultured Oscillibacter sp. (p = 6.000e−04) and Phocaeicola vulgatus (p = 0.006) was significantly correlated with Trichuris burden (Supplementary Fig. S22B and Supplementary Table S9). After we verified the results by building a linear mixed model controlling for village, both uncultured Oscillibacter sp. (p = 0.033) and Phocaeicola_vulgatus (p = 0.028) were negatively associated with Trichuris burden, indicating more replication in responders after anti-helminthic treatment (Supplementary Fig. S22C). However, considerable portions of responder-associated taxa (32 out of 93) were also observed in the noninfected individuals (n = 67) (Supplementary Fig. S22D). Therefore, it could be difficult to disentangle the effects of Trichuris infection and direct effects of albendazole treatment on the dynamics of the microbiome. Hence, we conducted MaAsLin2 analyses to identify bacterial replication (based on GRiD score) that were associated with Trichuris infection while controlling for treatment group and village. Collinsella_sp._TF06.26 (adjusted p = 0.004) was positively associated with Trichuris infection, while Phocaiecola vulgatus (adjusted p = 0.04), Burkholderia sp. K4410.MGS.135 (p = 0.04), Bacteroides stercoris (adjusted p = 0.04), and Phocaeicola massiliensis (adjusted p = 0.04) were negatively associated with Trichuris infection (Supplementary Table S10).

We used the HUMAnN tool to investigate pathway inference and gene families with Pfam domains (Figs. S23–S25). To adjust for covariates, we used MaAsLin2 to identify the pathways and gene families that were differentially abundant between the following: (1) Orang Asli and Urban cohorts, while controlling for age and sex; (2) Helminth positive and negative individuals, while including village as a covariate; and (3) Treatment response groups while controlling for village. Using these models, we find that the L-tryptophan biosynthesis superpathway was enriched in the Orang Asli microbiome compared to urban controls from KL (Supplementary Figs. S23 and S25A). Tryptophan, an essential amino acid, and its catabolites have been suggested to affect intestinal homeostasis through the aryl hydrocarbon receptor and may be important in inflammatory bowel diseases [28]. Hence, future work on microbial metabolism in the Orang Asli may focus on this pathway.

After controlling for village, there were no significant pathways differentiating helminth positive and negative individuals. Between different villages, we found the strongest significance for the peptidoglycan biosynthesis II (Staphylococci) pathway (Supplementary Figs. S23 and S25B). Villages with high helminth prevalence have individuals enriched in this pathway, but we did not find a significant relationship between helminth infection and Staphylococcus aureus abundance. This pathway may be important in the generation of peptidoglycan in other gram-positive bacteria, and the significance of the geographical difference in the abundance of this pathway is still unclear. We also found that the microbiome after albendazole treatment is enriched for the L-glutamate degradation V (via hydroxyglutarate) pathway (Supplementary Figs. S23 and S25C), which is an indication that albendazole may affect the fermentation of amino acids in an anoxic environment. Additionally, in our gene family enrichment analysis, our only substantial observation is that the phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase gene family was decreased after albendazole treatment (Supplementary Figs. S2 and S25D). This also indicates how albendazole can affect metabolic processes of the microbiome; however, the implications of these results remain unclear.

In this study, we examined 650 stool metagenomes from a cohort of 351 indigenous Malaysians from five villages with different prevalence rates (14.9–89.6%) of helminth infections, along with 56 urban citizens (uninfected) living in Kuala Lumpur City. To our knowledge, this is the largest study utilizing shotgun metagenomics to investigate the interactions between helminth infection and the human gut microbiome.

We also found that deworming helminth-negative individuals can influence the gut microbiome that overlaps substantially with changes in individuals responding to drug treatment by having reduced worm burdens. This indicates that albendazole may directly affect the microbiome, or that there are population effects that can influence uninfected people. There are four previous studies on albendazole [9, 10, 13, 16]. The first study conducted among Ecuador school children did not find any difference in bacterial composition among both Trichuris infected and uninfected groups after a combination of albendazole and ivermectin treatment [13]. In contrast, the second study in Indonesia found an increase of Actinobacteria and decrease in Bacteroidetes with albendazole treatment versus placebo in individuals that remained helminth-infected post treatment, but not in uninfected individuals [16]. In addition, Rosa et al. demonstrated that the gut bacterial composition was altered in a helminth-uninfected group in Indonesia after 2 years [9]. Another study in Kenya found significantly reduced Chao richness in uninfected individuals after deworming treatment, suggesting an effect of albendazole [10]. Albendazole is a prodrug that metabolizes rapidly to albendazole sulfoxide (the active anthelmintic compound) and albendazole sulphone (the inactive compound). Some bacterial species (Enterobacter aerogenes NCIM 2695, Klebsiella aerogenes NCIM 2258, Pseudomonas aeruginosa NCIM 2074, and Streptomyces griseus NCIM 2622) could be involved in metabolizing albendazole to albendazole sulfoxide and albendazole sulphone [37]. Albendazole can also be metabolized by the resident microbiota in gut rumens in sheep and cattle [38]. Hence, the gut microbiota could play a crucial role in metabolizing albendazole and influence drug bioavailability and efficacy on infected individuals. Why albendazole has lower efficacy against Trichuris infection than hookworm and Ascaris warrants further investigation [39]. Future studies could apply metabolomics profiling to investigate metabolite differences between response groups to better understand the underlying mechanisms. The observation that the L-glutamate degradation V (via hydroxyglutarate) pathway was enriched after albendazole treatment and that the phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase gene family was depleted after albendazole treatment indicates that albendazole can affect metabolic processes, and future work should focus on the effects of albendazole on microbial metabolism.

We find that this metagenomic study of rural indigenous populations required reference databases that included MAGs to improve taxonomic and functional classification of sequencing reads. However, unmapped reads remain a challenge as villages with higher prevalence of helminth infections have more unmapped reads. Hence, this large metagenomic dataset from five different villages in Malaysia with different helminth infection prevalences should facilitate further characterization of microbiome-parasite associations in other nonindustrialized populations. Helminth effects on the microbiome were village dependent, and albendazole treatment had a substantial effect on the microbiome. These results may explain some of the discrepancies from previous studies on helminth-microbiota interactions.

This study consists of both cross-sectional and longitudinal phases. Cross-sectional comparisons were made on the OA and between OA and urban cohorts (KL) living in the capital city of Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur. Within the Orang Asli community, we studied five Orang Asli villages: (1) Rasau village (Perak state); (2) Judah village (Selangor state); (3) Sepat village (Selangor state); (4) Bangkong village (Selangor state); and (5) Legong village (Kedah state). The locations of each village are displayed on a map using ArcGIS (version 10.7.1) together with other information including states, tribes, and subtribes (Supplementary Fig. S1). A total number of 351 samples were collected from Orang Asli subjects and 56 samples from KL subjects in this cross-sectional component (aged 4 years and older) (Supplementary Fig. S2).

For the longitudinal phase, Orang Asli subjects who provided consent were treated with 400 mg albendazole for 3 consecutive days after the first stool sample collection. Stool samples were collected from the treated subjects at 21 days and 42 days following anthelmintic treatment. However, due to the restriction during the COVID-19 pandemic, only four Orang Asli villages were included in this phase, excluding Legong village. There was no follow-up for urban controls after the cross-sectional phase because they were not treated with albendazole. Sample selection for analysis was based on a complete set of paired stool samples (pre [pre-anthelmintic treatment] and post [21-day post-anthelmintic treatment]) (n = 129) and three timepoints stool samples collection (pre, 21 days and 42 days; n = 110). Four subject samples were removed from the longitudinal analysis due to incomplete data collection. Then, subjects were categorized into three groups for comparison: responders, nonresponders, and uninfected, based on their infection status before and after the albendazole treatment. Responders (n = 66 paired samples) refer to individuals who were positive at baseline and became negative or showed reduction of infection intensity after deworming. Nonresponders (n = 5 paired samples) refer to individuals who were positive at baseline and showed increment or maintain of egg counts after deworming. Uninfected (n = 58 paired samples) refers to negative individuals before and after the treatment. Nonresponders were not included in the gut metagenome analysis due to insufficient sample size. The detailed number of samples collected at each timepoints was shown in Supplementary Fig. S2.

All the stool samples collected were divided into two portions: (i) preserved in 2.5% potassium dichromate and stored at 4 °C for intestinal helminth infection screening and (ii) aliquoted in 1.5 ml cryovial tube, frozen immediately in dry ice, and kept at −80 °C for shotgun metagenomic analysis (Supplementary Fig. S26). To detect and quantify helminth infections, Kato-Katz was performed. A thick smear was prepared from the fresh stool according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Kato-Katz kit, Mahidol University, Thailand) [40]. Infection intensity was stratified into light, moderate, or heavy according to WHO cutoffs [41]. Formalin ether sedimentation was performed according to Chin et al. (2016) [42]. Stool samples were considered positive if any soil-transmitted helminths were detected from any of these two methods. DNA was extracted from stool samples using Qiagen DNeasy PowerSoil Pro Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). DNA library was prepared using Illumina TruSeq DNA Nano Library kit (Illumina, USA). Paired-end metagenomic sequencing was performed on the NovaSeq 6000 S4 platform to generate an average of 20 million paired-end reads per sample (range 13–35 million paired-end reads), with a read length of 150 bp and insert size of 350 bp.

The overall bioinformatic analysis workflow from preprocessing to downstream analysis is shown in Supplementary Fig. S3. In brief, the whole process of quality filtering and trimming of the raw sequence reads was performed by using KneadData (version 0.7.4) integrated with Trimmomatic [42], Bowtie [43], and FastQC [44] tools. Sequence reads were trimmed by using Trimmomatic with default settings, based on a sliding window trimming approach (SLIDINGWINDOW:4:20) when average base Phred quality score over four reads dropped below 33 (PHRED 33). Next, sequence reads were mapped against reads mapping to the reference genome (hg37) using Bowtie2 with default parameters (very sensitive end-to-end alignment) to remove human host genome. The filtered reads were then used for the downstream analyses. Additionally, FastQC was used to perform quality checks on the raw metagenomic reads before preprocessing and after preprocessing to ensure high-quality metagenomic reads for downstream analysis.

Growth rate index (GRiD) (version 1.3) was used to evaluate the growth rate of microbial species in metagenomic samples [57]. Samples were mapped to a GRiD database (ftp://ftp.jax.org/ohlab/GriD_environ_specific_database/stool_microbes.tar.gz), a stool-specific database created based on microbes mostly found in stool. GRiD score > 1.02 indicates bacteria are in growth phase, whereas GRiD score < 1.02 indicates that bacteria are in stationary or lag phase. The downstream analysis was conducted as described in Supplementary Fig. S28.

Multiple efforts were done for the differential abundance analysis of the bacteria from OA and KL cohorts. Random forest (randomForest package) was used to identify microbiome taxa predictive of OA and KL [52] groups. We generated a “SMOTE” (Synthetic Minority Oversampling Technique) (consisting of 280 OA and 336 KL) dataset using the package DMwR [58] to address the imbalance number of samples between OA (n = 594) and KL (n = 56) samples [59]. SMOTE algorithm is a technique to address the imbalanced datasets by oversampling the minority class. A new data of the minority class was created artificially using the nearest neighbors of these cases and hence leading to a more balanced dataset [60]. Then, the random forest model was built based on this “SMOTEd” data set and tuned with the methods described by Brwonlee (2016) [61], followed by the significant testing using the methods described by Douglas (2020) [62]. Another more detail analysis via MaAsLin2 (Microbiome Multivariable Association with Linear Models2) from MaAsLin2 package of R was conducted to identify microbiome taxa predictive of OA and KL groups while controlled for village, age, and genders.

Overall, the Wilcoxon rank-sum test and Wilcoxon signed-rank test from the rstatix package [48] were used to determine the p-value between groups for specific taxa in cross-sectional and longitudinal study respectively.

List of the bioinformatic tools and R packages used is displayed in the table below:



Publisher’s Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Mian Zi Tee and Yi Xian Er contributed equally to this work.

