Bacteroidota and Lachnospiraceae integration into the gut microbiome at key time points in early life are linked to infant neurodevelopment





The early life microbiome plays critical roles in host development, shaping long-term outcomes including brain functioning. It is not known which initial infant colonizers elicit optimal neurodevelopment; thus, this study investigated the association between gut microbiome succession from the first week of life and head circumference growth (HCG), the earliest validated marker for neurodevelopment. Fecal samples were collected weekly from a preterm infant cohort during their neonatal intensive care unit stay and subjected to 16S rRNA gene sequencing for evaluating gut microbiome composition, in conjunction with clinical data and head circumference measurements. Preterm infants with suboptimal HCG trajectories had a depletion in the abundance/prevalence of Bacteroidota and Lachnospiraceae, independent of morbidity and caloric restriction. The severity of gut microbiome depletion matched the timing of significant HCG pattern separation between study groups at 30-week postmenstrual age demonstrating a potential mediating relationship resultant from clinical practices. Consideration of the clinical variables indicated that optimal infant microbiome succession is primarily driven by dispersal limitation (i.e., delivery mode) and secondarily by habitat filtering (i.e., antibiotics and enteral feeding). Bacteroidota and Lachnospiraceae are known core taxa of the adult microbiome, with roles in dietary glycan foraging, beneficial metabolite production and immunity, and our work provides evidence that their integration into the gut microbiome needs to occur early for optimal neurodevelopment.

The first five years of life are widely recognized to be critical for an individual’s educational and vocational success,1 as well as lifelong health and wellbeing2. On a cellular neurodevelopmental level, synaptogenesis and myelination occur at a net positive during this timeframe increasing brain volume until 90% of adult size is reached by age five.3,4 These processes are known to be both programmed by genetics and responsive to environmental cues,5 and the consequence of their impediment is developmental disability, a group of conditions resultant from physical, learning, language, or behavioral impairment that often lasts throughout an individual’s lifetime.6 Developmental disability was estimated by the Global Burden Disease Study 2016 to affect 8.4% of children under five years of age worldwide,7 and although global initiatives specifically targeting this timeframe for improving overall human health and economics have achieved success in reducing child mortality,8 the rate of developmental disability remains minimally changed.7 Thus, there is a vital need to identify modifiable environmental factors to reduce the incidence of developmental disabilities. Infancy represents a potentially crucial stage for intervention, as diagnosis of these developmental disabilities can already occur by 2–3 years of age.9,10 An early marker of neurodevelopment is necessary, and head circumference growth (HCG) has been found to sufficiently proxy increase in brain volume, thus correlating well with later neurodevelopmental testing results.11–15

To address this knowledge gap, prospectively collected longitudinal fecal samples from 58 infants born <34 weeks gestational age at the University of Chicago Comer Children’s Hospital were subjected to 16S rRNA gene sequencing,34,35 to determine the microbiome composition and predicted functional profile.36 Preterm infants were selected as they represent a substantive cohort (1 in every 10 infants worldwide is born preterm37) at an increased risk for both developmental disability,38 and altered gut microbiome configurations from clinical exposures such as antibiotics.21–24 Further, preterm infants can be strictly monitored within the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) environment, allowing statistical and machine learning models to be built that incorporate HCG trajectories, time, and clinical variables. We hypothesized that features of the early gut microbiome are associated with HCG from birth to term-equivalent age in the NICU. It was found that infants with suboptimal HCG trajectories (SHCGT) experienced a concurrent loss in HCG and the abundances of Bacteroidota and Lachnospiraceae specifically from 31 to 36 weeks postmenstrual age (PMA), indicating a mediating effect by these microbial taxa on HCG that was independent of clinical morbidity and caloric restriction but likely resultant from preceding clinical practices. Thorough examination of the potentially casual clinical variables revealed preferential effects of infant microbiome successional drivers, with dispersal limitation (i.e., delivery mode) superseding habitat filtering (i.e., antibiotics and enteral feeding) in shaping optimum microbiome and thus host development.

It was not previously known if gut microbiome succession could be linked to HCG, the earliest marker of human neurodevelopment. This study not only determined that β-diversity of the gut microbiome significantly differentiated infants with SHCGT from appropriate HCG trajectories (AHCGT) (Figure 1(a)), but also that the key time point when most fecal microbial taxa exhibited a shift in mean abundance of 30 weeks PMA (Figure 1(b)) matched the onset of significant SHCGT (Figure 1(c)). The matched timing suggests that preceding clinical practices may impact gut microbiome succession which changes infant HCG trajectories; this relationship is defined as mediation and the interactions between these three factors (clinical variables, the gut microbiome and infant HCG) will thus be examined in further detail. Preterm infant HCG trajectory was assessed as the difference in head circumference z-score from birth to 36 weeks PMA by the Fenton growth curve,14,39 and study groups were stratified by 0.5 interval losses in z-score: AHCGT (≥0.5), mildly SHCGT (<0.5–1), moderately SHCGT (<1-1.5), and severely SHCGT (<1.5). Alterations in α-diversity between study groups were first considered using ANOVA on multivariate regression with PMA as a covariate and patient as a random effect, but no significant differences were found (Table S1). Next, β-diversity (genus level) was examined by redundancy analysis with study groups and PMA as terms and permutations blocked by patient (Figure 1(a)). A significant redundancy analysis model was built (p= .001), and all terms had a statistically significant effect on gut microbiome composition (p= .001), listed from most to least impact (R2): PMA (0.6391), AHCGT (0.3795), moderately SHCGT (0.2160), severely SHCGT (0.1447), and mildly SHCGT (0.1060).

Defining key time points of gut microbiome succession is critical, as previous research has shown that the inability of the microbiome to achieve a particular state on time (i.e., “mature”) is associated with poor developmental outcomes such as weight gain failure in children.40 To identify successional time points within the infant dataset, a novel exploitation of change point analysis was employed (see methods section for details). After application of this approach, 30 weeks PMA was determined to be the key time point of gut microbiome succession within our studied time range, regardless of taxonomic level (Figure 1(b)). To observe how this key time point correlated with HCG patterns, the loss in head circumference z-score from birth for each PMA week was plotted for each study group (Figure 1(c)). ANOVA with post-hoc analysis revealed that the severely SHCGT group significantly separated from the AHCGT group starting at 28 weeks PMA, but significantly differentiating all three SHCGT groups from AHCGT could not be done until 31 weeks PMA (Table S2). Additionally, all three SHCGT groups could not be significantly distinguished from each other until the measurement end point of 36 weeks PMA (Table S2). Together, these results indicate that SHCGT could generally be treated as a loss in head circumference z-score of greater than 0.5 that occurred from 31 to 36 weeks PMA. Therefore, concordance of the gut microbiome successional pattern with infant HCG indicates a potential mediating role for an “immature” microbiome resultant from preceding clinical practices in promoting SHCGT, and further analysis of the infant gut microbiome was thus conducted on the time windows of 24–30 weeks PMA (before SHCGT) and 31–36 weeks PMA (during SHCGT), as well as with consideration of the clinical variables.

Having identified the time point of microbiome change relevant to head circumference growth, we next investigated which microbial taxa are putatively important for infant neurodevelopment. Bacteroidota (Figure 2(c)) and Lachnospiraceae (Figure 2(d)) were specifically identified as potential biomarkers of AHCGT. Further, it was determined that their significant reduction in abundance occurred during the time period of head circumference z-score loss (31–36 weeks PMA) (Figure 1(c)), solidifying a presumed mediating relationship and a promising key time point for interventional strategies. Finally, through predictive metagenomic profiling,36,41 the depletion of these taxa was found to potentially result in a reduced carbohydrate utilization capacity of the gut microbiome (Table 1), suggesting a mechanistic link in regards to energy resource utilization and short-chain fatty acid production.5,31 The differences in microbial taxon and KEGG orthology (KO) abundances between study groups were assessed by ANOVA on multivariate regression with patient as a random effect during the time windows of 24–30 weeks PMA (before SHCGT) and 31–36 weeks PMA (during SHCGT). The number of patients with microbial taxon or KO presence versus absence for each study group was statistically compared by the Fisher’s exact test. Study group comparisons also included infants with any SHCGT versus AHCGT, and infants with moderately SHCGT to severely SHCGT versus AHCGT to mildly SHCGT. However, the latter yielded no statistically significant differences in abundance or prevalence of microbial taxa, and thus will not be discussed further.

Legend: Study groups defined by difference in head circumference z-score from birth to 36 weeks postmenstrual age as calculated by the Fenton growth curve: appropriate head circumference growth trajectory (≥0.5; AHCGT) and suboptimal head circumference growth trajectory (<0.5; SHCGT). For KEGG pathway classifications, the total number of significantly differentially abundant or prevalent KEGG database orthologies (KOs) is indicated with at least 3 being requisite for listing. Significance for abundance was evaluated by ANOVA on multivariate regression with infant head circumference growth trajectory and postmenstrual age as fixed effects and patient as a random effect, and for prevalence by the Fisher’s exact test (p < 0.05; FP<1%). The p values, least squares mean differences (diff) with 95% confidence intervals and R2 values (abundance); p values and percent prevalence per study group (prevalence) are reported for the KOs that are more abundant or prevalent amongst infants with AHCGT. Significance was found both overall and during the 31–36 completed weeks postmenstrual age time window. Abbreviations: ns = nonsignificant.

To examine differences in function associated with these taxonomic differences, predictive metagenomic profiling was performed by Tax4Fun2.36 Significant KOs (p< .05; FP<1%) were tallied by their KEGG pathway classifications to identify where the most changes in function were occurring. Out of the major categories, the greatest number of significant differences in both KO abundance and prevalence occurred in “Metabolism,” and the majority of significant changes in metabolism were related to “Carbohydrate metabolism” (Table 1). The highest number of these KOs significantly depleted in the gut microbiome of infants with any SHCGT compared to AHCGT belonged to the pathway “Starch and sucrose metabolism,” and the second highest number belonged to the pathway “Amino sugar and nucleotide sugar metabolism” (Table 1). All KOs that were significantly less abundant or prevalent were only noted from 31 to 36 weeks PMA (Table 1). The changes in starch and sucrose metabolism could be attributed to the loss of representatives from the phylum Bacteroidota, whereas most changes in amino sugar and nucleotide sugar metabolism could be related to the loss of Lachnospiraceae (with some overlap of Bacteroidota), from referencing each KO (Table 1) with the linked taxonomy in the KEGG database.

Clinical factors could potentially confound the relationships between the infant fecal microbiome and HCG trajectories, and thus required investigation to probe the robustness of this study’s findings. Both statistical testing and machine learning modeling were used to determine the independent effect of a given clinical factor on infant HCG trajectories, and the relative importance of clinical factors compared to fecal microbiome features in predicting infant HCG trajectories, respectively. Separate random forest classifiers were built for the key time windows of 24–30 weeks PMA (Figure 3(a)) and 31–36 weeks PMA (Figure 3(b)), and in each case fecal microbiome features out ranked the majority of clinical factors in importance for binary classification of infants into AHCGT versus any SHCGT with 77.5% and 84% accuracy, respectively. From 24 to 30 weeks PMA, the top patient demographic factor was gestational age at birth (ranked #13), antibiotic factor was total days of all antibiotics (ranked #16), and enteral feeding factor was percentage of enteral feeds as human milk (ranked #17), which were all in the bottom 2/3rds ranked section of important features (Figure 3(a)). From 31 to 36 weeks PMA, the top patient demographic factor was again gestational age at birth (ranked #29), antibiotic factors were total days of metronidazole (ranked #20), total days of erythromycin (ranked #24) and consecutive days of clindamycin (ranked #26), and enteral feeding factor was total days of total parenteral nutrition (ranked #30), which were all in the bottom 2/3rds ranked section of important features (Figure 3(b)). Further, no statistically significant differences in patient demographics (Table 2), or clinical care including antibiotics and enteral feeding were found between study groups (Table S3). Critically, these results indicate that changes in infant HCG trajectories were not due to caloric restriction.

Legend: Head circumference growth groups are defined in legend for Figure 1. Binary variables are reported as the percentage of patients (number of patients) per group, with p values calculated by the Fisher’s exact test. Numerical variables are reported as the mean ± standard deviation per group, with p values calculated by Welch’s ANOVA. Abbreviations: NICU = Neonatal intensive care unit; PMA = Postmenstrual age.

Clinical characteristics were statistically analogous between the complete dataset and the LM subset (Table S6). However, a lower proportion of infants with any SHCGT in the complete dataset were vaginally delivered (Table 2), and this difference became statistically significant (p= .02) in the LM subset (Table S6). Interestingly, vaginal delivery was also identified as a highly important predictor for the random forest classifiers across both time windows, ranking #5 from 24 to 30 weeks PMA (Figure 3(a)) and as the top feature from 31 to 36 weeks PMA (Figure 3(b)). We hypothesized that the positive influence of vaginal delivery on infant HCG trajectories resulted from the vertical transmission of beneficial microbes,44 and thus investigated the interaction of this clinical factor with the infant microbiome in further detail.

Vaginal delivery was significantly positively associated with infant HCG trajectories (Table S6; Figure 3(a,b)), and we hypothesized that this resulted from the vertical transmission44 of microbes that elicit AHCGT. To address this hypothesis, it was first evaluated if vaginal delivery’s benefit to infant HCG trajectories was affected by the structure of the microbiome through moderation analysis. Significant moderation by the abundances of fecal microbial taxa previously significantly associated with AHCGT (Figures 2(c,d) and 3(a,b)) was indeed found, including Lachnospiraceae, Bacteroides_B, Faecalibacterium and Megasphaera (Table 3). Next, it was investigated if the abundances of fecal microbial taxa were significantly associated with delivery mode to determine which microbes were more likely to be vertically transmitted. It was discovered that the abundance of Bacteroidota was significantly enhanced by vaginal delivery (Figure 3(c)), which was one of the found key microbial taxa for infant HCG (Figure 2(c)). Taken together, these results affirm our hypothesis that delivery mode can be considered as a dispersal limitation factor influencing optimal infant microbiome succession, which impacts infant health and development. Understanding the relative importance of successional drivers is vital for identifying potential indirect routes of modifying the gut microbiome-brain axis, or variables that could alter the effectiveness of direct interventions. Despite clinical variables typically attributed as habitat filtering factors impacting microbiome succession, such as enteral feeding and antibiotics, not having a significant direct effect on infant HCG trajectories (Table 2), it was interrogated if these clinical factors could significantly moderate the influence of vaginal delivery. That was indeed found to be the case (Figure 3(d)), therefore delineating that optimal infant microbiome succession is primarily driven by dispersal limitation and secondarily by habitat filtering, at least in the context of host neurodevelopmental markers.

Legend: Significance of moderation was evaluated by the Wald statistic (p< 0.05; FP<1%), model coefficients with 95% confidence intervals and McFadden’s R2 on cumulative link mixed regression of infant head circumference growth trajectories for the interaction of delivery mode and abundance of a given fecal microbial taxon, with postmenstrual age, and delivery mode and the given fecal microbial taxon abundance individually as fixed effects, plus patient as a random effect. Head circumference growth groups are defined in legend for Figure 1. Abbreviations: ns = nonsignificant.

Finally, to test how clinical factors change infant HCG trajectory outcomes of vaginally delivered versus Cesarean-section delivered infants, moderation analysis equivalent to the approach used for the fecal microbial taxon abundances was performed. Time was found to be an important moderator of delivery mode and infant HCG trajectory relationships as demonstrated by the significance of gestational age at birth (p< 2x10−16, coefficient = 13.035 [13.030, 13.039], R2 = 0.11), and its proxies’ birthweight (p< 2x10−16, coefficient = 16.220 [16.216, 16.224], R2 = 0.11) and birth head circumference (p= .002, coefficient = 9.697 [3.669, 15.725], R2 = 0.08). Vaginally delivered infants with SHCGT were all born <27 weeks gestational age, whereas only 17% of vaginally delivered infants with AHCGT were born <27 weeks gestational age, and this trend can clearly be observed for the likely vertically transmitted Bacteroidota (Figure 2(c)), as well as Lachnospiraceae (Figure 2(d)), which appear relatively high in abundance for infants with SHCGT <27 weeks PMA with a subsequent rapid decline. Instead, skin bacteria from the phyla Firmicutes (Figure 2(a)) and Actinobacteriota (particularly Corynebacterium spp. as previously determined to be significantly augmented in infants with mildly SHCGT) (Figure 2(b)) were relatively and more stably higher in abundance for these earlier time points for infants with SHCGT. In contrast, infants with AHCGT from 27 weeks PMA onward had relatively higher and stable abundances of Bacteroidota (Figure 2(c)) and Lachnospiraceae (Figure 2(d)) and lower earlier abundances of Firmicutes (Figure 2(a)) and Actinobacteriota (Figure 2(b)). The number of morbidities was expectedly also a significant modifier (p= 3x10−11, coefficient = −6.090 [−8.649, −3.530], R2 = 0.13), but sex was not (p= .7, coefficient = 0.534 [−2.409, 3.476], R2 = 0.02). Both time (Figure 1(c)) and morbidities (Table 2) were found to have a significant direct effect on infant HCG trajectories, which is why the previous interrogation of critical time points (change point analysis) and morbidity as a confounder (LM subset) was undertaken. Intriguingly, several clinical factors known to affect the infant microbiome were found to be significant modifiers of the effect of delivery mode on infant HCG trajectories, and these had at least a fivefold greater impact on vaginally delivered infants, whose Cohen’s D effect sizes (AHCGT/any SHCGT) were all large, compared to Cesarean-section delivered infants, whose Cohen’s D effect sizes were all small to negligible (Figure 3(d)). These clinical factors included both the total days (p= 2×10−5, coefficient = −44.417 [−64.711, −24.124], R2 = 0.18) and longest number of consecutive days (p= 4×10−8, coefficient = −18.518 [−25.100, −11.935], R2 = 0.13) of all antibiotics, and the total amount of enteral feeds (p< 2×10−16, coefficient = 12.594 [12.590, 12.597], R2 = 0.14), along with the additional proxies of total days of total parenteral nutrition (p= 2×10−6, coefficient = −8.913 [−12.546, −5.279], R2 = 0.14) and the day of life full enteral feeding was achieved (p= .002, coefficient = −12.888 [−21.230, −4.546], R2 = 0.12). As for enteral feeding-type, the total amount of human milk was a significant moderator (p< 2×10−16, coefficient = 8.292 [8.288, 8.297], R2 = 0.07), whereas the total amount of formula was not (p= .1, coefficient = 2.603 [−0.738, 5.943], R2 = 0.04). Notably, none of these clinical factors had a significant direct effect on infant HCG trajectories (Table 2). As diet and antibiotics are known to be primary influencers of the intestinal environment, these results demonstrate that delivery mode, i.e., a dispersal limitation factor from vertical transmission, supersedes habitat filtering as a driver of infant gut microbiome succession.

There is a vital need to identify modifiable environmental factors for reducing the incidence of developmental impairments at a time point early enough for successful intervention. Thus, it was the aim of this study to determine if infant gut microbiome composition was associated with HCG, the earliest marker of neurodevelopment.13,14 This study is the first to show that β-diversity of the gut microbiome was significantly distinct between infants with AHCGT versus any SHCGT (Figure 1(a)), and that reduced abundances of Bacteroidota (Figure 2(c)) and Lachnospiraceae (Figure 2(d)) were specifically associated with SHCGT independent of concurrent morbidities and caloric restriction. Notably, this study’s novel application of change point analysis further linked the microbiome as a potential mediator of HCG by revealing that the timing of peak gut microbiome composition alteration (Figure 1(b)) exactly matched the timing of significant HCG separation between study groups (Figure 1(c)) at 30 weeks PMA. We hypothesized that clinical variables cause deviations in head circumference growth by altering the gut microbiome; in other words, the gut microbiome is a mediator of infant HCG. The clinical variable would thus occur first, and then as the gut microbiome is impacted, head circumference growth ceases, i.e., changes to the infant gut microbiome and head circumference growth would occur concurrently as observed. The preceding casual clinical factors were therefore additionally thoroughly examined to determine their influence on gut microbiome successional patterns that result in infant HCG trajectory deviations, of which the significant effect of delivery mode (Table S6; Figure 3(a); Figure 3(b)) provided further innovative insights into the primary drivers of optimal infant microbiome maturation.

Bacteroidota and Lachnospiraceae are both known core taxa of the adult gut microbiome,83 and our work provides evidence that Bacteroidota and Lachnospiraceae need to integrate into the gut microbiota early in infancy for optimal developmental outcomes. Ultimately, the promising findings from this study encourage future research of microbiome modification to improve infant developmental trajectories, either from clinical investigations to enhance statistical rigor and reproducibility or verify microbial load, functions and metabolites, or animal model experiments for direct probing of the impact of Bacteroidota and Lachnospiraceae on neurodevelopment. Optimizing the gut microbiome in infancy could also reduce the incidence of developmental disability, as evidenced by the associations between early antibiotics and later cognitive outcomes25,26 or the altered gut microbiome of children with ASD,32 and ADHD,33 and future work could continue to follow the fecal microbiome of infants with AHCGT and SHCGT over time to determine the potential lifelong effectiveness of an infant microbiome-based intervention.

The Microbiome In Neonatal Development (MIND) study received approval from an institutional review board (IRB16-1431). Study participant enrollment took place in the NICU at the University of Chicago Comer Children’s Hospital between January 2010 and December 2018. Infants born prior to 37 weeks gestational age were eligible for the study and were enrolled after receiving written informed consent from the parent. Infants with a genetic syndrome or severe congenital anomalies, including major congenital heart disease or major kidney, lung, or brain malformation, were excluded, as were infants judged not to be viable by the attending physician.

For assessment of the infant fecal microbiome and HCG, infant diapers were collected, and head circumferences measured weekly by nursing staff. HCG trajectory was evaluated by the difference between head circumference z-scores calculated from the Fenton 2013 growth curve39 by the completed weeks method at birth and 36 weeks PMA. If the infant was discharged prior to 36 weeks PMA, the measurement at NICU discharge was taken instead (no infant was discharged prior to 34 weeks PMA). Infants that expired in the NICU were excluded. Clinical variables identified as possible confounders were additionally gathered by abstracting information from patient charts using the electronic medical record system at the University of Chicago Comer Children’s Hospital. Data collected included delivery mode, gestational age at birth, sex, birthweight, head circumference at birth, enteral feeding regimens (mean mL per kg bodyweight over time periods of interest), antibiotics administration (total days or longest number of consecutive days administered over time periods of interest), clinical morbidities, length of stay in the NICU and PMA at NICU discharge. Enteral feeding regimens were described by the amount of human milk, formula or total enteral (human milk + formula), with the days of total parenteral nutrition (0 mL/kg total enteral nutrition) and day of life total enteral nutrition was achieved (120 mL/kg) recorded. Antibiotics were described both as a total and divided into their pharmacological classes. The morbidities reported include bronchopulmonary dysplasia, severe brain injury, severe retinopathy of prematurity, necrotizing enterocolitis, seizures and sepsis. Bronchopulmonary dysplasia was defined as the need for supplemental oxygen at 36 weeks PMA.84 Severe brain injury was defined as the presence of periventricular leukomalacia and/or grade 3 or 4 intraventricular hemorrhage on a cranial ultrasonogram.85 Severe retinopathy of prematurity was defined as unilateral or bilateral retinopathy of prematurity at stage 4 or 5 and/or retinopathy of prematurity requiring treatment by laser or antivascular endothelial growth factor drugs.85 Necrotizing enterocolitis was defined by the modified Bell’s criteria, with at least stage 2 being requisite for disease classification.86 Presence of seizures required both clinical and EEG-activity confirmation. Sepsis encompassed both blood culture-positive early- (<72 h) and late- (>72 h) onset.

Patient fecal samples were submitted to the Environmental Sample Preparation and Sequencing Facility at Argonne National Laboratory (Lemont, IL, USA) for genomic DNA extraction and Illumina 16S rRNA gene sequencing.34,35 Data retrieved from the facility were subsequently processed and merged by the sample inference tool DADA287 from within QIIME2 version 2019.788. The processed and merged data was then classified to the genus level by the IDTAXA method89 via R package DECIPHER version 2.14.0 using the Genome Taxonomy Database90 version 89, and additionally into species-like groups by the online NCBI Nucleotide Basic Local Alignment Search Tool91 (BLAST – https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi) with an identity threshold of ≥97%. After classification, low quality samples with <1000 total sequence counts were removed, and then species-like groups that represented <0.1% mean abundance were culled.

The α-diversity metrics of richness and Shannon diversity were computed by R package iNEXT92 version 2.0.20. For β-diversity analysis, the taxonomic levels of phylum, family, genus, and species were individually considered. These data were center-log ratio transformed using R package ALDEx293 version 1.18.0. Predicted functional profiles were obtained via the R package Tax4Fun236 version 1.1.5 using their downloaded version 2 reference dataset from NCBI BLAST (Ref99NR) and KEGG.41 This data was center-log ratio transformed with zeroes imputed by the nonparametric multiplicative simple method through R package zCompositions version 1.3.4.

All statistical analysis was done in R statistical software version 3.6.2 with plots generated by R package ggplot2 version 3.3.0. Original study groups were defined by the loss in head circumference z-score from birth to 36 weeks PMA: AHCGT (≥0.5; n = 28 patients, n = 118 fecal samples), mildly SHCGT (<0.5–1; n = 16 patients, n = 67 fecal samples), moderately SHCGT (<1-1.5; n = 8 patients, n = 32 fecal samples) and severely SHCGT (<1.5; n = 6 patients, n = 23 fecal samples). Later analysis combined all SHCGT groups in comparison to the AHCGT group, and the moderately to severely SHCGT groups in comparison to the AHCGT to mildly SHCGT groups, for both the complete and LM datasets. The LM subset comprised of infants without severe brain injury, severe retinopathy of prematurity, necrotizing enterocolitis, seizures, or sepsis; bronchopulmonary dysplasia was not excluded as it had an equivalent risk ratio between study groups (Table 2): AHCGT (n = 23 patients, n = 101 fecal samples), mildly SHCGT (n = 13 patients, n = 50 fecal samples) and moderately to severely SHCGT (n = 8 patients, n = 32 fecal samples).

Discussed key microbial taxa for HCG were both significantly differentially abundant or prevalent between study groups by the set threshold and were present in at least three patients of one study group. For KOs, statistically significant features were tallied by their respective KEGG41 pathways using R package KEGGREST version 1.26.1. The importance of KEGG pathways for discussion was then determined through ranking them by their total number of significant features. Detailed statistics from all studied datasets and time windows are provided for both the abundance and prevalence of significant microbial taxa and KOs (Table S10). This same procedure was applied to discussed vertically transmitted microbial taxa that were significantly differentially abundant by delivery mode; detailed statistics are provided (Table S7).

Individual microbial taxa were selected for change point analysis if they significantly varied in abundance by PMA as determined from the above mixed-effect linear models. Change point analysis was conducted on the mean percent abundances of the microbial taxon over PMA, and separately for each study group. Only the patients for which the microbial taxon was present in at least one fecal sample (>0 sequence counts) were used for determining change points of that microbial taxon. A data point for each PMA week from 24 to 36 was required for this analysis, and missing points were imputed by R package imputeTS version 3.0. Change points were evaluated using the pruned exact linear time (PELT) algorithm with a nonparametric cost function based on the empirical distribution of the data using R package changepoint.np94 version 1.01. The ideal penalty value (and thus number of change points) was selected from the diagnostic plot as outlined by Lavielle.95 The change points of all individual microbial taxa were then tallied by PMA week for each examined taxonomic level (phylum, family, genus, and species), which revealed the time point at which the most changes in microbial taxon abundances were occurring.

The R package caret version 6.0.86 was utilized to build random forest classifiers with 500 trees, and the number of variables randomly sampled as candidates at each split (argument mtry) tuned from a random search using 10-fold adaptive cross-validation and 3 repeats. For evaluating feature importance, statistical significance was estimated for the decrease in Gini coefficient from permuting the response variable by R package pRF version 1.2. Features were then ranked by their permutation importance,43 or the number of permutations yielding a lower importance than observed out of 1001. The key time windows of 24–30 weeks PMA and 31–36 weeks PMA were each separately considered for building random forest classifiers to predict the binary outcome of AHCGT versus any SHCGT.

Classifiers were first built using the fecal microbial taxonomic median abundance and prevalence data individually at the studied taxonomic levels. Microbial taxa that had a statistically significant (p< .05) feature importance, were present in at least three patients’ fecal samples and were classified to the respective taxonomic level examined were subsequently selected to be included in the final multi-taxonomic level random forest classifiers. Clinical data were added to the multi-taxonomic level random forest classifiers, which included mode of delivery, gestational age at birth, sex, birthweight, birth head circumference, morbidities, enteral feeding, and antibiotics. After the multi-taxonomic level random forest classifiers were built, a further feature reduction step took place to remove redundant variables through selecting the best descriptors for each feature after ranking by importance. The final random forest classifiers accuracies are described by the subtraction of the out of bag error from 100, and features are displayed by their permutation importance. Details of the random forest classifiers are provided (Table S11).

Cumulative link mixed regression models were built using R package ordinal version 2019.12.10, with infant HCG trajectory (AHCGT -> Mildly SHCGT -> Moderately SHCGT -> Severely SHCGT) as the outcome, PMA, delivery mode, the microbial taxon abundance/clinical factor and the interaction between delivery mode and the microbial taxon abundance/clinical factor as fixed effects, and patient as a random effect. Data were standardized using R package standardize version 0.2.2 prior to fitting the models. Significance of the delivery mode and microbial taxon abundance/clinical factor interaction was assessed by the Wald statistic implemented in the ordinal package. The model coefficients of the interaction between delivery mode and the microbial taxon abundance/clinical factor (i.e., expected change on the log odds scale as HCG severity decreases) with their respective 95% confidence intervals are provided. McFadden’s R2 was calculated manually through dividing the log likelihood of the model by the log likelihood of the null model and subtracting this value from one.

The clinical factors examined included gestational age at birth, birthweight, birth head circumference, sex, total days of all antibiotics, longest number of consecutive days of all antibiotics, total amount of enteral feeds, total days of total parenteral nutrition, day of life full enteral feeds achieved, total amount of human milk, total amount of formula, and number of morbidities. Individual antibiotics or morbidities were not examined for this analysis, as some were too rare in incidence to be properly assessed. Cohen’s D effect sizes between infants with AHCGT versus any SHCGT were calculated separately for each delivery mode using R package rstatix without assuming equal variances. Detailed statistics are provided for the significant clinical factors (Table S8).

Bree Andrews, MD/MPH, is an equity partner in the B-Corporation PreeMe+You (PMY), a technology start-up whose goal is to provide bedside technology to parents of NICU patients that ameliorates health disparities. There is no current income from the company or royalties and her research on the microbiome and neurodevelopment is not related to her work with PMY. There were no overlapping patients that were studied in the current manuscript who also interfaced with the technology from PMY. Dinanath Sulakhe is a cofounder and equity partner in Navipoint Genomics, LLC (NG), a genomics start-up that was incubated at the University of Chicago, whose goal is to provide a cloud-based genomic data analysis platform. NG currently has an active SBIR Phase-1 grant and Mr. Sulakhe is currently providing consulting services for this grant. Mr. Sulakhe is also a cofounder and equity partner in Navipoint Health, Inc (NH), a genetic testing start-up. There is no current income or royalties from NH. The research presented in the paper is not relevant to NG and NH, or his work at NG and NH. It will not have any impact in the form of financial gain or loss to NG and NH. The remaining authors declare no competing interests.

The data that support the findings of this study are openly available in NCBI SRA at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/PRJNA739139/.

The authors would like to thank the Digestive Disease Research Core Center at the University of Chicago (P30DK42086) for its support on this study.

Supplemental data for this article can be accessed here.

