Integrated analysis of the faecal metagenome and serum metabolome reveals the role of gut microbiome-associated metabolites in the detection of colorectal cancer and adenoma



To profile gut microbiome-associated metabolites in serum and investigate whether these metabolites could distinguish individuals with colorectal cancer (CRC) or adenoma from normal healthy individuals.

Integrated analysis of untargeted serum metabolomics by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry and metagenome sequencing of paired faecal samples was applied to identify gut microbiome-associated metabolites with significantly altered abundance in patients with CRC and adenoma. The ability of these metabolites to discriminate between CRC and colorectal adenoma was tested by targeted metabolomic analysis. A model based on gut microbiome-associated metabolites was established and evaluated in an independent validation cohort.

In total, 885 serum metabolites were significantly altered in both CRC and adenoma, including eight gut microbiome-associated serum metabolites (GMSM panel) that were reproducibly detected by both targeted and untargeted metabolomics analysis and accurately discriminated CRC and adenoma from normal samples. A GMSM panel-based model to predict CRC and colorectal adenoma yielded an area under the curve (AUC) of 0.98 (95% CI 0.94 to 1.00) in the modelling cohort and an AUC of 0.92 (83.5% sensitivity, 84.9% specificity) in the validation cohort. The GMSM model was significantly superior to the clinical marker carcinoembryonic antigen among samples within the validation cohort (AUC 0.92 vs 0.72) and also showed promising diagnostic accuracy for adenomas (AUC=0.84) and early-stage CRC (AUC=0.93).

Gut microbiome reprogramming in patients with CRC is associated with alterations of the serum metabolome, and GMSMs have potential applications for CRC and adenoma detection.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) has become a growing challenge worldwide, and its early diagnosis is recognised as an effective way to improve the survival rate for patients with CRC. Several approaches have been adopted to detect CRC, like non-invasive methods such as the faecal occult blood test (FOBT) and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) test, as well as invasive procedures such as colonoscopy.1–3 However, the large-scale use of these methods is limited due to the low accuracy of the non-invasive tests and the damage caused by the invasive test.1 4 5 Therefore, a non-invasive and accurate detection method for CRC is required.

In this study, we performed an integrated analysis of serum metabolomics and metagenome sequencing of paired faecal samples and identified a set of serum metabolites in patients with CRC and adenoma that exhibited a close association with the gut microbiota. Based on these metabolites, we developed a gut microbiome-associated serum metabolite (GMSM) panel that accurately discriminates patients with CRC and adenoma (collectively termed colorectal abnormal) from normal (healthy) individuals (figure 1A).

Our cross-sectional study was divided into four cohorts (figure 1B, online supplemental table S1). Please see online supplemental material methods for further details.

For metabolite extraction in untargeted metabolomics detection, 60 µL of previously thawed serum was used. The method for metabolite extraction in targeted metabolomics detection was the same as those used for the untargeted metabolomics detection except for some modifications. Please see online supplemental material methods for further details.

An equal volume of serum derived from each individual in the normal population from the discovery cohort was pooled together as the N-pool sample. The method for the generation of the C-pool sample was the same as those used for the N-pool sample. A series of quality control (QC) matrices were generated by mixing different volumes of C-pool and N-pool samples. Please see online supplemental material methods for further details.

Metabolites extracted from the discovery cohort and the serum and faeces matched cohort were analysed by the Q exactive mass spectrometer coupled with UltiMate3000 ultraperformance liquid chromatography (Thermo Fisher). Please see online supplemental material methods for further details.

Peak extraction and alignment were performed using the Progenesis QI software. Please see online supplemental material methods for further details.

Metabolite annotation was done as previously described with some modifications.30 Please refer to online supplemental material methods for further details.

DNA extraction of the faecal samples was done by the QIAamp DNA Stool Mini Kit. Whole-genome shotgun metagenome sequencing was subsequently carried out and used for the taxonomy and function analysis of the gut microbiome.31 Please see online supplemental material methods for further details.

Without using pure standards, we optimised the pseudotargeted method, described by Zheng et al,32 to determine the relative level of all metabolites in the identified panel by using the same reference pool for normalising abundances of each individual. The ExionLC AC system was connected to a 6500 QTrap Mass Spectrometer (Sciex) run in separate ion modes (positive and negative). The mobile phase and the column used for reversed-phase liquid chromatography were the same as those used for the untargeted metabolite profiling. Please see online supplemental material methods for further details.

For mass spectrometry imaging (MSI), a total of nine pairs of human colorectal tissue samples, including advanced adenoma or CRC and the adjacent noncancerous tissues, were collected. These samples were freshly frozen with liquid nitrogen immediately after biopsy, transferred to cryogenic vials, and stored at −80°C. The details of this method are described by Sun et al. 33

Data preprocessing, statistical analysis and predictive model building were conducted using R programming (V.3.6.1).

Using analysis of variance with Tukey’s honestly significant difference (HSD) test, we selected metabolites with an adjusted p<0.005 as significantly altered. Please see online supplemental material methods for further details.

The QC samples, including the C-pool and N-pool, as well as the mixed pool samples (NC10, NC20, NC30, NC40, NC50, NC75 and NC90), were built as described in the ‘QC samples and QC matrix’ section and were used to calculate the accuracy. Please see online supplemental material methods for further details.

Pairwise correlation coefficients using Pearson’s correlation coefficients between the gut microbiome species and serum metabolites were carried out using the 33 abnormal colorectal patients in the serum and faeces matched cohort. The correlation coefficient and p value for each species–metabolite pair was calculated and considered significantly associated with the cut-off of p≤1E-3.

To select the metabolite features for the CRC GMSM panel, we implemented the least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) algorithm with 10-fold cross-validation for feature selection from the GMSM data, as reported previously.34 Please see online supplemental material methods for further details.

Tumourigenesis is accompanied by global alterations of the metabolite state in local tissues and the circulation system.17 To investigate the relationship between the serum metabolome and colorectal adenoma or cancer, untargeted metabolomic profiling by metabolomic analysis was done in the discovery cohort (figure 1A). The discovery cohort was divided into three populations: Normal healthy population (N, n=31), patients with adenoma (A, n=12) and patients with CRC (C, n=49) (figure 1B). Low-abundance signals (mean abundance of <5000 in all the three populations) were filtered out first. Distributions of the R2 values of the linear regression model between the expected mixing ratio and measured mixing ratio for each metabolite detected, in either the negative and positive ion mode, are displayed in figure 1C, showing that more than 50% of the metabolites have R2 values larger than 0.9, indicating the accuracy of our metabolite detection, as well as the robust linearity of these metabolites within this concentration range. Additionally, we also profiled the coefficient of variances (CV%) for all metabolite features using pooled CRC samples (C-pool) as the QC and observed that the CVs for more than 90% of these features were less than 15% (online supplemental figure S1C), indicating the stability among different detection batches.

Next, we explored metabolites that showed significantly altered abundances between the different pairs of the population (C vs N, A vs N and C vs A, adjusted p<0.005, fold change >1.2 or <0.8). The distribution of all the samples in a principal component analysis (PCA) plot based on all these altered metabolites (figure 1D) revealed similar patterns for the patients with adenoma and cancer, while the normal population could be clearly distinguished from these two populations. On further comparison of the significantly altered metabolites in the three pairs, the C versus N pair showed the most remarkable similarity with the A versus N pair, indicating that tumourigenesis had already induced significant serum metabolic changes at the adenoma stage (figure 1E). The metabolites that were significantly altered in both the C versus N pair and the A versus N pair (1426 metabolite features in total), termed ‘colorectal abnormal-associated metabolites,’ were used for further analysis since they exhibited both early and sustained alterations during tumour progression. Out of the 1426 metabolite features, 885 could be annotated (online supplemental table S2), and the relative abundances of these metabolites in the discovery cohort are displayed in figure 1F. Based on these metabolites, a clear division between abnormal colorectal patients (C and A) and the normal individuals could also be achieved (figure 1G).

Alterations of the microbiome composition in abnormal colorectal patients contribute to the reprogramming of local metabolome profiles.9 10 However, whether these changes related to a colorectal abnormality in the gut microbiota could cause reprogramming of the serum metabolome remained unclear. To further investigate the association between the gut microbiome and colorectal abnormal-associated serum metabolites and to determine the potential contribution of these microbiome-associated metabolites to predict colorectal abnormality, we performed an integrated microbiome–metabolome analysis in the serum and faeces matched cohort by an associated analysis of the metagenomic profiling of the faecal samples with the metabolome of the matched serum samples (figure 2A). In total, data from 44 individuals in the serum and faeces-matched cohort passed the QC and was used for subsequent analysis. Taxonomic profiling of the metagenome data revealed 12 455 microbiome species. Among these species, we observed an elevation of the enterotoxigenic bacteria Bacteroides fragilis (ETBF), which has been proposed to be a keystone pathogen in CRC initiation (figure 2B, highlighted in red). Several other CRC-promoting species, including Fusobacterium nucleatum, Parvimonas micra and Campylobacter jejuni, were all significantly upregulated (figure 2B, highlighted in red), while probiotics such as Bifidobacterium longum were downregulated in the patients with CRC (figure 2B, highlighted in blue).8 35 The changes in the abundance of these CRC-related species were consistent with that of a previous report.10

Collectively, these results support that the CRC-associated gut microbiome could contribute to the alterations in specific serum metabolites.

Based on the 322 GMSM described above, we used the LASSO algorithm to identify key metabolite biomarkers for detecting colorectal abnormality (figure 3A). After performing 200 LASSO runs, 32 metabolite features in total consistently appeared more than 75% of the time (online supplemental table 5). Among them, eight metabolites could be reliably identified, showing a consistent upregulation or downregulation trend in both untargeted and targeted metabolomic detection, indicating that these metabolites could be stably measured using different approaches (figure 3A, B, table 1).

CV, coefficient of variances; GMSM, gut microbiome-associated serum metabolites.

Additionally, the eight metabolites also demonstrated significant accuracy in distinguishing adenomas/CRC from normal individuals in the serum and faeces matched cohort, with an AUC of 0.96 (95% CI 0.84 to 1.00) (figure 3G). The abnormal colorectal patients from two centres, Cancer Institute, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences (green spots) and Shandong province (SD) (red spots), were clustered in the PCA plot and were unambiguously separated from the normal individuals (blue spots) (figure 3H). As a result, a panel consisting of eight GMSM was discovered, termed the GMSM panel, which has the potential to detect the colorectal abnormality.

Based on the panel of metabolites identified in the discovery cohort, 192 individuals were recruited in the modelling cohort, including 72 normal individuals and 120 abnormal colorectal patients (online supplemental table S1), and the targeted multiple reaction monitoring method was used to measure the relative abundances of the 8 GMSM metabolites. A prediction model was generated using a logic regression method and reached an AUC of 0.98 (95% CI 0.94 to 1.00) in the modelling cohort (figure 4A). To achieve the highest accuracy, the cut-off of the biomarker score was set at 0.438 (figure 4B), leading to a sensitivity of 96.7% and specificity of 90.3% in the modelling cohort.

Next, we evaluated the performance of the GMSM model in an independent validation cohort consisting of 103 abnormal colorectal patients and 53 normal individuals (online supplemental table S1). Our GMSM model reached an AUC of 0.92, with a sensitivity of 83.5% and specificity of 84.9% in this independent validation cohort (figure 4C). We also separately examined the stage-specific performance of this model for the adenoma to late-stage cancer of the abnormal colorectal patients in the validation cohort. Our model distinguished the patients with adenoma from the normal healthy individuals with an AUC of 0.84. For the early-stage/mid-stage (stage I/II) patients with CRC, the AUC was 0.93, while for the late-stage (stage III/ IV) patients with CRC, the AUC reached 0.91 (figure 4D). Using the previously established cut-off for the highest accuracy, the sensitivity for colorectal adenoma and the early/mid-stage CRC (stage I/II) achieved 63.2% and 88.2%, respectively, while the specificity for colorectal adenoma and the early/mid-stage CRC was 84.9%. Our data implicate the promising potential of the GMSM model for the early detection of CRC.

To compare the efficiencies of the clinically used marker CEA and our GMSM model to detect CRC and adenoma, we assessed their performances in the validation cohort, and the serum CEA levels of all the individuals in this validation cohort were recorded. Using CEA at the clinically used cut-off value of 5 U/mL to detect colorectal abnormality lead to an AUC of 0.72 with a sensitivity of 35.8% and specificity of 86.4%. In contrast, our GMSM model reached an AUC of 0.92 (sensitivity=83.5%, specificity=84.9%), which was much higher than that of CEA (figure 5A, B).

Additionally, we also compared our GMSM model with the FOBT/FIT analysis currently used for CRC screening. For this, we analysed the medical records of patients with CRC and found 89 patients who had undergone the FOBT/FIT test. Among these patients, 58 patients were positive for FOBT/FIT test, and 31 patients had a negative FOBT/FIT result, leading to a sensitivity of 65.2%, comparable with previous reports.41 42 These results indicate that our GMSM model is better than the FOBT/FIT test in detecting CRC.

Metabolic profiling is emerging as an efficient approach for the detection of different tumours.25 43 44 In this study, we used metabolomic analysis to develop a CRC and adenoma detection model. Our model exhibited a higher accuracy than the clinically used biomarker CEA and a recently reported plasma biomarker panel that used a series of protein markers and cfDNA hotspot mutations.45 Our results suggest that our GMSM panel could be a promising approach for non-invasive CRC and adenoma detection.

It should be noted that certain shortcomings exist in our study. A larger number of adenomas, particularly advanced adenomas and early-stage CRCs, are needed to confirm the implication that our approach can be applied to cancer early detection. Nonetheless, by integrating the analysis of faecal metagenome and serum metabolomes in normal and CRC populations, we discovered an association between colorectal abnormality and serum metabolic profiles. We established a metabolite-based prediction model with high accuracy for the detection of CRC.

FC and XD contributed equally.

Correction notice: This article has been corrected since it published Online First. The data availability statement has been updated.

Contributors: All authors contributed to this article through each of the following: (1) conception and design, analysis and interpretation of data; (2) drafting the article and revising it critically for important intellectual content; (3) giving final approval for the version to be published and (4) agreement to be accountable for all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions related to the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are appropriately investigated and resolved.

Funding: This study was supported by the CAMS Innovation Fund for Medical Sciences (CIFMS) (grant no. 2017-I2M-3-005 and No. 2019-I2M-2-002).

Competing interests: X-DD is the cofounder of Precogify Pharmaceutical. All other authors declare no conflicts of interest or competing financial interests with respect to this manuscript.

Provenance and peer review: Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.

Supplemental material: This content has been supplied by the author(s). It has not been vetted by BMJ Publishing Group Limited (BMJ) and may not have been peer-reviewed. Any opinions or recommendations discussed are solely those of the author(s) and are not endorsed by BMJ. BMJ disclaims all liability and responsibility arising from any reliance placed on the content. Where the content includes any translated material, BMJ does not warrant the accuracy and reliability of the translations (including but not limited to local regulations, clinical guidelines, terminology, drug names and drug dosages), and is not responsible for any error and/or omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.

Readers can now access the original datasets of untargeted metabolomics at National Population Health Data Center and Population health Data Archive (https://www.ncmi.cn/phda/dataDetails.html?type=project_data&id=CSTR:17970.11.A001M.202105.612.V1.0).

Not required.

Ethical approval was obtained from the Independent Ethics Committee of National Cancer Center/Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Science, and Peking Union Medical College (approval no. 18-218/1796).

