Microbial co-occurrence complicates associations of gut microbiome with US immigration, dietary intake and obesity

Obesity and related comorbidities are major health concerns among many US immigrant populations. Emerging evidence suggests a potential involvement of the gut microbiome. Here, we evaluated gut microbiome features and their associations with immigration, dietary intake, and obesity in 2640 individuals from a population-based study of US Hispanics/Latinos.

The fecal shotgun metagenomics data indicate that greater US exposure is associated with reduced ɑ-diversity, reduced functions of fiber degradation, and alterations in individual taxa, potentially related to a westernized diet. However, a majority of gut bacterial genera show paradoxical associations, being reduced with US exposure and increased with fiber intake, but increased with obesity. The observed paradoxical associations are not explained by host characteristics or variation in bacterial species but might be related to potential microbial co-occurrence, as seen by positive correlations among Roseburia, Prevotella, Dorea, and Coprococcus. In the conditional analysis with mutual adjustment, including all genera associated with both obesity and US exposure in the same model, the positive associations of Roseburia and Prevotella with obesity did not persist, suggesting that their positive associations with obesity might be due to their co-occurrence and correlations with obesity-related taxa, such as Dorea and Coprococcus.

Among US Hispanics/Latinos, US exposure is associated with unfavorable gut microbiome profiles for obesity risk, potentially related to westernized diet during acculturation. Microbial co-occurrence could be an important factor to consider in future studies relating individual gut microbiome taxa to environmental factors and host health and disease.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s13059-021-02559-w.

Evidence from animal studies suggests that the gut microbiome may play a causal role in the development of obesity [1, 2], while the relationship between gut microbiome and obesity remains unclear in humans [3, 4]. Recent systematic reviews found mixed results on gut microbiome features associated with obesity across human studies [3, 4]. The inconsistency in human studies may be due to small sample sizes (the majority of previous studies had N < 100) and/or large interpersonal variation in gut microbiome related to many host factors (e.g., race/ethnicity [5], geography [6], diet/lifestyle [7, 8]). On the other side, microbes do not live in isolation but develop a range of relationships in the communities, including mutualism, commensalism, synergism, competition parasitism, predation, antagosim, and amensalism [9], and the complex microbial interaction might also influence the relationship of gut microbiome with obesity and other conditions.

To better understand the interrelationship among immigration, gut microbiome, and obesity in US Hispanics/Latinos, we extended our analyses using shotgun metagenomics sequencing on a larger group of individuals. Among 2640 US Hispanics/Latinos of diverse background (including Dominican, Cuban, Puerto Rican, Mexican, Central American, and South American), aged 23 to 83 years, from the Hispanic Community Health Study/Study of Latinos (HCHS/SOL ) [29, 30], we evaluated multiple gut microbiome features including community-level diversity, individual taxa, and functional potential, and examined associations of these features with immigration generation, duration of US residence, usual dietary intake, and obesity. The potential microbial co-occurrence relationship and its potential influences on the associations of gut microbiome with US immigration, dietary intake, and obesity were also examined.

Among 2640 US Hispanics/Latinos (age ranged from 23 to 83 years), 368 (14%) were born in the mainland USA. Severity and prevalence of obesity were highest for those born in USA, as well as being positively associated with duration of US residence. Detailed study participant characteristics are shown in Additional file 1: Table S1.

Higher levels of obesity were associated with lower α-diversity Faith’s phylogenetic distance (PD) after multivariable adjustment in weighted linear regression (Additional file 1: Figure S1A). Consistently, α-diversity Faith’s PD index was lowest in those born in USA, and inversely associated with duration of US residence (Additional file 1: Figure S1A). Principal-coordinates analysis (PCoA) of weighted UniFrac distances indicated that both host obesity and US exposure (US born and duration of US residence) significantly co-varied with the β-diversity of gut microbiome and explained moderate proportion of variance (PERMANOVA analysis by adonis function from vegan package, R2 = 0.9% and 1.8% respectively, both P < 0.001) (Additional file 1: Figure S1B). These results are in line with previous findings in US immigrants from Thailand [10]. In addition, we also examined associations of other participant characteristics with β-diversity, and most variables were significantly associated with β-diversity, while all these R2 values were relatively small (R2 < 2.0%), including those for obesity and US exposure (Additional file 1: Figure S2). These results are consistent with those observed in our previous analyses using 16S data [11] as well as previous findings observed in large population-based studies in which multiple host factors showed significant associations with β-diversity but only explained a very small proportion of variation in β-diversity [6].

We then examined associations of individual gut microbial taxa at a genus level with obesity and US exposure after controlling for demographic, socioeconomic, behavioral, and clinical variables using weighted linear regression models. Of the 84 predominant gut bacterial genera included in this analysis (relative abundance ≥0.01%), 38 were significantly associated with BMI (FDR < 0.05; 26 under Firmicutes phylum, 6 under Actinobacteria, and 3 under Proteobacteria), and 49 genera were significantly associated with US exposure (FDR < 0.05; 33 under Firmicutes phylum, 6 under Proteobacteria, and 6 under Bacteroidetes) (Fig.
1A and Additional file 2: Table S2). Cross-classification of these two sets of results identified 23 bacterial genera that showed significant associations with both BMI and US exposure (Fig.
1A, B and Additional file 1: Table S3). Despite a strong positive association between BMI and US exposure (Fig.
1C), we found that a majority of genera (17 of 23) showed paradoxical associations with obesity and US exposure, including nine genera (e.g., Roseburia, Prevotella, and Dorea) associated with higher BMI but less US exposure, and the other eight genera (e.g., Anaerotruncus and Eggerthella) associated with lower BMI but greater US exposure. After further adjustment for Hispanic background, the associations of gut bacterial genera with obesity and US exposure did not change materially (Additional file 3: Table S4). In addition, in consideration of close correlations between US exposure and the covariates included in our regression models, we also compared associations of gut bacterial genera with US exposure and these covariates. Forty-nine genera were significantly associated with US exposure independently of these covariates, and their associations with these covariates are also shown in Additional file 4: Table S5.

We also performed co-occurrence network analysis [33, 34] to visualize potential bacterial co-occurrence relationships among gut bacterial genera in our study samples. This analysis indicated potential bacterial co-occurrence relationships among these genera which showed associations with both obesity and US exposure (Fig.
2C), and their associations might be driven by some key genera associated with obesity or US exposure. For example, among Cluster-A bacterial genera which showed bacterial co-occurrence relationships, Coprococcus and Dorea were associated with higher BMI, while Roseburia, Prevotella, and Senegalimassilia were associated with less US exposure. Interestingly, either phylogenetically closely related bacterial genera, or those belonging to different phyla, could be clustered in the bacterial co-occurrence network. For example, Roseburia, Coprococcus, and Dorea are in the Lachnospiraceae family, while Prevotella and Senegalimassilia belong to the Bacteroidetes phylum and the Actinobacteria phylum, respectively (Fig.
1A). Taken together, these results suggested that the observed associations of individual gut microbial taxa with obesity and US exposure might be due to bacterial co-occurrence, and these paradoxical associations were resolved after taking bacterial co-occurrence into account.

To further clarify the relationships of individual gut microbial taxa with obesity and US immigration, we attempted to account for diet, a behavioral factor that tends to change after immigration and that can profoundly influence both body habitus and gut microbiome features [11]. Compared to US-born Hispanics/Latinos, Latin America-born individuals, especially those who had relative shorter duration of US residence, showed higher consumption of dietary fiber, and generally more favorable eating habits, as evidenced by higher levels of the 2010-AHEI as well as individual food/nutrient components (e.g., higher intakes of vegetables, fruits, nuts, and legumes, and lower intakes of red/processed meat, sugar-sweetened beverages, sodium, and trans-fat) (Fig.
3A, B).

We then related individual bacteria genera with host dietary intake and found that 30 out of 84 predominant bacteria genera were significantly associated with 2010 -AHEI as well as individual food/nutrient components, especially with healthy fiber-rich foods (e.g., whole grain, vegetables, fruits, nuts, and legumes) (Additional file 1: Figure S8). Consistent with the relationship between US exposure and host dietary intake, bacterial genera associated with less US exposure were associated with relatively healthier diet pattern and higher intakes of fiber-rich foods, while bacterial genera associated with greater US exposure were associated with relatively unhealthier diet pattern and lower intakes of fiber-rich foods, regardless of their associations with obesity (Fig.
3C). We then focused on the associations of these bacteria genera with dietary fiber intake and found some unexpected associations. Particularly, Dorea and Coprococcus, which were independently associated with obesity, were associated with higher fiber intake (Fig.
3D). After including all 15 bacteria genera in a conditional analysis model (mutual adjustment) on fiber intake, no paradoxical associations remained. Six bacteria genera were independently associated with dietary fiber intake, and directions of these associations were in line with those of their associations with US exposure and/or obesity (Fig.
3D).

Lastly, we examined microbial function contents to better understand the interrelationship among US immigration, dietary intake, gut microbiome, and obesity. The gut microbiome functional profiles were obtained using SHOGUN [35] and annotated by the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database Release 94.0 [36], and a total of 1952 known enzymes with specific Enzyme Commission numbers (EC number) were identified and included in the analyses. We first examined associations between US exposure and KO groups for 1952 known enzymes using weighted linear regression models and identified 260 KO groups associated with US exposure (all FDR P < 0.1). We then performed an enrichment test for these KO groups at EC level II enzyme category and found an enrichment of enzymes belonging to the glycosylases associated with US exposure (Additional file 1: Table S13).

We then explored potential contributions of these 15 bacterial genera that were independently associated with US exposure, fiber intake, and/or obesity to these KO groups. As these KO groups were highly correlated with each other, we focused on xylanase (K15531) as an example, given its well-known biological function in fiber degradation. While we found expected positive associations between bacterial genera (e.g., Roseburia and Prevotella which were associated with higher fiber intake) and xylanase, Dorea and Coprococcus which were positively associated with obesity were also positively associated with xylanase (Fig.
4D). We performed conditional analysis by including all 15 genera in the same regression model on xylanase. This greatly attenuated or abolished most of the associations of these genera, especially Dorea and Coprococcus, with xylanase, while the association between Roseburia and xylanase was only slightly attenuated and remained the strongest (Fig.
4D). These results suggest that Roseburia might be a major bacteria contributing to xylanase, and the observed positive associations of Dorea and Coprococcus with xylanase might be due to their correlations with Roseburia. Our genomic analyses provided further evidence supporting the presence of xylanase gene on representative Roseburia genomes but not on representative Dorea or Coprococcus genomes (Additional file 1: Table S15). In support of our results, Roseburia species from the human gut have been reported to produce xylanases and display high xylanolytic activity [38].

Taken together, these data from a large population-based cohort study of Hispanics/Latinos living in the US demonstrated that US immigration was associated with alterations in gut microbiome diversity, individual taxa, and functional profiles, which is consistent with previous findings observed in immigrants from Thailand to the USA [10]. Further extending prior work, this study linked these US immigration-associated gut microbiome features with obesity, a major health burden among US Hispanics/Latinos and other US immigrants from lower-to-middle income countries [12]. In particular, we focused on individual gut microbial taxa associated with both US immigration and obesity. We identified several gut bacterial genera associated with US immigration, host dietary intake, and obesity in expected directions, suggesting a potential involvement of these bacteria linking US immigration with obesity, though potential mechanisms underlying these associations remain unknown. For example, Acidaminococcus which was associated with obesity in the current study and other populations [40, 41] was found to be more abundant in US-born Hispanics/Latinos and those with a longer duration of US residence, compared to those with a shorter duration of US residence, potentially related to increased consumption of animal-based protein-rich foods (e.g., red/processed meat intake; Fig.
3B), since Acidaminococcus is known to use amino acids as energy source [42]. However, it remains unknown how increased gut Acidaminococcus may influence host obesity.

This study has several limitations. Data on diet were assessed prior to the gut microbiome assessment, although we obtained dietary information using rigorous methods based on two 24-h dietary recalls and a food propensity questionnaire designed to capture habitual long-term diet [49] and detected strong associations between host dietary intake and gut microbiome features. The potential urban-rural differences could not be evaluated in our study due to the lack of detailed information on place of origin. Due to limitations of shallow shotgun metagenomics, we were unable to examine strain-level data and determine individual taxa contributing to gut microbiome functional components using SHOGUN pipeline [35]. Given the observational nature of this study, causal inference could not be established without further evidence.

In conclusion, this study in US Hispanics/Latinos found that US immigration was associated with reduced gut microbiome diversity, reduced gut microbiome functions of fiber degradation, and alterations in individual gut microbial taxa (e.g., increased Acidaminococcus, decreased Roseburia, and Prevotella), potentially related to westernized diet during acculturation process. The US immigration-related alterations in gut microbiome features were also associated with obesity, suggesting a potential role of gut microbiome in the development of obesity among US immigrants from Latin America. Of note, a majority of gut bacterial genera showed paradoxical associations with US immigration, host dietary intake, and obesity, which could be resolved into directionally consistent associations after accounting for potential microbial co-occurrence. Thus, potential microbial co-occurrence may be an important factor to consider in future studies relating individual gut microbial taxa to environmental factors and host health and disease.

HCHS/SOL is a prospective, population-based cohort study of 16,415 Hispanic/Latino adults (aged 18–74 years at the time of recruitment during 2008–2011) who were selected using a two-stage probability sampling design from randomly sampled census block areas within four US communities (Chicago, IL; Miami, FL; Bronx, NY; San Diego, CA) [11, 29, 30]. A comprehensive battery of interviews and a clinical assessment with blood draw were conducted at in-person clinic visits. Information on demographics, behaviors, health status, family and medical histories, and medication use was collected using structured questionnaires, and blood pressure and anthropometric traits were measured. Blood biomarkers including blood lipids and glycemic traits were measured by standard methods [50]. The HCHS/SOL Gut Origins of Latino Diabetes (GOLD) ancillary study was conducted to examine the role of gut microbiome in the development of multiple health outcomes, enrolling 3035 participants from the HCHS/SOL approximately concurrent with the second in-person visit period from 2014 to 2017 [11]. This study included participants of diverse Hispanic/Latino backgrounds, including Dominican, Cuban, Puerto Rican, Mexican, Central American, and South American. The study was approved by the institutional review boards of corresponding site institutions. Written informed consent was obtained from all participants.

Enrolled GOLD participants were provided with a stool collection kit. For each participant, a single fecal specimen was self-collected using a disposable paper inverted hat (Protocult collection device, ABC Medical Enterprises, Inc., Rochester, MN). Two fecal samples were self-collected by each participant, with one sample collected by a Whatman FTA card (GE Healthcare, Chicago, IL) and another one placed in a tube of RNAlater (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Detailed procedures have been described elsewhere [11]. In addition, use of antibiotics or probiotic supplements within the prior 6 months and stool characteristics were ascertained by self-administered questionnaire at the time of stool sample collection.

Metagenomics Sequencing was performed on DNA extracted from fecal samples collected by FTA card using a novel shallow-coverage method of shotgun sequencing-based Illumina NovaSeq platforms [51]. The adapters and barcode indices are processed following the iTru adapter protocol [52]. De-multiplexing was applied to generate Shallow shotgun per-sample FASTQ data and the adapter sequences were trimmed. The human-filtered FASTQ reads were further trimmed to remove low-quality bases that had a PHRED quality score of 25 or less using prinseq-lite 0.20.4 (https://edwards.sdsu.edu/cgi-bin/prinseq/prinseq.cgi) [53]. For the final analytical set, two Illumina sequencing runs were pooled. Samples with a coverage depth less than 500,000 reads per sample were excluded. Of 3035 samples, 2640 samples passed all QC metrics and were used in the current analysis. The coverage depth ranged from 500 to 8945 k reads per sample and average depth was 955 k reads per sample. The quality-controlled paired end data was then concatenated and aligned against the NCBI RefSeq representative prokaryotic genome collection (release 82) [54] using default SHOGUN [35] settings. Bowtie2 [55] was selected as the alignment tools in SHOGUN pipeline (https://github.com/knights-lab/SHOGUN). The reads that mapped to a single reference genome is labeled with the NCBI taxonomic annotation at the species level. Those reads that mapped to multiple reference genomes are labeled as the last common ancestor (LCA) of each label according to the NCBI taxonomy [35]. The α-diversity indices (Faith’s phylogenetic distance), and β-diversity weighted UniFrac distances were calculated using Qiita (https://qiita.ucsd.edu/) [56], Metaphlan3(https://huttenhower.sph.harvard.edu/metaphlan/) [57], and R phyloseq / vegan packages (https://github.com/joey711/phyloseq/https://github.com/vegandevs/vegan) [58, 59]. Functional profiles were obtained using SHOGUN and the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database release 94.0 [36].

Information on Hispanic/Latino background, place of birth, and years living in the mainland USA (with the US territory of Puerto Rico considered to be part of Latin America) was collected using structured questionnaires [11, 29, 30]. US exposure was defined based on place of birth and duration of US residence: mainland US born, US residence of 0–< 15 years, US residence of 15–< 25 years, US residence of 25–< 35 years, US residence of 35–< 45 years, and US residence of ≥ 45 years. Body mass index (BMI) was calculated as measured weight (kg) divided by measured height squared (m2). Obesity status was defined by BMI: normal weight (18.5 ≤ BMI < 25 kg/m2), overweight (25 ≤ BMI < 30 kg/m2), obese I (30 ≤ BMI < 35 kg/m2), obese II (35 ≤ BMI < 40 kg/m2), and obese III (BMI ≥ 40 kg/m2). Other obesity measures included waist circumference, and body fat percentage obtained from the Tanita body composition analyzer (model TBF-300A; Tanita Corporation, Arlington Heights, IL).

Usual dietary intake was estimated using the National Cancer Institute methodology based on dietary data collected from two 24-h dietary recalls and a food propensity questionnaire (FPQ), as described previously [60]. In brief, the first dietary recall was administered through in-person interviews conducted at the time of the baseline visit, whereas the second was performed primarily via telephone approximately 30 days after the first interview. The FPQ, which was administered at the 1-year follow-up call, asked participants to report frequencies of foods eaten in the previous year. Foods and nutrients were analyzed using the multiple-pass methods of the Nutrition Data System for Research software (version 11) from the Nutrition Coordinating Center at University of Minnesota. Overall dietary quality for each participant was estimated by the 2010 Alternative Healthy Eating Index (AHEI-2010) which was established based on extensive epidemiologic findings linking foods and nutrients to chronic disease outcomes [61]. The AHEI-2010 consists of 10 food/nutrient components in addition to alcohol consumption, with each of the 11 components being given 0–10 points according to predetermined criteria.

Clinical and demographic characteristics of the study population were described by reporting means with standard deviations (SDs) or medians with interquartile ranges for continuous variables and absolute frequencies with percentages for categorical variables.

The Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR) method was used for multiple testing correction. Statistical analyses were performed using R 3.6.1. unless otherwise stated.



The review history is available as Additional file 9.

Publisher’s Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

