Abnormalities in Gut Microbiota and Metabolism in Patients With Chronic Spontaneous Urticaria



Increasing evidence suggests that the gut microbiome plays a role in the pathogenesis of allergy and autoimmunity. The association between abnormalities in the gut microbiota and chronic spontaneous urticaria (CSU) remains largely undefined.

Fecal samples were obtained from 39 patients with CSU and 40 healthy controls (HCs). 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene sequencing (39 patients with CSU and 40 HCs) and untargeted metabolomics (12 patients with CSU and 12 HCs) were performed to analyze the compositional and metabolic alterations of the gut microbiome in CSU patients and HCs.

The 16S rRNA gene sequencing results showed a significant difference in the β-diversity of the gut microbiota, presented as the Jaccard distance, between CSU patients and HCs. No significant differences were found in the α-diversity of the gut microbiota between patients and HCs. At the phylum level, the major bacteria in the gut microbiome of patients with CSU were Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, Proteobacteria, and Actinobacteria. At the genus level, Lactobacillus, Turicibacter, and Lachnobacterium were significantly increased and Phascolarctobacterium was decreased in patients with CSU. PICRUSt and correlation analysis indicated that Lactobacillus, Turicibacter, and Phascolarctobacterium were positively related to G protein-coupled receptors. Metabolomic analysis showed that α-mangostin and glycyrrhizic acid were upregulated and that 3-indolepropionic acid, xanthine, and isobutyric acid were downregulated in patients with CSU. Correlation analysis between the intestinal microbiota and metabolites suggested that there was a positive correlation between Lachnobacterium and α-mangostin.

This study suggests that disturbances in the gut microbiome composition and metabolites and their crosstalk or interaction may participate in the pathogenesis of CSU.

Chronic urticaria (CU), affecting 0.5%–1% of the general population, is defined as daily or an almost daily appearance of urticaria symptoms with or without angioedema. Approximately 80% of CU patients have no triggering physical stimuli or specific allergens identified, which is termed chronic spontaneous urticaria (CSU). CSU significantly affects patients’ performance at work and school and impairs quality of life. However, the etiology and pathogenesis of CSU are sophisticated and remain largely unclear.

In this study, we performed 16S rRNA gene sequencing and untargeted metabolomics in fecal samples to examine the differences in the gut microbiome and metabolites between patients with CSU and healthy controls (HCs), with the aim to providing preliminary data for further investigation into the potential role of gut microbiota perturbance in the pathogenesis of CSU.

Thirty-nine patients with CSU and 40 healthy volunteers (12–60 years of age) were recruited from The Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South University between February 1 and October 31, 2018. The diagnosis of CSU was established according to the EAACI/GA²LEN/EDF/WAO guideline (12). None of the subjects had been exposed to treatment with antibiotics or probiotics during the past 3 months prior to the collection of fecal samples. Patients were excluded if they had severe systemic diseases affecting vital organs, immunodeficiency disorders, auto-inflammatory syndromes, urticarial vasculitis, severe infections, or inducible urticaria except for dermographism or if they had been treated with systemic corticosteroids, biologics, or immunosuppressants in the past 3 months. Healthy volunteers without a personal history or family history of urticaria, atopic dermatitis, allergic rhinitis, conjunctivitis, asthma, anaphylaxis, autoimmune diseases, or other severe systemic diseases were recruited into the HCs group. This study was approved by the Medical Ethics Committee of The Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South University. Written informed consent was obtained for each participant before sample collection.

Subjects provided fresh feces within 1 day after enrollment. Feces were collected using Longseegen stool storage kit and suspended in stool storage solution according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Longsee Biomedical, Guangzhou, China) and stored at 4°C before further analysis.

The gut microbiota of the subjects was determined with 16S rRNA gene sequencing analysis, as described previously (13). 16S rRNA gene sequencing was performed at Longsee Biomedical Corporation (Guangdong, China). Briefly, the microbial DNA was extracted from the fecal sample from each participant using LONGSEE Stool DNA Kit (Longsee Biomedical, Guangzhou, China) in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. The forward primer (5′-ACT CCT ACG GGA GGCAGC AG-3′) and reverse primer (5′-GGA CTA CHV GGG TWT CTA AT-3′) were used to amplify the 16S rRNA gene V3–V4 variable region from the bacterial DNA by PCR. Amplifications were performed using a step cycling protocol consisting of 95°C for 3 min, 30 cycles of denaturation at 95°C for 15 s, annealing at 55°C for 15 s, and extension at 72°C for 30 s, followed by a final extension period at 72°C for 5 min. The PCR-amplified product was purified, quantified, normalized, and sequenced on the Illumina MiSeq-PE250 instrument using a Miseq Reagent Kit V3 (MS-102-3003; Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA). Raw FastQ files were demultiplexed, quality-filtered by Trimmomatic, and merged using FLASH (Fast Length Adjustment of Short Reads) (14). Trimmed sequences were clustered to operational taxonomic units (OTUs) with a 100% similarity cutoff using QIIME2 (Quantitative Insights Into Microbial Ecology, version 2) (15), and chimeric sequences were identified and removed using UCHIME, an algorithm detecting chimeric sequences with two or more segments (16). The taxonomical assignment of the OTUs was performed with QIIME2 classify-sklearn against the Silva database (http://www.arb-silva.de/) using a confidence threshold of 97%.

Stool samples were centrifuged at 17,000 × g for 15 min at 4°C. The supernatant was transferred to a new 1.5-ml centrifuge tube and dried by vacuum. Then, 200 μl of a 50% acetonitrile aqueous solution was added, vortexed for 30 s, sonicated for 10 min, centrifuged at 17,000 × g for 15 min, and then filtered through a 0.22-μm filter. Quality control (QC) samples were prepared by mixing aliquots of the supernatant from all samples. Liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis was performed using an ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography (UHPLC) system (1290 Infinity II LC System, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) and an ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) high-strength silica (HSS) T3 column (2.1 mm × 100 mm, 1.8 μm) coupled to a quadrupole time-of-flight (Q-TOF) mass spectrometer (6545 LC/Q-TOF MS, Agilent Technologies). Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water for positive mode and 0.5 mmol/L ammonium fluoride in water for negative mode; mobile phase B was acetonitrile. The elution gradient is set to: 0–1.0 min, 5% B; 1.0–2.0 min, 5%–10% B; 2.0–10.0 min, 10%–60% B; 10.0–14.0 min, 60%–95% B; 14.0–19.0 minutes, 95% B; 19.0–20.0 min, 95%–5% B; 20.0–23.0 min, 5% B. The flow rate was 0.4 ml/min. The injection volume was 1 μl. The Q-TOF mass spectrometer was used for its ability to acquire the MS/MS spectra on auto MS/MS mode in the control of the acquisition software (LC/MS Data Acquisition, version B.08.00, Agilent Technologies). The electrospray ionization (ESI) source conditions were set as follows: sheath gas flow rate, 12 L/min; sheath gas temperature, 350°C; dry gas flow rate, 8 L/min; dry gas temperature, 320°C; full MS resolution, 40,000; MS/MS resolution, 40,000; and collision energy, 20/40. In the normalized collision energy (NCE) mode, the spray voltage was 4.0 kV (positive) or −3.5 kV (negative). Mass Spectrometry–Data Independent Analysis software (MS-DIAL) was used for peak search, peak alignment, and other data processing, and the given identification results were obtained based on database matching with the first- and second-level maps.

For 16S rRNA gene sequencing analysis, diversity was calculated using the QIIME2 tool (15). The species richness and evenness within the bacterial populations were calculated by the α-diversity (17), whose metrics include Chao 1, evenness, Faith’s phylogenetic diversity (PD), Observed OTUs, and the Shannon and Simpson indices. The significance of α-diversity was calculated using Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed-rank test. The heterogeneity of the microbial communities, β-diversity, was determined using Jaccard distance matrices calculated by QIIME script, whose significance was also determined by PerMANOVA (permutational multivariate analysis of variance) (18). The greater the Jaccard distance, the less similarity among the microbial communities. Principal coordinates analysis (PCoA) was performed to visually present the individual and/or group differences in microbial distribution (19). Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) effect size (LEfSe) was performed to present the statistically significant differences in the relative abundance of gut microbial families and genera between two groups of samples (20). Only LDA values >2.5 and p-value <0.05 were considered significantly enriched. The performance of relevant microbes was measured by the area under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve (AUC), which was computed by SPSS.

For metabolomics analysis, all putative identities were confirmed by matching with entries in the MassBank of North America (MoNA) (http://mona.fiehnlab.ucdavis.edu/), the HMDB database (http://www.hmdb.ca), and the KEGG database (http://www.genome.jp/kegg) using the molecular mass data (m/z) of samples. The metabolite would be identified when a mass difference between the observed value and the database value was <0.025 Da. The datasets were analyzed using MetaboAnalyst 3.0 in a pattern recognition method. Peak areas were normalized to internal standards, as previously described in detail (22). Metabolites with a percentage relative SD of >30% in the quality control samples were excluded, and the remaining data were log transformed. For univariate analysis, the statistical significance of features between CSU patients and HCs was determined by t-test using MetaboAnalyst 3.0. For multivariate statistical analysis, partial least squares discrimination analysis (PLS-DA) was carried out on mean-centered and unit variance-scaled data. Metabolites were ranked according to their variable importance in the projection (VIP) scores from the PLS-DA model. Metabolites with VIP scores >1.0 in the multivariate statistical analysis and p < 0.05 in the univariate analysis were considered as the significant contributors. A metabolomics pathway analysis was performed using MetaboAnalyst 3.0 to determine the most relevant metabolic pathways involved in CSU. We assessed a test both for overrepresentation of altered metabolites within a pathway (hypergeometric tests) (23) and for the impact of the altered metabolites on the pathway functions through changes in critical junction points for the pathway (relative betweenness centrality) (24). The most significant pathways, in terms of hypergeometric test p-value and impact, were shown by plotting the results of KEGG pathways. GraphPad Prism 7.0 was used to obtain Spearman’s correlation coefficients between metabolites and intestinal microbiota.

Data in a normal distribution was expressed as mean (±SD). Percentage is used for enumeration data. Student’s t-test or Mann–Whitney U test was performed to test the differences of two groups. Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS Statistics (v.26.0.0.0; SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA), GraphPad Prism software (version 7.0, GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA), or R software (version 3.4.4). P-values <0.05 were considered significant.

The 16S sequencing data of this study have been deposited in the SRA accession database (ID: PRJNA721617).

In this study, we enrolled 79 subjects, including 39 patients with CSU and 40 HCs. No significant differences were found in age, sex ratio, and body mass index (BMI) between the two groups (p > 0.05). The baseline characteristics of the subjects, including a series of clinical features of the patients with CSU, are provided in Table 1 .

CSU, chronic spontaneous urticaria; HCs, healthy controls; BMI, body mass index; IQR, interquartile range.

A total of 519,595 high-quality sequences (6,577 sequences per sample) were obtained from the fecal samples of 79 subjects (39 CSU patients and 40 HCs). To evaluate alterations in the gut microbial diversities between CSU patients and HCs, we examined the α-diversity using six indices, namely, Chao 1, evenness, Faith’s PD, observed OTUs, and the Shannon and Simpson indices ( Figure 1A and Supplementary Table S1 ). No significant difference in the α-diversity of the gut microbiome between two groups was found (p > 0.05). For β-diversity ( Figure 1B and Supplementary Table S2 ), we observed significant differences in the Jaccard distance between CSU patients and HCs (*p < 0.05).

The bacterial communities and relative abundance in the two groups were explored at different taxonomic levels. At the phylum level, the major phyla in the gut microbiota of patients with CSU were similar to that of HCs: Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, Proteobacteria, and Actinobacteria ( Figure 2A and Supplementary Table S3 ). The relative abundance of Firmicutes was increased in patients with CSU, while the relative abundance of Proteobacteria was decreased. At the genus level, we observed that the relative abundance of Faecalibacterium, Roseburia, Lachnospira, Gemmiger, Prevotella, and Bifidobacterium was increased in patients with CSU, whereas the relative abundance of Blautia, Ruminococcus, Oscillospira, Megamonas, Dialister, Bacteroides, Parabacteroides, Alistipes, and Sutterella was decreased in this group compared to HCs ( Figure 2B and Supplementary Table S4 ).

We also performed an analysis in which patients with CSU were divided into group A and group B based on their different patterns of gut microbial diversity ( Supplementary Figures S1A, B ). When we compared the clinical differences of patients in groups A and B, no significant difference in BMI, time since diagnosis of CSU, complication with angioedema, history of food allergy, history of drug allergy, or family history of urticaria was identified between the two subgroups of patients ( Supplementary Figures S1C–H ).

To evaluate functional differences in the gut microbiomes of CSU patients versus HCs, we performed PICRUSt (21) to calculate their abundance, assign them to metabolic pathways using KEGG (25), and then test the differences between two groups. Compared with HCs, the G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) pathway was the only enriched metabolic pathway associated with the gut microbiome in the CSU group among the 328 metabolic pathways tested ( Figure 3A and Supplementary Table S6 ).

We next examined whether these bacteria, namely, Lactobacillaceae, Turicibacteraceae, Peptostreptococcaceae, Lachnobacterium, Turicibacter, Lactobacillus, Veillonellaceae, and Phascolarctobacterium, which were mentioned above as predictors of CSU, were related to GPCRs in order to gain insights into how specific taxa act in the aberrant metabolic pathways of CSU. Interestingly, in the CSU group, Lactobacillus, Turicibacter, and Phascolarctobacterium were positively related to GPCRs ( Figure 3B ). This indicated that the altered gut microbiome of patients with CSU may contribute to the progression of CSU via its impact on GPCRs.

Metabolome refers to a collection of small-molecule compounds that are involved in the metabolism of organisms and maintain the normal growth and development of organisms. These are mainly referred to as the endogenous small molecules with relative molecular weight of less than 1,000. We performed metabonomic analysis of the metabolites extracted from 24 fecal samples (12 from the 39 patients with CSU and 12 from the 40 HCs). A total of 6,377 molecular features were obtained and subjected to statistical analysis using MetaAnalyst 3.0. PLS-DA revealed that CSU patients and HCs exhibited clear clustering with a Q 2 of −0.24 and a R 2 Y of 0.88, which indicated that the model was not overlifting and was reliable ( Figure 4A ). Features with VIP scores >1.0 in the multivariate statistical analysis and p < 0.05 in the univariate analysis were considered as significant differential metabolites and were visualized through heatmaps ( Figure 4B ). Five significantly differential metabolites with a second-level map were altered in the feces of patients with CSU compared with those of HCs ( Supplementary Table S7 ). Among them, α-mangostin (α-MG) and glycyrrhizic acid were upregulated and 3-indolepropionic acid (IPA), xanthine, and isobutyric acid were downregulated in patients with CSU.

We then analyzed the correlation between the abundance of these five metabolites in fecal samples and clinical features such as BMI, time since diagnosis of CSU, complication with angioedema, history of food allergy, history of drug allergy, and family history of chronic urticaria using data of these 12 patients with CSU. Interestingly, the fecal abundance of xanthine was negatively correlated with the time since diagnosis of CSU in these patients (Spearman’s correlation analysis: r = −0.662, p = 0.0227) ( Supplementary Figure S2A ). Compared to the eight patients whose time since diagnosis of CSU is less than 12 months, the four patients with at least 12 months since diagnosis of CSU showed a significantly lower fecal abundance of xanthine (unpaired t-test: p = 0.0028) ( Supplementary Figure S2B ). Meanwhile, compared to the nine patients without a history of angioedema, the three patients complicated with angioedema showed a significantly higher fecal abundance of IPA (unpaired t-test: p = 0.0321) ( Supplementary Figure S2C ).

The significantly differential metabolites in the metabolic pathway were predicted using the KEGG pathway. Our results showed that some of the metabolic pathways in patients with CSU significantly changed compared with those of HCs, such as caffeine metabolism, protein digestion and absorption, and purine metabolism ( Supplementary Table S8 ). The decreased xanthine was involved in caffeine metabolism and purine metabolism. The decreased isobutyric acid was involved in protein digestion and absorption.

Spearman’s correlation analysis was performed for the altered metabolites screened out in the fecal metabonomic analysis and the perturbed gut microbiota genera screened out by 16S rRNA gene sequencing analysis. The criteria for statistical significance were correlation coefficient |r| > 0.60 and p < 0.05. There was a positive correlation between Lachnobacterium and α-MG ( Supplementary Table S9 ). A correlation heatmap was generated to present the covariation between the perturbed gut microbiota genera and the altered fecal metabolites, as shown in Figure 4C .

In our study, we have profiled the intestinal microbiome and metabolites of patients with CSU using 16S rRNA gene sequencing and metabolomics analysis. Our major findings revealed that Lactobacillus, Turicibacter, and Lachnobacterium were significantly increased and Phascolarctobacterium was decreased in the CSU group, and the perturbed gut bacteria may contribute to the progression of CSU through GPCRs, suggesting that CSU is potentially associated with the disturbance of gut bacteria.

In summary, our data revealed disordered gut microbial constitution and metabolites using high-throughput molecular techniques, which provided potential clues for studying the pathogenesis of CSU. Our work establishes an important knowledge framework for further investigations into the molecular interactions between gut bacteria and metabolites and immunity, which would enhance our understanding of the mechanisms underlying the development of CSU. This progress may also provide novel potential targets for intervention of this sophisticated disease. However, a weak point of this study is that potential confounding factors such as age and diet were not taken into account during the design of this study. Due to the limitation of the methodology, fungi colonization was not assessed either. In addition, no discussion was performed on the differential metabolite glycyrrhizic acid, a chemical extracted from the root of the licorice plant, due to the lack of relevant material for detailed discussion. As a single-center study with a limited sample size, the generalizability of our findings should be cautiously appraised. Therefore, further multicenter studies with a larger sample size and more critical factors incorporated are warranted in future investigations.

The 16S rRNA data have been uploaded to NCBI: PRJNA721617.

The studies involving human participants were reviewed and approved by the Medical Ethics Committee of The Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South University. Written informed consent to participate in this study was provided by each participant or by the participant's legal guardian/next of kin.

XW and HL designed the study. XW, WY, LH, SL, JW, and LJ performed the study. HL and MZ supervised the study. XW wrote the paper. HL, MZ, and QL revised the manuscript. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (81773334 and 81703133), Hu-Xiang Talents Program (2018RS3031), and the Clinical Medicine Research Center Program (2016SK4001) of Science-Technology Department of Hunan Province and Outstanding Innovation Talents Program of Changsha Science-Technology Bureau (kq1802002).

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fimmu.2021.691304/full#supplementary-material

