Disordered development of gut microbiome interferes with the establishment of the gut ecosystem during early childhood with atopic dermatitis



The gut microbiome influences the development of allergic diseases during early childhood. However, there is a lack of comprehensive understanding of microbiome-host crosstalk. Here, we analyzed the influence of gut microbiome dynamics in early childhood on atopic dermatitis (AD) and the potential interactions between host and microbiome that control this homeostasis. We analyzed the gut microbiome in 346 fecal samples (6–36 months; 112 non-AD, 110 mild AD, and 124 moderate to severe AD) from the Longitudinal Cohort for Childhood Origin of Asthma and Allergic Disease birth cohort. The microbiome-host interactions were analyzed in animal and in vitro cell assays. Although the gut microbiome maturated with age in both AD and non-AD groups, its development was disordered in the AD group. Disordered colonization of short-chain fatty acids (SCFA) producers along with age led to abnormal SCFA production and increased IgE levels. A butyrate deficiency and downregulation of GPR109A and PPAR-γ genes were detected in AD-induced mice. Insufficient butyrate decreases the oxygen consumption rate of host cells, which can release oxygen to the gut and perturb the gut microbiome. The disordered gut microbiome development could aggravate balanced microbiome-host interactions, including immune responses during early childhood with AD.

The gut microbiome during early life influences immune system development that affects health in later life.1,2 Gut microbiome perturbations during early infancy increase the risk of developing allergic diseases in children.3,4 Several studies support the notion that the gut microbiome plays a critical role in manifesting allergic diseases.5–8 Gut microbiota, and the short-chain fatty acids (SCFA) they produce, can induce Treg cells, which control mucosal Th2 inflammation.9,10 The Th1/Th2 balance is essential for immune regulation, and an imbalance Th1/Th2 can lead to chronic inflammation and allergic diseases.11

We investigated the relationship between gut microbiome dynamics in early childhood in children with AD and without AD and the potential interactions that control this relationship.

We analyzed 346 fecal samples (6–36 months; non-AD = 112, mild AD = 110, and moderate to severe AD = 124) from the Longitudinal Cohort for Childhood Origin of Asthma and Allergic Disease birth cohort (Figure 1a and Figure S1). The sample size had a discriminatory power of 90%, with a significance of 0.05 (Table S1). Of these, 58.0% were boys, and 25.6% were born by cesarean delivery (Table S2). The scoring of atopic dermatitis (SCORAD) index, parental history of allergic diseases, serum eosinophils, total IgE, egg-, and milk-IgE were significantly different between non-AD and AD groups (p < .001). Solid food was introduced at a mean age of 5.6 months in the subjects of this study.

Bifidobacterium, Veillonella, and Escherichia were dominant genera in GMT1, whereas Bacteroides, Bifidobacterium, and Faecalibacterium were dominant in GMT2 (q < 0.001; Figure 1e, Table S5). These coincided with the DMM modeling results in each phenotypic group (Figure S3). Although WMS and 16S datasets showed similar results for DMM clustering, the relative abundances of each genus were different. Therefore, we compared the overall concordance of relative abundances between WMS and 16S at phylum and genus levels (Figure S4). Pearson correlation R values of WMS and 16S were over 0.52 in all subjects (p < .001) at the phylum level and decreased (R ≤ 0.31; p < .001) at the genus level. Moreover, detected genera in negative controls for WMS were clearly different from those in samples, and detected numbers were lower (2 genera) than in 16S (19 genera) (Figure S2). Therefore, we primarily used the WMS dataset for further analyses.

Although the early childhood gut microbiota was clustered within two types, previous studies reported that the gut microbiota dynamically changes with age during early life.2,23 Furthermore, solid food intake starting at a mean age of 5.6 months in subjects of this study could influence their gut microbiome (after 6 months). Therefore, we analyzed the gut microbiota using the Bray–Curtis dissimilarity according to age range (6, 7–12, 13–24, 25–36 months) in non-metric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) plots (Figure 2a). The microbiota varied with age within GMT1 and GMT2 for all subjects and each phenotype (p < .01).

We analyzed the significantly associated covariates with microbiota at each age using the EnvFit model (Table S8). Breastfeeding and AD severity were significantly associated with gut microbiota at 6–24 months. In particular, exclusive breastfeeding (EBF) was the most significant and common factor (r2 = 0.306, p < .001 in WMS) for the gut microbiota differences in both non-AD and AD groups at 6 months. The relative abundance of B. longum was higher in EBF infants than in non-EBF infants, whereas B. breve and UC_Coprobacillus were higher in non-EBF infants (p < .05; Figure S5b).

We compared the species profiles by age to analyze the gut microbiome development during early life according to AD severity via random forest modeling. Bacteroides fragilis and F. prausnitzii were the most influential species in the prediction model (Figure 3a). Gut microbiota in the AD group was highly mature compared to that in the non-AD group at 6 months, whereas delayed gut microbiota maturation was observed after 12 months in the microbial-by-age z-score (MAZ) analysis (Figure 3b). Bacteroides fragilis, UC_Subdoligranulum, Anaerostipes hadrus, and Roseburia inulinivorans were significantly correlated to low MAZ in the AD group after 12 months (p < .05; Figure S6a).

Citrobacter freundii and E. faecalis were keystones in GMT1 of mild and moderate to severe AD, respectively. Although UC_Subdoligranulum and Lachnospiraceae were also keystones during microbiome development in AD groups, there were fewer correlated bacteria than in the non-AD group, and their correlations differed. Faecalibacterium prausnitzii was also a hub in GMT2 of AD groups. Therefore, the same bacteria could be critical to gut microbiome development in all groups. However, their influences on the microbiota were different in AD groups according to severity. This could be related to the disordered gut microbiome development with lower relative abundances of B. fragilis and UC_Subdoligranulum in AD groups (Figure S6a). Network analysis for all subject and combined AD groups revealed similar results as that of the distinguished phenotypes (Figure S7).

Differences in AD gut microbiome development can cause alterations in SCFA profiles. Therefore, we compared SCFA profiles among groups by training a machine-learning algorithm. SCFA-by-age z-score (SAZ) was calculated to analyze the dysbiosis of SCFA profiles in AD groups along with age (Figure 4a). Butyrate contributed more significantly to the prediction model than propionate. The SCFA profiles in AD groups were highly matured compared to those in non-AD before 12 months. However, they delayed maturation after 12 months, consistent with gut microbiota development (correlation R value between SAZ and MAZ ≥ 0.77 with p < .001). These results indicated that disordered gut microbiota development was associated with dysregulated SCFA production.

Gene families involved in butyrate metabolism were compared according to AD severity (Table S9 and Figure S8), and the significantly different gene families between non-AD and AD groups (q < 0.05 in Dunn’s test and q < 0.25 in MaAsLin2 after adjustments) were analyzed (Figure 4c). L-glutamate usage for butyrate production through glutamate decarboxylase (gad) was lower in AD groups than in non-AD group after 12 months. The conversion between fumarate and succinate by succinate dehydrogenase/fumarate reductase (sdhB/frdB) was lower in moderate to severe AD at 7–12 months. Different genes were used to convert pyruvate to acetyl-CoA in mild AD (porB) compared to other groups (korA) at 25–36 months. Crotonoyl-CoA production from 3-butenoyl-CoA by 4-hydroxybutanoyl-CoA dehydrase (abfD) was reduced in AD groups at 13–24 months. Butyryl-CoA: acetate-CoA transferase (but) levels at 25–36 months were lower in AD groups than non-AD group, and acetaldehyde dehydrogenase (adhE) levels were higher in the mild AD group than in other groups. Phosphate butyryltransferase (ptb) and butyrate kinase (buk) levels were the lowest in the mild AD group at 25–36 months. Ten species (A. findgoldii, A. hadrus, B. fragilis, B. ovatus, Coprococcus eutactus, Eggerthella lenta, Lachnospiraceae bacterium, Megamonas hypermegale, Odoribacter splanchnicus, and Prevotella buccae) were significantly different between non- and AD groups, as corresponding bacteria (q < 0.05; Figure S9). These differences could cause deficient butyrate production and low SAZ in AD groups. Differences according to severity were also found. Gene families involved in propionate metabolism were also different among groups according to severity (Table S10 and Figure S10).

The associated species with abnormal MAZ and SAZ in AD groups were correlated with clinical features (Figure 4d). The relative abundances of B. fragilis and UC_Subdoligranulum were negatively correlated with total IgE, egg-, and milk-IgE at 25–36 months (p < .01). In particular, B. fragilis was related to both abnormal MAZ and SAZ in AD groups, suggesting that the disordered microbiome development and SCFA production by limited colonization of B. fragilis was related to IgE levels and sensitization to egg or milk in children with AD.

Four KOs gradually changed according to AD severity at each age (p < .05 in Kruskal–Wallis test and q < 0.05 in Dunn’s test). The relative abundance of acarbose and validamycin biosynthesis was higher in non-AD than in AD groups at 6 months. The MAPK signaling pathway showed the highest levels in moderate to severe AD at 7–12 months. Chloroalkane and chloroalkene degradation and transcription were higher in moderate to severe AD at 13–24 months. MAPK signaling pathway showed higher levels in non-AD than in AD groups at 25–36 months. Species contributed to these KOs differed among the AD severity groups.

The interactions between the perturbed gut microbiome and host cell were analyzed using animal and in vitro cell assays. The gut microbiota, SCFA production, and host gene expression were compared between non-AD and AD-induced mice (Figure 6a). The concentration of butyrate was lower in fecal samples of the AD group than the non-AD group, whereas acetate was higher in the AD group (p < .01; Figure 6b). The expression level of genes for G-protein coupled receptor 109A (Gpr109a) and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ (Pparg) were downregulated in the colon of the AD group compared to the non-AD group (p < .01; Figure 6c). Positively correlated gut microbes with Pparg, Gpr109a, and butyrate were more abundant in the non-AD group than in the AD group (p < .05; Figure 6d).

Our results clearly show that butyrate production by the gut microbiome in the AD group was disturbed in both human and animal studies; hence, the influence of butyrate on colon epithelial cells was analyzed by the oxygen consumption rate (OCR) in Caco-2 cells (Figure 6e). Butyrate enhanced OCR and mitochondrial respiration processes. However, this effect was only detected at 1 mM concentration of butyrate, which showed that an optimal concentration of butyrate is required to maintain homeostasis of host cell metabolism.

We analyzed the gut microbiome of children with AD during early childhood (6–36 months) according to severity. The ecological drift of the gut microbiome during early life, from facultative anaerobes to strict anaerobes, was irregular in AD groups. The disordered microbiome development in AD was contributed to butyrate deficiency, different microbiome’s functional genes, and increased IgE levels. Perturbed gut microbiota and deficient butyrate interacted with gene expressions and OCR in host cells. The perturbed microbiome-host crosstalk could contribute to AD during early childhood.

In conclusion, regulated gut microbiome development is essential to maintain the gut ecosystem during early childhood. Disordered microbiome development in AD is characterized by persisting facultative anaerobes and limited B. fragilis colonization with age, which reduces SCFA production and induces abnormal immune responses by increasing IgE. This relationship is dynamic and harmonious crosstalk of a symbiotic human-microbiome system. Thus, the early stages of microbiome development may be an appropriate target for modulating the microbiota and establishing a healthy microbiome. Understanding these symbiotic relationships is critical for developing preventive and therapeutic strategies to treat AD in early childhood.

The statistical power of the sample number per group was estimated using the micropower R-package based on permutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA).56 The PERMANOVA powers were calculated based on the weighted UniFrac distance of infant gut microbiota data in our previous study.13 The effect sizes (ω2) were calculated using the simulated matrixes of 80% and 90% powers for varying sample numbers per group (Table S1). One hundred bootstrap iterations were performed using a significance level of 0.05 to estimate the power and effect size. The effect size was smaller than 0.0001 in ≥ 100 samples per group for a discriminatory power of 90%. Therefore, we aimed to collect more than 100 samples per group in this study.

This study was approved by the Institutional Review Boards (IRBs) of Asan Medical Center (IRB no. 2008–0616 and 2015–1031), Samsung Medical Center (IRB no. 2009–02-021), Severance Hospital (IRB no. 4–2008-0588), CHA Medical Center (IRB no. 2010–010), and Seoul National University Hospital (IRB no. H-1401-086-550). Written informed consent was obtained from the parents of each infant.

Metagenomic DNA was extracted from fecal samples using the RNeasy PowerMicrobiome Kit (Cat #26000-50, Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. The extracted DNA was purified using the DNeasy PowerClean Pro Cleanup Kit (Cat #12997-50, Qiagen) and quantified using a BioPhotometer D30 with a μCuvette G1.0 (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). The V1–V3 region of the 16S rRNA gene was amplified using a C1000 thermal cycler (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) per the MiSeq system protocol for preparing a 16S metagenomics sequencing library (Illumina, Inc., San Diego, CA, USA), as described previously.60,61 Equimolar concentrations of each sample were pooled and sequenced using the Illumina MiSeq system (300-bp paired ends) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Previous studies reported the influence of potential contamination of reagents on sequence-based microbiome analyses.62,63 Therefore, we sequenced and analyzed negative controls for quality control of sequencing. Negative controls were included at every step to check contamination, and three negative controls were sequenced with samples. Sequenced negative controls included unused stool box (sampling blank), DNA-free water added to the RNeasy PowerMicrobiome Kit (negative extraction controls), and the library preparation instead of DNA (library negative controls).

Amplicon sequences were analyzed using the QIIME2 pipeline.64 Raw sequences were quality filtered, and denoised using DADA2, and the taxonomic position of representative sequences were assigned with the EzTaxon-e database.65 Diversity indices were calculated after rarefied without replacement. A total of 28,804,166 reads (median 68,045 reads per sample) in human fecal samples were obtained from sequence analyses.

Extracted DNA from 346 samples was fragmented using a NEBNext dsDNA Fragmentase (Cat #0348 L, New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA, USA). Then, metagenomic libraries were prepared using the ACCEL-NGS 2S PLUS DNA Library Kits (Cat #21096, Swift Biosciences, Ann Arbor, MI, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

WMS were analyzed as described previously.13,66 Briefly, adapter removal and quality filtering were performed using Trimmomatic with default options (leading and trailing: 3, sliding window size: 4, quality: 15, min length: 150).67 Paired-end sequences were merged using PEAR v.0.9.11.68 Contaminated human genes were removed using the BBMap (http://sourceforge.net/project/bbmap) with a reference human genome. Taxonomic features were obtained by using MetaPhlAn2 v.2.7,69 and functional features were obtained by using HUMAnN2 v.2.8.0.70 Finally, the resultant UniRef90 IDs were converted to the KOs. A total of 2,635,653,581 reads (median 6,837,236 reads per sample) were obtained from WMS analysis.

The relative amounts of bacteria in fecal samples were estimated by quantitative real-time PCR based on the 16S rRNA gene. The 16S rRNA gene was amplified with the primer 340 F (5′-TCC TAC GGG AGG CAG CAG-3′) and 518 R (5′-ATT ACC GCG GCT GCT GG-3′) using a Thermal Cycle Dice Real-Time System III (TaKaRa Bio, Inc.).

Each sample was measured in triplicates in a 25-μL reaction containing 12.5 μL of TB Green Premix Ex Taq (Tli RNaseH Plus) (Cat #RR820B, TaKaRa Bio, Inc.), 2 μM of each primer, and 1 μL of DNA template (a 10-fold dilution series of sample DNA) with following amplification conditions: 95°C for 30s, followed by 40 cycles of denaturation at 95°C for 5 s and annealing at 60°C for 30s. We quantified the bacterial amount by comparing threshold cycles (Ct) values to a standard curve generated from parallel reactions of serial dilutions (1 × 101–1 × 107) of the 16S rRNA gene from the Escherichia coli K12 w3110 strain. Regression coefficients (r2) for all standard curves were ≥ 0.98.

Fecal SCFAs were extracted with modification of previously described methods.71,72 Acetic acid (Cat #338826, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), propionic acid (Cat #81910, Sigma), iso-butyric acid (Cat #58360, Sigma), butyric acid (Cat #W222100, Sigma), iso-valeric acid (Cat #129542, Sigma), and valeric acid (Cat # 240370, Sigma) were used as standard compounds. 4-methlyvaleric acid (Cat #277827, Sigma) was used as an internal standard (IS) for final adjustment on the quantity of each compound in samples. Briefly, 20 mg of fecal sample was suspended in extraction solution (450 μL of methylene chloride, 5 μL of IS (10 ppm), and 25 μL of 0.6 M HCl). The suspension was derivatized for 10 min after vortexing and centrifuging (14,000 × g) for 10 min at 4°C. Finally, the methylene chloride layer was transferred into the test vial and briefly vortexed before injecting into the gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS).

Quantitative analysis software (MSD, Agilent Technologies) was used to process the GC-MS data for peak picking, standard curve construction, and SCFAs quantification. The concentration of each SCFA in samples was calculated using the calibration curve constructed from the GC-MS data of corresponding SCFA standards.

We used the Model-based Genomically Informed High-dimensional Predictor of Microbial Community Metabolic Profiles (MelonnPan v.0.99.0)73 to predict SCFAs profiles based on measured SCFAs in fecal samples and functional gene features of gut microbiomes obtained from HUMAnN2 (UniRef90 gene families).

Butyrate and propionate were successfully predicted after evaluating 10-fold cross-validation of predicted metabolisms in the present study. The accuracy of predicted metabolites was evaluated by the representative training sample index (RTSI) scores based on principal component analysis (PCA).

Female C57BL/6 mice were purchased from ORIENT Bio Korea. The mice (8-week-old) were divided into AD (n = 8) and non-AD (n = 10) groups. AD was induced for five weeks. Briefly, 200 μL of 1% 1-Chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene (DNCB) in an acetone:olive oil mixture (3:1 vol/vol) was applied to the shaved dorsal skin, and then the skin was covered with a transparent film dressing. 1% DNCB was applied three times a week for one week. Then, 0.4% DNCB was applied three times a week for four weeks. At 35 days, mice were sacrificed, and the middle part of the colon was collected for gene expression analysis, and fecal samples were collected for microbiota and SCFA analyses. All procedures were performed in accordance with the guideline of the Institutional Animal Care and Usage Committee at Soonchunhyang University.

Total RNA was extracted using TRIzol reagent (Cat #15596018, Invitrogen) from the collected middle part of the colon. RNA was converted to cDNA using reverse transcription reagents (Cat #FSQ-201, Toyobo). PCR was performed using SYBR Green Real time PCR Master Mix Kit (Toyobo) with specific primers for target genes (Table S12). The reaction was performed with QuantStudio5 Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). The expression levels of target genes were calculated by comparing the relative expression levels after normalization to β-actin.

Metagenomic DNA was extracted from fecal samples of mice using the RNeasy PowerMicrobiome Kit (Qiagen). The 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing and analyses were performed as described above. A total of 442,006 reads (median 20,543 reads per sample) in mouse fecal samples were obtained from sequence analyses.

SCFAs in mice fecal samples were extracted and analyzed using GC-MS as described previously.

Caco-2 cells (ATCC® CRL-1790TM) were cultured in Eagle’s minimum essential medium (EMEM) supplemented with 20% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin by incubation at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2. Cultured Caco-2 cells at passages 20–27 were used for experiments.

Caco-2 cells were seeded (0.5 ×104 cells/well) into 96-well plates and incubated at 37°C for 24 h to allow the cells to attach. Caco-2 cells were treated with butyrate (concentrations of 0.5, 1, and 5 mM). Afterward, 20 μL of MTT solution (final concentration of 1 mg/mL) was added to each well, and cells were incubated for 2 h. The cell culture medium was subsequently removed, and each well was treated with 200 μL DMSO to dissolve formazan crystals. Dissolved formazan absorbance was measured at 570 nm using a microplate reader (Sunrise-Basic Tecan, Tecan Austria GmbH, Grödig, Austria). The cell viability was expressed as the percentage of MTT reduction calculated relative to the absorbance of control cells.

The effect of butyrate on mitochondrial function was measured by seeding Caco-2 cells in Seahorse XFp mini-plate (Cat #103025-100, Agilent Technologies) at 0.7 ×104 cells/well. Cells were cultured as described above. The cells were washed with extracellular flux (XF) DMEM medium (Agilent Technologies) supplemented with 5.55 mM glucose, 2 mM glutamine, and 1 mM sodium pyruvate followed by incubation in this medium for 60 min at 37°C in a non-CO2 incubator. Plates were transferred to a Seahorse XFp analyzer (Agilent Technologies) and subjected to an equilibration period. After measuring the basal oxygen consumption rate (OCR) for four cycles, oligomycin (1.5 µM, Agilent Technologies) was added to determine the proportion of respiration used to generate ATP. Then, carbonyl cyanide-4-(trifluoro methoxy) phenyl hydrazone (FCCP, 0.5 µM, Agilent Technologies) was added to determine the maximal respiration by mitochondria. After that, rotenone (0.5 µM, Agilent Technologies) and antimycin A (0.5 µM, Agilent Technologies) were added to measure the non-mitochondrial respiratory rate.

Statistical analysis was performed with the R software v.4.0.2. All statistical tests for microbiome data were two-sided.

The Kruskal–Wallis test was used to compare continuous variables among groups, and the Chi-square test was used to compare categorical variables between groups. The ORs and corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated using unconditional logistic regression models.

The difference in Shannon diversity index between non-AD and AD groups was analyzed using the Mann–Whitney–Wilcox test. Differences in beta-diversity were visualized using NMDS plots and tested for inference by PERMANOVA (Adonis from the package vegan with 999 permutations) based on the Bray–Curtis distance.

The correlations between significantly associated genera with Pparg, Gpr109a, acetate, and butyrate in mice experiments were analyzed using the Spearman correlation in R software.

The variance of the gut microbiota in all samples was analyzed using DMM modeling75 with the R package DirichletMultinomial. DMM clustering was conducted at the genus level to compare results between 16S and WMS. The lowest Laplace approximation score determined the number of clusters.

The overall concordance of microbiota compositions between 16S and WMS analyses was compared at the phylum and genus levels. Relative abundances of taxa were visualized using bar plots. Linear regression models and a Pearson correlation test were used to investigate the coefficient inference associations between 16S and WMS datasets. The correlation and regression of two datasets were visualized using scatterplots.

The indicator species at each age were determined using the ‘multipatt’ function of the indicspecies package in R software. We selected species with > 10% prevalence and > 0.01% mean relative abundance in at least one group to identify indicators. This procedure is a statistical method determining whether a particular species is significantly more abundant in predefined groups than when the same species are randomly assigned to the groups. The non-AD microbiota determined the indicator species at each age. The significance of the association of the indicator with age was tested using 10,000 permutations. Results with p < .05 were considered indicators at each age. Resultant indicators were evaluated by multivariate analysis of MaAsLin2 after adjustment for covariates.

Covariates (sex, delivery mode, feeding type, allergic family history, AD diagnosis, total IgE, egg-IgE, and milk-IgE) could be related to differences in the gut microbiome and allergic disease. The effect size and significance of each covariate in the variation of microbiota were determined using the ‘envfit’ function in R package vegan (v.2.5–7), which compared the difference in centroids of each group relative to the total variation. The significance was determined using 999 permutations. A PERMANOVA was used to determine the covariates with the strongest effects on taxonomic and functional features. Results with p < .05 were considered statistically significant.

Random forest regression was performed to model the gut microbiota age based on the relative abundance of bacterial species obtained from WMS of 112 non-AD samples (6–36 months) using the R package Ranger. The chronological age of the microbiota in children without AD was used as a training set to predict the estimated microbiota age (EMA). The resulting prediction model, defined by alterations in bacterial species, was subsequently applied to all subjects with Ranger’s ‘predict’ function. These estimates were used as a proxy for gut microbiota maturation.76 Next, sensitivity analyses were performed by restricting the models to samples not included in model building to confirm the independence of the training sets.

The correlations between significantly associated species with abnormal MAZ or SAZ in AD groups and clinical features (SCORAD index, Total IgE, egg-IgE, milk-IgE, and eosinophil) were analyzed using the Spearman correlation in R software.

Interspecies correlations were estimated using FastSpar77 based on Pearson correlation with 1,000 bootstraps. Pseudo p-values were calculated as the proportion of simulated bootstrapped datasets with a correlation at least as extreme as the one computed for the original data set. The corresponding correlation network was visualized using the R package qgraph. The top 10 species in each microbiota (GMT) group were selected for each phenotype by random forest, and they were used for network analysis. Significant correlations (with p < .05) were shown in the network.

Node sizes were scaled on the eigenvector centrality measure, which was determined using the R package igraph. Edge thickness denoted a FastSpar correlation ranging from values −0.4 to 0.4. Hubs were identified using the PageRank algorithm, a link analysis with the underlying assumption that hubs are more connected to other nodes than non-hub nodes.78 The top five species with the highest PageRank in each phenotypic group were selected as hubs in the networks. This process was performed in R using the igraph package.

Functional features of the gut microbiome were analyzed using the KO category. The significantly different features, according to age, were selected by MaAsLin2 after adjustment for covariates (q < 0.05). The N top discriminatory KOs were selected by ‘rfcv’ function in the randomForest package.

Gene families involved in butyrate and propionate metabolism were compared between phenotypic groups at each age. MaAsLin2 evaluated the difference in gene families between phenotypic groups at each age after adjusting for covariates. We evaluated the significance of different KOs and gene families between phenotypic groups at each age using the Kruskal–Wallis test and Dunn’s test. P-values were adjusted using the Benjamini–Hochberg method. Results with q < 0.05 were considered statistically significant.

AD, atopic dermatitis; SCFA, short-chain fatty acid; SCORAD, scoring of atopic dermatitis; COCOA, the Longitudinal Cohort for Childhood Origin of Asthma and Allergic Disease birth cohort; 16S, 16S rRNA amplicon sequences; WMS, whole metagenome sequences; RTP, quantitative real-time PCR; DMM, Dirichlet multinomial mixture; GMT, gut microbiota type; OR, odds ratio; NMDS, non-metric multidimensional scaling; UC, unclassified; EBF, exclusive breastfeeding; MAZ, microbial-by-age z-score; SAZ, SCFA-by-age z-score; KO, KEGG Orthology; OCR, oxygen consumption rate; GC-MS, gas chromatography-mass spectrometry

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).

Supplemental data for this article can be accessed on the publisher’s website

All sequence data (16S and WMS) obtained from this study are available in the EMBL SRA database under the study numbers PRJEB41351 (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/data/view/PRJEB41351), PRJEB45443 (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/data/view/PRJEB45443) and PRJEB47988 (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/data/view/PRJEB47988). Measured concentrations of SCFA data are deposited on Zenodo at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5602428.

Supplemental data for this article can be accessed online at http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19490976.2022.2068366

