Effect of the Microbiome on Intestinal Innate Immune Development in Early Life and the Potential Strategy of Early Intervention

Early life is a vital period for mammals to be colonized with the microbiome, which profoundly influences the development of the intestinal immune function. For neonates to resist pathogen infection and avoid gastrointestinal illness, the intestinal innate immune system is critical. Thus, this review summarizes the development of the intestinal microbiome and the intestinal innate immune barrier, including the intestinal epithelium and immune cells from the fetal to the weaning period. Moreover, the impact of the intestinal microbiome on innate immune development and the two main way of early-life intervention including probiotics and fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) also are discussed in this review. We hope to highlight the crosstalk between early microbial colonization and intestinal innate immunity development and offer some information for early intervention.

Neonates are more susceptible to infections and other gastrointestinal diseases such as necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) due to the immature immune system (1, 2). The ability to fight infections is dependent on innate immunity in early life (3); furthermore, the development of innate immunity is earlier than adaptive immunity and contributes to the maturation of adaptive immunity (4). The intestine is not only the digestive organ but also the body’s largest organ of immunity. More than half of the immune cells are stationed in the intestine, and 70% of immunoglobulin A (IgA) is produced in the intestine (5). Furthermore, as the closest part of the body to the outside environment, the intestine is the first line of defense. Thus, the development of innate immunity is important for neonates, while the specific mechanisms of immune modulation in early life also remain largely unknown.

Several reviews have summarized that microbial colonization shapes the immune system (13) and the effect of breast milk and solid food on the intestinal immunity (14), while this review provides an overview of the influence of microbial colonization on the development of intestinal innate immunity in early life especially focusing on the interaction between the specific bacteria and innate immune cells. Moreover, the effect of two main strategies, probiotics and FMT, of early intervention on intestinal innate immunity is also concluded. The goal of this review is to highlight the crosstalk between early microbial colonization and intestinal innate immunity development in early life and offer some references for early intervention by a microbial strategy.

It has long been thought that the fetus is sterile and the establishment of the fetal microbiome begins after birth. The microbial community has been detected on human placental samples, cord blood, and meconium (15), while some researchers report that the experiment procedure, including sample collection and reservation, sequencing, and choosing of reagents are all different, and there is contamination during the whole trial. Furthermore, a lot of studies suggest that the human placenta has no microbiome by using different methods including 16S sequence, microbial cultivation, quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR), metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS), and setting the negative control containing air and water (16–18). Whether the fetal microbiome exists remains a controversial issue. Here, we just present the microbiome found in the fetus.

Low diversity and limited bacteria have been detected in the mammal fetal intestine, skin, and lung by mNGS, 16S sequence, RNA-in situ hybridization (RNA-ISH), and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (19, 20). A labeled E. faecium isolated from a healthy woman can be found in the amniotic fluid of the inoculated mice, which also indicated that the maternal microbiome can be transferred into the fetus (21). Phyla Proteobacteria, Bacteroidetes, Actinobacteria, and Firmicutes are enriched in the fetal intestine, especially Enterobacteriaceae, Micrococcaceae, and Lactobacillus (22–24). Additionally, bacterial metabolites such as short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), deoxynojirimycin, mitomycin, and tobramycin exist in the fetal intestine, which also implies that there is a microbiome in the fetal intestine (23, 25).

The microbiome of the newborn is similar to that of the mother and is closest to the vaginal microbiome. The intestinal microbiome in early life matures and evolves along with infant growth, and generally stabilizes and evolves adult-like after weaning, which has been proved via different ages of animal models, including mice (26) and pig (27), and infants (28).

After weaning, dietary changes from breast milk to solid food fixed with carbohydrates and fibers lead to major structural changes in the intestinal flora and microbiome diversity increasing. Furthermore, the intestinal microbiome structure tends to be relatively mature and stable; Bifidobacterium, Lactobacillus, and Escherichia decrease after weaning; and the intestinal flora are dominated by Prevotella (33). The mature microbiome contributes to the development of the innate immune response; for instance, the levels of cytokines related to immune cell proliferation and maturation were increased in fecal water of offspring (33). Furthermore, enterocyte proliferation is induced by intestinal microbiome maturation during early human life via microbial metabolites (34).

The intestinal epithelium and innate immune cells are the two main functional cells of the mammalian intestine innate immunity system. The intestinal epithelium consists of epithelial cells, Paneth cells (PCs) and goblet cells (GCs), and innate immune cells including macrophages, dendritic cells (DCs), natural killer (NK) cells, and innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) (35).

PCs are housed in the crypt of the intestine and secrete antimicrobial peptides (AMPs), which are known to defend against pathogen infection (36, 37). Furthermore, PCs also play an essential role in intestinal homeostasis and microbiome colonization; for example, loss of PC function is implicated in microbiome dysbiosis and NEC in early life (38, 39). It has been found that Cdk5rap3 (a gene that serves a vital role in intestinal PC development and maintenance) knockout resulted in early embryonic lethality, which indicated that embryonic PC function may determine the embryo fate (40).

It has been demonstrated that PC number and functions are regulated by the intestinal microbiome, and germ-free (GF) mice have fewer intestinal PC numbers and RegIIIγ secretion compared with specific pathogen-free (SPF) mice (48). Early-life microbiome participates in the function and maturation of PCs, and the gene expression of PC products including defensins, matrilysin, and phospholipase A2 was significantly downregulated after antibiotic treatment in neonates (49). Furthermore, the number of PCs in a humanized microbiota gnotobiotic mouse model is significantly decreased compared with SPF mice, and the transportation of normal infant intestinal microbiome can rescue the low number of PCs and increase the AMP (Cathelicidin-5 and Lysozyme-1) mRNA expression level in the humanized microbiota gnotobiotic mouse model (50). On the other hand, the loss of a protective mucus layer leads to increased epithelial–bacterial interactions in mice and then results in the upregulation of RegIIIβ and RegIIIγ expression (46). RegIIIγ mRNA expression increased in the small intestine of conventionally raised mice throughout the weaning period, but not in GF animals, indicating that the intestinal microbiome is crucial for PC function during the weaning period (51).

Intestinal GCs generate and secrete mucins, primarily mucin2 (MUC2), which are a major component of the mucus barrier, and serve as the first line of defense against pathogen infection and bacterial-derived product invasion (52, 53). Trefoil factor-2 (TFF2) deficiency in the neonatal small intestine allows the opportunistic neonatal pathogen E. coli K1 to permeate the weakened mucus layer in the distal small intestine and cause systemic infection (54). Intestinal GCs derive from intestinal stem cells (ISCs) that reside near the bottom of the intestinal crypt (55). It was recently discovered that GCs can form goblet cell-associated antigen passages (GAPs) and transfer luminal substances to antigen-presenting cells and DCs that underlie lamina propria (LP) and trigger adaptive immune responses (56).

The intestines of GF mice contain significantly fewer and smaller GCs compared with SPF mice (61). Furthermore, when GF mice are colonized with commensal bacteria, the size and number of GCs rapidly expand, and they release much Relm-β (62). Maturation of microbiome contributes to the function of GCs; functional maturation of GCs is more significant after exposure to adult microbiome than suckling microbiome, according to assessments of solute transporters and aquaporins (63). In a humanized microbiota gnotobiotic mouse model, the microbiome of an infant with poor weight gain has been shown to reduce the amount of GCs (50). The number of GCs was increased by transferring the microbiome from 15-day-old suckling conventional rats to the GF mice (63).

DCs are bone marrow-derived antigen-presenting cells that are at the front line in maintaining intestinal integrity, and they comprise two major subsets: conventional (or classical) DCs (cDCs) and plasmacytoid DCs (pDCs). Intestinal DCs are found within the intestinal LP (64), Peyer patches (PPs) (65), and mesenteric lymph nodes (MLNs) (66). CD103+ DCs are key players in the innate immune system, and the relative paucity of CD103+ DCs in the neonatal intestine contributes to the high susceptibility to intestinal infection (67).

Bacterial signals during DCs differentiation have a profound impact on DCs function. DCs do not develop until day 16 in GF mice (72). DCs are highly microbiome dependent, and are disturbed following broad-spectrum antibiotic treatment, but can be restored by FMT, commensal E. coli and Lactobacillus johnsonii strains (73, 74). Moreover, MLN DCs from GF mice were less stimulatory for T cells than their counterparts from SPF mice (75).

ILCs are immune effector cells that contribute to host defense, metabolic homeostasis, and tissue repair (76). ILCs can be divided into three types: type 1 ILC includes IFN-γ producing ILC1, type 2 ILC includes interleukin-5 (IL-5) and IL-13 expressing ILC2, and type 3 ILC includes lymphoid tissue inducible cells (LTi) and IL-17 and IL-22 expressing ILC3 (77).

It has been demonstrated that GF mice have been shown to have defective ILC3 development and lower production of IL-22, a key cytokine in epithelial responses to microorganisms in the small intestine (81, 82). Furthermore, prolonged transient neonatal antibiotic exposure suppresses IL-17A-producing ILC3 during the first 2 weeks of life, promoting bacterial translocation and increasing susceptibility to K. pneumoniae-induced sepsis, and recolonization with mature microbiome raises the level of IL-17A-producing ILC3 in mice, reducing their susceptibility to late-onset sepsis (LOS) (83).

NK cells are recognized as the only cytotoxic population of ILCs. NK cells take part in protecting against pathogen infection including Listeria monocytogenes, Salmonella, Citrobacter rodentium, and Yersinia enterocolitica infections (84–86).

The lower presence of NK cells has been detected in the intestine of GF mice (91). Microbiome impacts the epigenome of intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) and modifies interaction between IECs and NK cells through altering methylation-modifying enzyme activity (91). However, whether the microbiome can directly interact with NK cells to regulate NK cell activity and function remains to be determined.

There is increasing evidence that macrophages play a crucial role in the maintenance of intestinal homeostasis and as key sentinels of the intestinal immune system. For example, macrophages enhance epithelial integrity by the production of prostaglandin E2 to stimulate ISC renewal (92). Moreover, macrophages maintain and expend Treg, Th17, and ILC3 through their secretion of cytokines such as IL-10, transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β), and IL-1β (93–95). Macrophages are first detected in the 11- to 12-week fetal intestine and the number rapidly increases from the 12-week to the 22-week period of gestation in human (96).

In comparison to conventionally housed controls, analysis of the colonic macrophage compartment in GF mice found markedly fewer monocyte–macrophage subsets in the colon (97). The microbiome also controls the homeostatic replenishment of monocyte-derived macrophages in the intestinal mucosa (97). In addition, genome-wide transcriptional profiling of macrophages from antibiotic-treated mice revealed a reduction in antiviral immunity genes (98). Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that early microbiome exposure stimulated tumor necrosis factor (TNF) production in spleen monocytes and macrophages of neonatal mice during the first 3 days of life (99) and the antibiotics caused an indirect or direct reduction in macrophage-like cells in the early life of chickens (100).

In early life, the intestinal microbiome plays a crucial role in the development of the immune system. In detail, relative abundances of Bacteroides and Prevotella populations are highly correlated with responses to toll-like receptor-2 (TLR2) (101). Moreover, at 36 months of age, Bifidobacterium colonization is related to the greater production of IL-5, IL-6, IL-13, TNF, and IL-1. Gut colonization by Enterococcus, Staphylococcus aureus, or Clostridium in early childhood, on the other hand, was negatively associated with induced IL-13, IL-5, and TNF at 3 years of age (7). At 2 years of age, early S. aureus colonization was linked to a larger number of IL-4 and IL-10 generating cells (102).

As mentioned before, the infant intestinal core microbiome is characterized by the predominance of Bifidobacterium, Enterococcus, Lactobacillus, Escherichia, Bacteroides, and Clostridium (31). Early colonization of the microbiome after birth is helping to shape the innate immune system ( Figure 2 ).

Milk-promoted bacteria such as Lactobacillus are signs of normal breast milk, and neonates are quickly colonized by Lactobacillus by suckling, which affects immune development in early life (106). The abundance of Lactobacillus in newborn mice as well as treatment with specific Lactobacillus probiotics (L. murinus and L. johnsonii) were able to resist K. pneumoniae colonization and LOS induced by K. pneumoniae, in contrast to eradicating the transmission of Lactobacillus by maternal antibiotic exposure exacerbated disease (107). Moreover, the enrichment of Lactobacillus is associated with low NEC scores in the NEC rat model; in detail, L. murinus isolated from neonatal rats reduces molecular markers and the intestinal barrier damage of NEC (108).

Though a lot of evidence shows that Lactobacillus modulates the innate immune system in early life, knowledge about the mechanisms underlying regulating innate immune development by Lactobacillus is limited. P40, a Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG-derived protein, enhances functional maturation of the intestine in early life including IEC proliferation, differentiation, and tight junction formation by activation of epidermal growth factor receptor (114). Furthermore, Lactobacillus’ SpaC pilus was found to adhere to the fetal gut and to modulate IECs’ innate immune gene TLR-related gene expression and attenuate pathogen-induced TNF-α mRNA expression (115). Lactate, mainly produced by Lactobacillus, is the most abundant metabolite in the intestine during the first 6 months of life (116), and is a key factor in promoting ISC-mediated epithelial development. In detail, lactate directly stimulates PCs, and intestinal stromal cells through Gpr81 activation of the Wnt3–β-catenin pathway and plays an important role in promoting the proliferation of Lgr5+ ISCs (117). Furthermore, the effect of lactate on the proliferation of ISCs in newborn mice was greater than that in adult mice (117).

Bifidobacterium is among the earliest and most dominant colonizers of the neonatal gut and is closely related to intestinal development. Colonization of the infant intestine with Bifidobacterium is influenced by human milk oligosaccharides (HMOs) from breastmilk. HMOs stimulate the growth of Bifidobacterium in the intestine, which offers a nutrient source for the infant intestinal microbiome, especially Bifidobacterium species that encode HMO-utilizing genes (118). Lack of Bifidobacterium and its breast milk oligosaccharide utilization genes is associated with systemic inflammation and immune imbalance in early life (119).

Bifidobacterium Tad pili may play a role in the early maturation of the naive gut by producing a unique scaffold of extracellular protein structures that stimulate the growth of the newborn mucosa (129). Furthermore, in human embryonic colon epithelial cells, Bifidobacterium regulates intestinal development by stimulating cell proliferation and accelerating the maturation of the internal barrier via the Wnt/β-catenin and PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathways (130).

Aerobic conditions initially help in the rapid colonization of facultative anaerobic species in the neonatal intestine, such as E. coli. Colonization in the early stages with E. coli causes epithelial remodeling in the colon, changing the epithelium’s structure as well as the mucus layer. For example, proliferative cell markers (Ki67, proliferating cell nuclear antigen, phospho-histone H3, and cyclin A) were higher in rats non-colonized with E. coli than in GF, and following E. coli inoculation, epithelial MUC2 and mucopolysaccharide levels decreased rapidly, implying that these components are released to join the mucus layer, which doubled in thickness after inoculation (131). Furthermore, the intestinal microbiome composition of newborns was closely related to that of their mothers. Intestine epithelial cell differentiation is regulated by transmitting E. coli from the mother to the neonates, which increases the numbers of GCs (132). It has been demonstrated that E. coli EC 25 isolated from neonatal rats protects neonatal rats from NEC (133).

The oxygen-rich environment in the intestinal tract during the neonatal period is the main factor affecting the colonization of bacteria and driving the excessive growth of K. pneumoniae. The oxygen content in the intestinal tract decreases gradually with the development, forming mature bacteria dominated by anaerobic microorganisms that can resist K. pneumoniae (107). In addition, commensal Enterobacteriaceae contribute to colonization resistance by competing for oxygen with S. enteritidis, which is necessary for pathogen expansion (136).

Bacteroides species are found in varying amounts in the baby’s intestinal microbiome, but by the first year of life, they are always present (137). Indeed, Polysaccharide A, produced by Bacteroides fragilis, promotes PLZF+ lymphocyte homeostasis in the thymus through TLR2 signaling, while the colony mediates the migration of pDCs from the colon to the thymus to maintain PLZF+ lymphocyte homeostasis, and intervening intestinal flora in early life by antibiotic affects the distribution of PLZF+ cells in the adult thymus and then increases susceptibility to DSS-induced colitis (124).

E. faecalis dominates more than 60% of the total LAB in the stool of healthy newborns and represents a more effective competitor than the rest in initiating colonization of a newborn (138). In vivo and in vitro, E. faecalis attenuates inflammation by suppressing proinflammatory cytokine secretions, especially IL-8 (139). Furthermore, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) activity can be altered by E. faecalis through phosphorylation, resulting in increased DNA binding and transcriptional activation of IL-10 (134).

Human breast milk-fed preterm infants are colonized by commensal Propionibacterium with high abundance, and the P.UF1 bacterium combines with SIGNR1 on the DCs to regulate macrophage in the intestine, which contributes to protect against pathogen infection and mitigate induced NEC-like injury (140).

The bacteria that colonize a newborn’s gut in the first few days after birth are all from the class Gammaproteobacteria, Gram-negative bacteria that express cell-surface LPS, which is recognized by the host intestinal cells via TLR4. ILC3 produces the cytokine IL-17A as a result of this signaling sequence. Upregulation of IL-17A in the gut causes G-CSF to recruit neutrophils from the bone marrow into the bloodstream, increasing circulating neutrophils that effectively remove blood-borne infections like E. coli K1 (144).

Early life is a critical period for the development of the intestinal innate immune system, and increased exposure to environmental microorganisms during this period may improve immune function by regulating the symbiotic microbiome. For example, microbial exposure early in life influences immune maturation; it may reduce the risk of certain conditions later in life, such as colitis, by enabling the intestinal microbiome to develop properly during the early stages of immune development (9, 10).

Probiotics are defined as live microorganisms that produce health benefits and have been investigated by humans for centuries. Strong evidence supports the contribution of probiotics to maintaining intestinal mucosa homeostasis and the development of immunity in early life. Furthermore, the ability to resist DSS- and C. rodentium-induced intestinal injury and intestinal tumor formation in adulthood can be enhanced by early-life intervention (114, 145, 146). Hence, the effect of probiotics on early life has attracted many researchers.

↑, up regulation; ↓, down regulation.

Probiotics early intervention is increasingly being used in the clinic; a meta-analysis that included 10,812 infants demonstrated that early intervention with probiotics including Bifidobacterium spp., Lactobacillus spp., Saccharomyces spp., and Streptococcus spp. reduced the risk of NEC, late-onset invasive infection, and mortality in very-preterm or very-low-birth-weight infants (180). Moreover, the intervention that combined Bifidobacterium and Lacticaseibacillus accelerated microbial maturation such as α-diversity, stability, and interconnectivity and reduced the inflammatory response in extremely preterm infants (181). Probiotics are an effective strategy to prevent gastrointestinal disease in infants, and research showed that 14% of intensive care units administered probiotics to low-birth-weight premature babies between May and September 2015 in the USA (182). Clinical trials on probiotics aim to determine their safety and effectiveness, although their effect has been investigated in experimental animals such as mice, rats, and pigs.

In recent years, as a strategy of intestinal microecological regulation apart from probiotics, FMT has become popular in recent years. FMT was mainly used to reverse the disorder gut microbiome ecosystem in Clostridioides difficile infection and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) adulthood to achieve the therapeutic goal (183–185). In neonates, FMT not only promoted the diversity and composition of the intestine but also regulated the landscape of microbiota metabolites (186).

↑, up regulation.

Of note, colonization of microbiome from different intestinal segments was region-specific, and compared with FMT, whole-intestinal microbiota transplantation (WIMT) is more conducive to the transplantation of the donor intestinal microbiome and its function into the recipient small intestine (198). However, it is worth noticing that not just any microbiome from any animal can promote immune system development and maturation in mice; the intestine immune system only depends on colonizing with a host-specific microbiome. For example, the number of GF mice’s T cells could only be reconstructed by mouse microbiome instead of human or rat microbiome (199).

Intestinal innate immunity is one of the first defense lines of the host. The intestinal microbiome plays a crucial role in the development of the host’s immune system in early life. Here, we summarize how the intestine microbiome directs the development of the intestinal innate immune system composed of the epithelium and immune cells from early life. In neonates, the intestinal innate immunity is shaped by the milk-derived bacteria Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium, and other commensal bacteria including Escherichia, Bacteroides, and Enterococcus. Early intervention by probiotics and FMT are two effective ways to modulate intestinal microecology, promote the development of intestinal immunity, and maintain intestinal mucosa homeostasis. Nevertheless, the impact of probiotics and FMT on other immune cells such as ILCs is not yet researched. Furthermore, a single probiotic or FMT may not be the best strategy for early intervention, and FMT carries the risk of facing an infectious disease because of the harmful strains (200). More focused efforts to uncover a combination of multiple bacteria can be developed to enhance neonatal intestinal health. For instance, the immune system was enhanced by colonizing the synthetic community (SYN) in the cecum, which is composed of 9 different commensal bacteria from chicken (201). Thus, the research on core bacteria and the combination of multiple bacteria is the trend for early intervention in the future. Moreover, clinical tools including sequence style and bioinformatics to detect and predict the intestinal microbiome in infants are worthy of further research. For example, bioinformatics accelerates the pharmaceutical industry (202). qPCR was used to detect the specific bacteria that correlated to disease or intestinal health in the clinic (203). Moreover, the occurrence of NGS and metagenomic sequencing of the microbiome helps us investigate the microbial composition deeply (204), and the different methods of analysis such as via a co-occurrence network, functional annotation, and random forest (181, 205) help us predict the maturation of the intestinal microbiome and exploit new probiotics for infants.

ZY designed and wrote the manuscript. XL completed the table. YW drew the figure. HW and JP designed the manuscript and provided funding and modified the manuscript. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.

This research was supported by Hubei Province Science and Technology Innovation Major Project (2021BBA083) and China Agriculture Research System of MOF and MARA.

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

