Association between aging-dependent gut microbiome dysbiosis and dry eye severity in C57BL/6 male mouse model: a pilot study

While aging is a potent risk factor of dry eye disease, age-related gut dysbiosis is associated with inflammation and chronic geriatric diseases. Emerging evidence have demonstrated that gut dysbiosis contributes to the pathophysiology or exacerbation of ocular diseases including dry eye disease. However, the relationship between aging-related changes in gut microbiota and dry eye disease has not been elucidated. In this pilot study, we investigated the association between aging-dependent microbiome changes and dry eye severity in C57BL/6 male mice.

Eight-week-old (8 W, n = 15), one-year-old (1Y, n = 10), and two-year-old (2Y, n = 8) C57BL/6 male mice were used. Dry eye severity was assessed by corneal staining scores and tear secretion. Bacterial genomic 16 s rRNA from feces was analyzed. Main outcomes were microbiome compositional differences among the groups and their correlation to dry eye severity. In aged mice (1Y and 2Y), corneal staining increased and tear secretion decreased with statistical significance. Gut microbiome α-diversity was not different among the groups. However, β-diversity was significantly different among the groups. In univariate analysis, phylum Firmicutes, Proteobacteria, and Cyanobacteria, Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio, and genus Alistipes, Bacteroides, Prevotella, Paraprevotella, and Helicobacter were significantly related to dry eye severity. After adjustment of age, multivariate analysis revealed phylum Proteobacteria, Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio, and genus Lactobacillus, Alistipes, Prevotella, Paraprevotella, and Helicobacter to be significantly associated with dry eye severity.

Our pilot study suggests that aging-dependent changes in microbiome composition are related to severity of dry eye signs in C57BL/6 male mice.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12866-021-02173-7.

Dry eye disease is a multifactorial disorder in which the tear film homeostasis is lost, accompanied by several ocular symptoms. Tear film instability and ocular surface inflammation may contribute to the disease [1, 2]. Given that the prevalence of dry eye disease increases after middle age, aging is one of the critical risk factors for dry eye disease [3, 4]. As the elderly population increases, socio-economic costs are expected to proportionally increase in the near future [5]. Ocular surface is an exposed mucosa constantly subject to external stimuli. Tear film instability induces hyperosmolar stress in ocular surface epithelium, which subsequently acts as an initial precipitating factor for dry eye disease. Hyperosmolar stress promotes the expression of inflammatory cytokines in the damaged ocular surface epithelium [1]. The inflammatory cytokines may recruit innate immune cells, activate dendritic cells and stimulate T helper 1 (Th1) and 17 (Th17) cells that infiltrate the ocular surface and lacrimal glands [1, 6]. Regulatory T cell (Treg) dysfunction is also involved in the progression to chronic dry eye disease [7].

The gut microbiota changes with aging and this aging-related microbiota alteration is associated with inflammaging and chronic geriatric diseases [20]. Given that the gut dysbiosis is associated with dry eye disease [19], aging-related microbiome dysbiosis may also contribute to aging-related dry eye disease. Therefore, in this pilot study, we aimed to investigate (1) whether aging-related dysbiosis is present in C57BL/6 (B6) male mice and (2) which taxa that altered with aging may be associated with the severity of dry eye. These results will open the door for microbiota modulation in aging-related dry eye disease as one of the treatment options.

First, we discovered that dry eye developed according to age in B6 male mice. The mean (± standard deviation (SD)) corneal staining scores (punctate epithelial erosions) of eight-week-old (8 W; young), one-year-old (1Y; middle aged), and two-year-old (2Y; elderly) groups were 1.35 ± 1.03, 6.25 ± 1.78, and 4.81 ± 1.62, respectively (Fig. 1a-b). The scores of the 1Y and 2Y groups were significantly higher than that of the 8 W group (p < 0.001 and p = 0.005, respectively); however, there was no difference between the 1Y and 2Y groups (p > 0.999; Kruskal–Wallis test followed by Dunn’s post hoc test) (Fig.
1a-b). The amount of tear secretion was not different among the groups; whereas, the correction value according to body weight (BW), which is also clinically relevant, was significantly lower in both 1Y and 2Y groups than in the 8 W group (Fig.
1c; p = 0.003 and p = 0.044, respectively; Kruskal–Wallis test followed by Dunn’s post hoc test). Supplementary Table 1 shows all measurements of each mouse.

Finally, we performed partial rank correlation analysis to adjust the confounding age factor. In phylum level, only Proteobacteria significantly affected corneal staining score (r = 0.418, p = 0.047), tear secretion (r = − 0.423, p = 0.016), and tear secretion with BW adjustment (r = − 0.371, p = 0.037). In genus level, corneal staining score was positively related to Helicobacter (r = 0.423, p = 0.046). Both tear secretion with and without adjustment for BW were negatively related to Prevotella (r = − 0.444, p = 0.011; r = − 0.472, p = 0.006; respectively), Paraprevotella (r = − 0.367, p = 0.039; r = − 0.368, p = 0.038; respectively), and Helicobacter (r = − 0.455, p = 0.009; r = − 0.399, p = 0.024; respectively).

This study demonstrates that (1) aging-dependent gut dysbiosis is present in B6 male mouse model and (2) dry eye severity is correlated with the gut dysbiosis.

Our study has several limitations. First, a small number of animals were used, and the corneal staining score was not measured in all mice. Therefore, the results may be insufficient to represent each group. However, this study can be used as a pilot study for future research. Second, this study was conducted with only male mice. The female sex is one of the potent risk factors for dry eye disease due to hormonal effects [53]. Therefore, it may not be possible to extend the results to female. Third, this was an animal study conducted with mice. However, B6 mice are frequently used in aging research because they develop all the hallmarks of dry eye clinical features including corneal barrier dysfunction, loss of goblet cells, meibomian gland dysfunction, increased dry eye related cytokine expressions, dry eye signs with age, and inflammatory cell infiltrations in lacrimal gland associated with aging [54–56]. Fourth, we did not co-house mice or use littermates. We included mice of different ages; therefore, we could not use the same littermates. Moreover, mice that have passed the weaning period, especially males, tend to fight until death when co-housed, and so, we could not co-house them [57]. For these reasons, a co-housing or littermate method could not be applied in previous studies comparing gut microbiome of young and old mice [58, 59]. Fifth, relative abundance may not be as accurate as absolute abundance [60]. The overall abundance of bacteria in the gut is likely to also change with age, thereby just showing relative abundance may overlook important key findings. Lastly, we evaluated the association between gut microbiome changes and dry eye severity signs, and we did not reveal any cause-and-effect relationship. Analysis of serum inflammatory cytokines, stool SCFA, or histological changes in the ocular surface with aging will be needed in future studies to strengthen the association of age-related microbiome changes to dry eye severity. Probiotics have been observed to improve dry eye disease severity, suggesting that regulation of gut microbiota might aid future discovery of effective treatment for dry eye disease [21, 22].

Several microbial taxa change in aged mice are related to gut dysbiosis or chronic inflammation, which are possibly associated with the severity of dry eye. In aged mice, phylum Proteobacteria, Cyanobacteria, and genus Bacteroides increased while genus Paraprevotella decreased. These microbial taxa were associated with increased corneal staining score or decreased tear volume. Especially, phylum Proteobacteria was positively associated with corneal staining score. Modulation of gut dysbiosis may be a new therapeutic strategy for age-related dry eye disease.

The experimental protocol was approved on May 29, 2017 by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the Seoul National University Biomedical Research Institute (IACUC no. 19–0076-S1A0). Animal experiments were performed in accordance with the ARVO Statement for Use of Animals in Ophthalmic Vision and Research and ARRIVE guidelines. It is known that B6 mice have increased corneal erosion at 6–9 months of age, and histological changes in the lacrimal glands are evident at 12 months of age [24, 61]. Moreover, mice older than 24 months have a have a higher chance of natural death caused by aging [62]. Therefore, we set 12 and 24 months of age as the time points of the analysis and compared them with 8-week-old mice as controls.

A total of 33 B6 male mice were used in this study. Fifteen 8 W, ten 1Y, and eight 2Y mice were included. All mice were purchased from the same company (KOATECH; Pyeongtaek, Gyeonggi-do, South Korea) at 6-weeks of age, and freely fed a normal diet of laboratory rodent chow (38,057; Cargill Agri Purina, Inc., Seongnam, South Korea). Mice cages were in a specific pathogen-free facility at Seoul National University Hospital Biomedical Research Institute (Seoul, Korea), maintained at 22–24 °C with 55 ± 5% relative humidity, and given food and water ad libitum. After the study, the mice continued to be observed without sacrificing for further study related to aging-related dry eye disease.

The corneal staining and tear secretion test were performed under anesthesia (using a mixture of xylazine and zoletil at a ratio of 3:1). The corneal staining was evaluated first, and the tear secretion was measured at least 24 h apart. The corneal staining scores were blindly assigned by a single experienced ophthalmologist (CH. Y.) according to the National Eye Institute (NEI) grading scale [63]. A drop of 0.25% fluorescein dye was applied to the conjunctival sac for 30 s, then the ocular surface was gently washed with 1 mL of normal saline, and corneal staining was evaluated using a microscope (Olympus SZ61; Olympus Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) under cobalt blue illumination. For the tear secretion test, phenol red-impregnated cotton threads (FCI Ophthalmics, Pembroke, MA, USA) were inserted into the lateral canthus of mice for 60 s. The amount of tear secretion was determined by measuring the length of the wet thread in millimeters. The correction value obtained by dividing the amount of tear secretion by the BW of the mouse was also calculated [64]. Corneal staining score was evaluated in ten 8 W, six 1Y, and eight 2Y mice, and tear secretion test was performed in all mice. The average values of corneal staining scores and tear secretion results from both eyes were used for the analyses.

All collected feces were stored at − 80 °C until they were referred to Chunlab, Inc. (Seoul, Korea) for microbiota analysis as previously described [17]. Total DNA extraction was performed using the FastDNA® SPIN Kit for Soil (MP Biomedicals, USA), in accordance with the manufacturer’s instruction. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification was performed using extracted DNA and bacterial PCR primers 341F (5′-TCGTCGGCAGCGTC-AGATGTGTATAAGAGACAG-CCTACGGGNGGCWGCAG-3′; underlining sequence indicates the target region primer) and 805R (5′-GTCTCGTGGGCTCGG-AGATGTGTATAAGAGACAG-GACTACHVGGGTATCTAATCC-3′) targeting V3-V4 regions of 16S rRNA. The reaction conditions for the first PCR amplification were as follows: 3 min of initial denaturation at 95 °C, 25 cycles of 30 s’ denaturation at 95 °C, 30 s primer annealing at 55 °C, 30 s elongation at 72 °C, and final extension at 72 °C for 5 min. The second PCR amplification was performed using i5 forward primer (5′-AATGATACGGCGACCACCGAGATCTACAC-XXXXXXXX-TCGTCGGCAGCGTC-3′; X indicates the barcode region) and i7 reverse primer (5′-CAAGCAGAAGACGGCATACGAGAT-XXXXXXXX-GTCTCGTGGGCTCGG-3′) for attaching the Illumina NexTera barcode. The second amplification conditions were the same as those described for the first reaction except only eight amplification cycles were performed. Amplification was confirmed using gel electrophoresis on 1% agarose gel and visualized under a Gel Doc system (BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA). The product size and quality were assessed on a Bioanalyzer 2100 (Agilent, Palo Alto, CA, USA) using a DNA 7500 chip. Mixed amplicons were pooled and sequencing was performed using an Illumina MiSeq Sequencing system (Illumina, Inc., San Diego, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instruction at Chunlab, Inc. (Seoul, Korea). The EzBioCloud database (http://ezbiocloud.net) was used for taxonomic classification after chimera check. To detect chimera on reads that contain lower than 97% best hit similarity rate, UCHIME and the non-chimeric 16S rRNA database from EzBioCloud were used [17]. The dataset was normalized to the lowest number of read counts (28903 reads per sample) for further analysis.

α-diversity analysis expressed with the observed OTUs, Chao1, Shannon, and β-diversity analysis expressed with generalized UniFrac were carried out using EZBioCloud, a bioinformatics cloud platform of ChunLab Inc. (Seoul, Korea). PCoA was performed to visualize differences in the samples at genus and species level. PERMANOVA was used to evaluate significance in UniFrac PCoA. Compositional abundance differences from each sample were identified by analysis using LEfSe and the Kruskal-Wallis test [65]. Taxa with more than 1% abundance in at least one group were included in the analysis. Only those taxa that showed a p-value < 0.05 and log LDA score ≥ 3 were used as thresholds. For multiple comparisons, the Kruskal–Wallis test followed by Dunn’s post hoc test was used. Spearman’s rank correlation and partial rank correlations were used to analyze the relationship between measures. Spearman’s rank correlation analysis between dry eye indices and clinically important microbials with significant differences among groups was performed. Partial rank correlation analysis was performed to identify independent significant microbials affecting dry eye signs after adjustment of confounding age factor. Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism software (version 8.2.0; GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA, USA) and SPSS Statistics 20.0 (IBM Corporation, NY, USA). Differences were considered statistically significant at p < 0.05.



Publisher’s Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

