Microbiome-based interventions to modulate gut ecology and the immune system

The gut microbiome lies at the intersection between the environment and the host, with the ability to modify host responses to disease-relevant exposures and stimuli. This is evident in how enteric microbes interact with the immune system, e.g., supporting immune maturation in early life, affecting drug efficacy via modulation of immune responses, or influencing development of immune cell populations and their mediators. Many factors modulate gut ecosystem dynamics during daily life and we are just beginning to realise the therapeutic and prophylactic potential of microbiome-based interventions. These approaches vary in application, goal, and mechanisms of action. Some modify the entire community, such as nutritional approaches or faecal microbiota transplantation, while others, such as phage therapy, probiotics, and prebiotics, target specific taxa or strains. In this review, we assessed the experimental evidence for microbiome-based interventions, with a particular focus on their clinical relevance, ecological effects, and modulation of the immune system.

To fully appreciate the stakes and challenges of microbiome-based interventions, it is important to detail a few important features of gut microbiomes, which is done in this introductory section.

The human body is colonised by rich communities of microorganisms at various body sites, with the gastrointestinal tract being home to a cell-rich and diverse community. The intestinal microbiome consists of various types of eukaryotic (fungi, helmiths and protozoa)1 and prokaryotic (bacteria and archaea)2 microbes, as well as viruses3. While protozoa and helminths are frequent colonisers of the gut within developing nations, their prevalence is significantly reduced in developed countries, leading to them being understudied4. Both groups have generally been viewed as pathogenic in nature within the human gut, however they have been shown to interact with the gut microbiome and influence the enteric immune system5, as well as wider allergic inflammation6. Bacteria within the gut have been extensively studied and will be the major topic of this review. Due to the complexity and highly dynamic nature of enteric microbial populations, study of their interactions with the host is made difficult.

The complex, yet stable gut microbial ecosystem in adults contrasts dramatically with the rapid seeding of the sterile intestinal tract of new-borns. This rapid process of colonisation makes early life an important period during which both the ecosystem trajectory and immune responses are shaped.

The perinatal period is defined as pregnancy and up to one year post birth and is a time of immense physiological programming that influences health. Although previous studies have suggested an in utero (fetal) and placental microbiome during healthy pregnancies, the detected bacterial ‘communities’ are likely the result of contamination, either during DNA extraction (through contamination of reagents and purification columns), tissue collection, and/or during the sample processing and sequencing16,17. Those microbes that have been definitely identified in these otherwise sterile sites include those associated with negative birth outcomes, such as Streptococcus alginate18. Gut microbes do play a key role in foetal development; however, this is via the maternal gut microbiome, with microbial mediators and metabolites entering the circulation and impacting particular developmental and immune pathways in utero (see sections below)19. Interestingly, the maternal gut microbiome alters during pregnancy, including reduction in diversity over the course of gestation and increasing levels of Bifidobacterium in women and mice which appears to be partly driven by progesterone20. The direct ecological interactions between the gut microbiome and the infant host starts immediately post birth, as this is when initial seeding, from a range of environments and sources, occurs.

Throughout this perinatal period, the infant gut microbiome is highly dynamic, and therefore more susceptible to microbiome perturbations, which is linked to a plethora of acute and chronic (including immune-mediated) conditions. This is why understanding the ecological principles that govern microbiome assembly during this developmental window is important and a prime-time period for beneficially manipulating the gut microbiome to promote appropriate immune development.

The diversity of microbial taxa within an individual’s gut microbiome leads to a large range of microbial communities between individuals. It has been suggested that these communities can be grouped into three categories, originally termed ‘enterotypes’, based on the dominance of species within the genera Ruminococcus, Bacteroides, or Prevotella26,27. Since the proposition of enterotypes in 2011, there has been great debate as to if they constitute real ‘clusters’ of the microbial communities or are driven by artificial clustering. While this matter has been reviewed in greater depth elsewhere28, enterotypes do not appear to be stable as an individual’s microbiome can swap enterotypes during the course of a year29.

The occupation of these functional niches, as well as their integration within greater metabolic interactions prevent opportunistic pathogens from being able to colonise. This is termed niche exclusion and occurs if a current occupant of the environment already utilises the same substrates as the pathogen, preventing the pathogen accessing the nutrients it requires. This has been shown to occur with Klebsiella oxytoca preventing colonisation of Klebsiella pneumoniae36, and E. coli preventing the colonisation of Salmonella enterica37. In both cases it was the shared utilisation of specific substrates by the resident microbe which prevented colonisation by the invading pathogen. These examples highlight the benefits of a diverse microbiome, as the more diverse the microbiome is, the more functional niches are occupied and the harder it is for pathogens to colonise.

The gastrointestinal tract itself is not a homogenous ecosystem but instead consists of a diverse range of environments for microbial species to reside. The small intestine is generally viewed as being sparsely colonised with a limited number of microbial species, which increases towards the distal gastrointestinal tract38,39. The limited number of studies that have looked at small intestinal communities suggest the presence of a few dominant taxa such as Streptococcus, Escherichia, Gemella, and Veillonella spp.40,41. Distally, the colon is home to a more diverse community of microbes that also varies depending on the segment studied42.

In summary, this introduction aimed to provide key information about the diversity and development of the gut microbiome, as understanding the innate complexity of the system is crucial for the interpretation of how microbiome-based interventions can modify microbial communities for the benefit of the host. The various layers of complexity mentioned above (different microbes; strain-level diversity; many unknown ecosystem members; biogeography of the gut) complicate the understanding of interactions between enteric microbes and the host. Nonetheless, progress has been made in all of these aspects of research, facilitating the implementation of microbiome-based applications in health and disease.

The rationales for microbiome-based interventions are diverse, ranging from the prevention of acute infections to the improvement of life-long health (Table 1). Depending on the intervention, the mechanism of action by which the microbiome-based intervention works also vary, from restructuring of the entire community, to supplementation of specific molecules that directly affect the host (Fig. 1a). Based on this, the ecological impact of each intervention can be conceptually defined as belonging to at least one of three categories of ecological impacts: species introduction, species depletion, and enhanced growth (Fig. 1b). For example, phage therapy aims to deplete a species within the ecosystem, hence it can be assigned to the ‘species depletion’ category, while prebiotics are selected based on their specific utilisation by a subset of bacteria, hence they belong to the ‘enhanced growth’ category. Grouping microbiome-based interventions into three categories is a simplistic and reductionist approach as many interventions belong to two or all three categories and any modification to the gut microbiota is likely to have secondary effects.

The impact of each intervention method on the ecology of the gut microbiome are detailed below, along with mechanistic insight into how they can influence the immune system. Each section, based on a single intervention, have been ordered on the complexity of their interactions with both the resident microbes and immune system. As such, FMT is the most complex, consisting of live microbes, remnant dietary components, phage and metabolites. On the other end of the spectrum, postbiotics are purified molecules derived from a microbe, which have a direct effect on either the ecosystem or the host, leading to a desired outcome.

FMT is the administration of stool preparation obtained from a healthy donor to a diseased patient (recipient) with the goal to treat or alleviate the pathology. Such transplants have been done since the 4th century in China63, but the last decade has seen an increase in its clinical application, enhancing our understanding. Modern interest in FMT began with the successful application of FMT to treat Clostridioides difficile infections64. A recent meta-analysis of 45 studies (n = 3768 patients) on the efficacy of FMT to treat C. difficile showed that although highly effective (average success rate between 50.2–96.4%), its success depends on the frequency of transplants, as well as the method of transplantation65. The most successful method of transplantation to date is lower gastrointestinal endoscopy (96.4%), with enema being the least effective (50.2%). Repeat administration significantly improved the effectiveness of FMT, independent of the transplantation method.

Ethical concerns have been raised based on the undefined nature of the material during FMT84. This has led to increasing interest in the identification of the key species, consortia of species85, or molecules that confer the health benefits86.

FMT success is generally attributed to the dominant bacterial populations in stool, with a large focus placed on engraftment of donor strains and species87. However, the lack of standardisation and use of complex material has been raised as a concern for the wide-spread implementation of FMT. Faecal filtrates aim at removing microbial cells, but retain the viral and small molecules in the donor sample. Faecal filtrate transfer (FFT) was shown to be effective in treating C. difficile which has been proposed to be due to the transfer of bacteriophages88. FFT has also been shown to be more effective than FMT when treating NEC in piglets89. Comparison of the effectiveness of faecal sediment vs. supernatant for treatment of C. difficile infection has shown a 27% increase in effectiveness when using the supernatant, confirming that active agents other than the bacterial component are important90. However, FFT has been tested in few studies that have relied on a small number of patients. Systematic comparisons between FMT and FFT are required using optimised protocols for each approach (application route for FMT and method of filtration for FFT) before solid conclusions can be made. While FFT has been shown to significantly alter the composition of viruses within the gut91, the impact on the entire ecosystem is less understood.

There is a large overlap between the chronic diseases linked to diet and those that have been linked to the gut microbiome92. These pathologies, such as allergies, obesity (plus metabolic comorbidities), autoimmune, neurological, and oncological disorders, are complex diseases that are to some degree immune mediated with inflammation as a common determinant93. Decreased microbial diversity in the gut microbiome is observed both in chronic diseases but also population-wide in Western societies, in which the rates of these diseases are higher94. Western diets (WD) are high in processed foods, animal products, and refined grains, and low in whole plant foods such as vegetables, fruits, nuts, and legumes92. The impact of a lard-based WD on mice has been shown to be reliant on the presence of a microbiota95, as germ-free mice are resistant to obesity from this diet96. This interaction between WDs and the microbiota has been confirmed by microbiota transfer experiments into germ-free mice96. These showed that microbiota of obese mice significantly increased body-fat gained compared to transfer of a lean mouses microbiota97.

For example, there is emerging evidence that an individual’s microbial composition may influence their ability to lose weight when following specific diets. Stratifying individual’s according to their microbial community may help predict their responses to certain diets121. Individuals with a gut microbiome dominated by Prevotella27 may achieve optimal weight loss by adhering to a high fibre diet122,123 which is not observed among individuals with a gut microbiome dominated by Bacteroides121. The value of a personalized use of diet informed through microbiome information is also supported by the Prevotella-dependent27 effects of barley-kernel bread on glucose discussed above108. However, increasing bifidobacteria in individuals with a gut microbiome dominated by Bacteroides has been shown to improve metabolic parameters which could be used as a weight loss strategy121. Although the concept of personalised nutritional advice incorporating microbiome analysis is promising, this area of research is still in its early stages with noteworthy limitations including cost and a lack of causal data from clinical trials underpinning recommendations.

The International Scientific Association for Probiotics and Prebiotics (ISAPP) has defined fermented foods and beverages as “foods made through desirable microbial growth and enzymatic conversions of food components”124. Fermented foods in which live organisms are present include yoghurt, sour cream, kefir, most cheeses, sauerkraut, kimchi, miso, natto, kombucha, some beers, and non-heat-treated (raw) fermented sausages (e.g. salami). If served uncooked, fermented foods often contain a high number of live microbes and have a long history of safe consumption124.

Although there is limited and conflicting evidence that fermented foods contribute to the repopulation and densification of the gut microbiome, they are culturally acceptable and safe vehicles by which live microorganisms can temporarily reside and pass through the human alimentary canal, influencing the immune system. Such foods they may confer health benefits attributed to their low pH and unique preparation methods which expose individuals to microbial species not otherwise present in the food chain.

A prebiotic is currently defined as a substrate that is selectively utilised by host microorganisms conferring a health benefit132. Although current definitions of prebiotics have been criticised for not allowing a clear distinction between dietary fibres that are prebiotic and those that are not133–135, non-digestible carbohydrates (NDCs) can be used to modulate both composition and function of the gut microbiome.

The capacity to identify the mechanisms by which specific fibre types regulate host microbial populations and metabolism may offer the possibility for targeted therapeutic dietary fibre interventions to regulate disease states associated with altered metabolism and inflammation104. However, well controlled human clinical trials that establish the effects of fibre supplements or prebiotics on the gut microbiome and host health parameters are scarce and effects are highly inconsistent149.

Probiotics are live microorganisms, and thus directly add to the diversity of the native gut ecosystem. The most recent definition of a probiotic is “live microorganisms that, when administered in adequate amounts, confer a health benefit on the host”150. This definition is purposely broad and inclusive, but the difficulties lie in the demonstration of a health benefit. Probiotics come in a range of complexities, from single strains151 to complex microbial assemblages of multiple strains from different species152 that are either administered in foods or as supplements.

Multi-strain consortia can apply a holistic approach towards probiotics rather than the traditional single strain approach. Including multiple bacterial strains into a single probiotic can have benefits that leverage different approaches. The likelihood of achieving a specific functional target, for example, butyrate production, could be improved by including a number of different strains that have different requirements or interactions with a resident microbiome. The presence of trophic chains within the gut microbiome is one such opportunity, whereby interactions can be manipulated to increase the production of a wanted end-product, such as butyrate. Lactate is produced by many lactobacilli and bifidobacteria as an end-product of carbohydrate fermentation, however, it can then be utilised by butyrate producing species. Supplementation of faecal samples with a multi-strain lactate-producing consortia was observed to cause increased butyrate concentrations after a week169. While multi-strain consortia offer a unique opportunity to utilise our knowledge of the microbiome, producing multi-strain probiotics at scale poses technological challenges (see Box 1).

Bacteriophages (or phage) are viruses that target bacteria. Most have a narrow host range, meaning they infect closely related strains within a species or related species, limiting their ability to infect other species and reducing collateral damage to the resident microbiome170. One example is the development of phage cocktails to treat C. difficile infections, which have, in fermenter experiments, been shown to eliminate C. difficile, while also avoiding major impact to the commensal groups (bifidobacteria, enterococci, enterobacteria, and lactobacilli)171. Phage isolated against disease-associated bacteria, such as Adherent invasive Escherichia coli (AIEC), have also been applied to reduce the severity of inflammation in DSS treated mice172. Another species targeted to reduce inflammation is Klebsiella pneumoniae. A consortium of five phage that target K. pneumoniae has been developed and shown to reduce the severity of DSS induced inflammation, and an initial human study has shown this consortium is safe for human use, and viable173.

While thousands of phage have been identified to exist within the human gut, few have been isolated directly from this environment and fewer still have had their impact on the community studied3. Further research is required in this area to understand the direct and indirect impact of phage therapy on both the microbial community and the host.

Postbiotics are functionally bioactive molecules produced by microbes, formally defined as a “preparation of inanimate microorganisms and/or their components that confers a health benefit on the host”181. It is key within this definition that while intact microbial cells may be deemed a postbiotic, the preparation is not alive or viable. This prevents the chance for colonisation and means health benefits conferred by postbiotics are reliant on regular intake to maintain the presence of the bioactive molecules.

Currently only a few microbial metabolites and proteins have had their therapeutic potential studied, yet the gut microbiome produces thousands of metabolites and proteins202 with more discovered each year203. Detailed description of the molecular effector landscape of the gut microbiome will be a major endeavour for coming years. For those molecules that have been studied, standardisation of dosages will facilitate greater understanding of their impact on the ecology of the microbiome as current variation in treatment between studies prevents direct comparison of results.

In this section, we detail some of the known effects of microbiome-based interventions on the immune system. As this is a broad field of research, we have focused this section on interactions for which mechanisms have been studied and those with therapeutic application. Each subsection focuses on a mechanism by which microbial effectors (e.g., FMT) impact immune targets (e.g., cytokine production). Many studies which identify an association between a change in the microbiome, such as one caused by a microbiome-based intervention, and a change in host phenotype fail to provide a mechanisms204. Due to the difficulty of conducting mechanistic experiments in humans, we also consider mouse and cell lines experiments to provide greater insights into the pathways and cells involved. However, mechanisms identified in mouse experiments may not transfer to humans, hence their validation is still required in humans205. An overview of the discussed mechanisms is shown in Fig. 2.

Establishment of the gut microbiome in early life overlaps with the immune priming window. Epidemiological and more recent mechanistic studies indicate that a perturbed perinatal gut microbiome is associated with heightened risk of developing immune-mediated disorders, including atopic dermatitis, asthma, food allergies, chronic intestinal diseases, and autoimmune conditions206,207.

Strengthening of the epithelium barrier during early life is critical to limit unregulated stimulation of the mucosal and systemic immune system that may lead to inflammatory associated conditions215. A particular condition of concern during early life is NEC, which impacts between 5–15% of preterm infants. Previous studies in mice have indicated that Bifidobacterium plays an oversized role in guiding epithelial barrier development. Specifically, supplementation with B. breve UCC203 during the neonatal window was associated with whole scale transcriptional responses in the small intestinal epithelial compartment, with stem cell marker genes being selectively targeted, indicating an increased regenerative potential of the epithelial layer (Fig. 2)216. This is important in the context of NEC, as numerous studies have shown that supplementation with Bifidobacterium (and Lactobacillus) probiotics significantly reduces NEC incidence in preterm infants217, including strain EVC001218. This links to previous findings in various animal models and ex vivo studies also showing how addition of specific strains of Bifidobacterium can reduce intestinal epithelial cell apoptosis and NEC pathology in vivo219.

As discussed in the previous section, enhancing barrier function in early life is a key mechanism by which probiotics can help reduce the incidence of NEC, but barrier function is also important in adults. The term ‘leaky gut’ has been used to describe when reduced epithelial barrier function leads to increased occurrence of microbial products within the body220. Both probiotics and prebiotics have previously been found to improve barrier function in patients with obesity221.

Mononuclear phagocytes, macrophages and dendritic cells (DCs), within the gastrointestinal tract have also been observed to be modulated by microbiota-based interventions. Butyrate can stimulate differentiation of monocytes to macrophages via inhibition of histone deacetylase 3 (HDAC3) and alter activity by increasing antimicrobial peptide production via reducing activity of mTOR kinase244. This was confirmed in vivo by giving mice butyrate in their drinking water (150 mM for seven days), after which their colonic macrophages had higher antimicrobial activity than those given a saline solution. In vitro experiments have also shown that conditioned media from probiotic strains, such as LGG, can enhance the rate at which macrophages kill ingested bacteria. This is done via increasing reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation by enhancing the expression of NADPH oxidase245. Some LAB strains have been shown to modify the activity of DCs via the induction of tolerogenic properties. When bone marrow-derived dendritic cells, treated with the probiotic strain L. rhamnosus LR-32 were transferred into mice, they conferred a protective phenotype on the recipients to 2, 4, 6-trinitrobenzenesulfonic acid (TNBS)-induced colitis due to the higher abundance of tolerogenic DCs246. LAB strains found in fermented foods, particularly sauerkraut, produce D-phenyllactic acid, leading to increased serum levels, which is recognised by the HCA3 receptor on monocytes, altering their migration247.

In addition to modulation of innate immunity, microbiome-based interventions can have profound effects on the adaptive immune system. For example, in patients with end-stage renal disease, daily intake of propionate (1000 mg) was shown to expand the Treg population within the peripheral blood248 and has consistently been shown to decrease the levels of C-reactive protein, a marker of inflammation, in peripheral blood by half, although its influence on other inflammation markers (IL-2, IL-17) are inconsistent249. Propionate has also been shown to modulate the activity of immune cells, including increased production of IL-10 by Tregs, which leads to inhibition of Th17 cells (Fig. 2). In the context of Multiple sclerosis, patients receiving propionate daily (1000 mg) for 14 days reported alleviation of clinical symptoms and a reduced risk of disease progression if taken continuously over a year250.

Many other immune cells, other than T cells which have been the focus of this section, are impacted by the gut microbiome. As such, they can be part of the mechanism by which microbiome-based interventions impact the immune system. Recently, probiotic bacterial consortia have been developed to modulate immune populations. GUT-108 is one such consortia which reduces the CD4 + T cell population within the gut, reducing the abundance of multiple inflammatory cytokines152. While effective in mice, clinical trials are required to confirm its application in humans and better understand the mechanisms by which it affects the immune system.

Cytokines are host molecules used for communication between immune cells. Altering the abundance of these molecules can change the migration and activity of specific immune cell types. Gut microbes have evolved multiple methods to modulate the ability of cells to produce and secrete these molecules. Lactocepin is a protease produced by Lacticaseibacillus casei which is able to degrade IP-10 (CXCL10), a proinflammatory molecule (Fig. 2)257. Based on this, lactocepin-producing probiotic species have been proposed to be of therapeutic use for IBD patients258, while no clinical trials studied their application, probiotic use of L. casei DN-114 001 has proven effective against gastrointestinal inflammatory conditions259.

Ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA), commercially called ursodiol, is a SBA which has been used clinically for decades197 and inhibits cultured epithelial cells releasing proinflammatory chemokines, therefore reducing the severity of inflammatory responses265. However, trials have so far failed to prove their effectiveness to treat conditions such as IBD266. As the impact of bile acids is dose-dependent267, it may be that an insufficient dose was applied. Additionally, high-dosage treatment with UDCA has also proven detrimental, being linked to increased risk of colorectal neoplasia in patients with ulcerative colitis and primary sclerosing cholangitis268.

The gut microbiome has been identified as a factor influencing host response to medication, such as check-point inhibitor (CPI) therapy269. CPIs are a form of immunotherapy for treatment of cancer which target the immune escape mechanisms used by cancerous cells. There are three main target molecules that are inhibited; CTLA-4, PD-1, and PD-L1. The interaction between the microbiome and CPIs has been shown to be complex and is not limited to a single species, instead showing cohort-specific microbiome signatures270.

Other members of the gut microbiome associated with clinical response to PD-1, and PD-L1 treatment are A. muciniphila and Enterococcus hirae. Germ-free mice gavaged with these species were observed to become responsive to PD-1 treatment. This may be in part due to stimulating the secretion of IL-12 by DCs, Th1 cell reactivity to A. muciniphila, and Tc cell reactivity to A. muciniphila and E. hirae276, however the exact mechanism remains unclear.

While microbiome-based interventions influence the host immune system using multiple ways, our understanding is still in its infancy and further work is needed to understand these mechanisms and utilise this information to design better intervention strategies. However, implementation of this information has already led to great advancements over a relatively short period of time and future advancements are likely to occur at a fast rate. In Box 2 we detail a few of the most exciting developments in recent and coming years. Additionally, while this review has focused on the bacterial and viral fractions of the microbiome, the fungal residents of the gut have also been identified as being important to host health and their potential use should be studied further277.

Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

