Fecal Microbiome Changes and Specific Anti-Bacterial Response in Patients with IBD during Anti-TNF Therapy

Inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) are chronic disorders of the gastrointestinal tract that have been linked to microbiome dysbiosis and immune system dysregulation. We investigated the longitudinal effect of anti-TNF therapy on gut microbiota composition and specific immune response to commensals in IBD patients. The study included 52 patients tracked over 38 weeks of therapy and 37 healthy controls (HC). To characterize the diversity and composition of the gut microbiota, we used amplicon sequencing of the V3V4 region of 16S rRNA for the bacterial community and of the ITS1 region for the fungal community. We measured total antibody levels as well as specific antibodies against assorted gut commensals by ELISA. We found diversity differences between HC, Crohn’s disease, and ulcerative colitis patients. The bacterial community of patients with IBD was more similar to HC at the study endpoint, suggesting a beneficial shift in the microbiome in response to treatment. We identified factors such as disease severity, localization, and surgical intervention that significantly contribute to the observed changes in the gut bacteriome. Furthermore, we revealed increased IgM levels against specific gut commensals after anti-TNF treatment. In summary, this study, with its longitudinal design, brings insights into the course of anti-TNF therapy in patients with IBD and correlates the bacterial diversity with disease severity in patients with ulcerative colitis (UC).

Inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) such as Crohn’s disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC) are chronic disorders with an unknown etiology and mechanism of progression. However, several associated risk factors have been identified and extensively studied, ranging from genetic predisposition and environmental factors to immune system dysregulation [1]. Biological therapy is a standard part of the treatment regimen for IBD in the Czech Republic and worldwide. Specifically, two of the currently available monoclonal antibodies for IBD treatment include antibodies against tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), infliximab (IFX), a chimeric monoclonal antibody, and adalimumab (ADA), a fully human monoclonal antibody IBD [2].

Dysbiosis in patients with IBD is quite well documented across many studies [10,15,24,25]. However, studies linking fluctuations in diversity and specific microbial phylotypes with disease advancement after anti-TNF therapy do not provide consistent results. Therefore, the aim of this study was to track changes in the bacterial and fungal microbiome over the course of anti-TNF therapy and link it to disease severity. Moreover, we studied various immune factors related to the clinical status of patients with IBD that might contribute to the observed microbial diversity changes.

Patients were recruited at the ISCARE Clinical and Research Centre for Inflammatory Bowel Disease in the Czech Republic from November 2018 to December 2020. This study included patients diagnosed with IBD according to the guidelines of the European Crohn’s and Colitis Organization (ECCO) [26], who had started to receive anti-TNF therapy. Fecal and blood (serum, peripheral blood mononuclear cell isolation) samples were collected before the beginning of therapy (baseline, week 0) and at each patient visit (weeks 2, 8, 14, 20, 26, 32, and 38) as described previously [27]. All samples were stored at −80 °C until processing. At each visit, we recorded medical history, disease severity, responsiveness to treatment, and various clinical parameters: Harvey–Bradshaw index (HBI) in patients with CD and partial Mayo score (pMayo) in patients with UC; C-reactive protein (CRP); fecal calprotectin (FC); ferritin; hemoglobin (Hb); platelet count (PLT); white blood cells (WBC). HBI and pMayo were calculated by a specialized gastroenterologist during patient visits at the outpatient clinic according to disease activity reflected by patient outcomes and physician’s assessment [28,29]. Healthy control subjects were recruited at the Institute of Clinical and Experimental Medicine (IKEM) in the Czech Republic and comprised 37 individuals. The exclusion criteria for healthy subjects were a gastrointestinal or dermatologic diagnosis and use of antibiotics within 3 months prior to sampling. All study participants signed informed consent forms. This study was approved by the Ethics Committees of ISCARE (Nr2015/Ia) and IKEM (Nr2015/Ia).

DNA was isolated from the stool specimen using the ZymoBIOMICS DNA Miniprep Kit (Zymo Research, Irvine, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The V3V4 region of 16S rRNA gene and the fungal ITS1 region covered by specific primers with barcodes (341F GTCCTACGGGNGGCWGCAG and 806R GGACTACHVGGGTWTCTAAT) and (F GTAAAAGTCGTAACAAGGTTTC and R AAGTTCAAAGAYTCGATGATTCAC), respectively, were chosen as representative sequences for taxonomic identification. The amplification reaction was performed with the KAPA HiFi HotStart Ready Mix (Roche, Penzberg, Germany), as follows: initial denaturation step 3 min at 95 °C followed by 25 cycles at 95 °C for 30 s, 55 °C for 30 s, 72 °C for 30 s with a final elongation step at 72 °C for 5 min using 5 ng/µL DNA. PCR products were checked using QIAxcel advanced capillary electrophoresis (QIAgen, Hilden, Germany). Triplicates of the amplicons were pooled and normalized with the SequalPrep™ Normalization Plate Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), concentrated (Eppendorf centrifugal vacuum concentrator), and purified with DNA Clean & Concentrator Kit (Zymo Research, Irvine, CA, USA). Subsequently, the amplicon libraries were ligated with sequencing adapters using the KAPA HyperPlus Kit (Roche, Penzberg, Germany), pooled in equimolar concentrations, and sequenced. Amplicon sequencing was performed using the Miseq platform (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA).

Reads were quality filtered with Cutadapt (version 1.15), joined with Fastq-join (version 1.3), and demultiplexed using a custom R script. The sequences were trimmed and denoised, and amplicon sequence variants (ASVs) were generated with the Qiime2 plugin DADA2. Qiime2 (version 2021.2) [30] pipeline was used to calculate alpha and beta diversities. Bacterial taxonomy was assigned with VSEARCH classifier against the SILVA database (release 138) with 99% similarity. Only forward reads were used with the ITS sequences and fungal taxonomy was assigned with blast against the Unite database (version 8) with 97% similarity. The MetaCyc metabolic pathways were predicted from the 16S-based taxonomic profiles with the aid of the Qiime2 plugin Phylogenetic Investigation of Communities by Reconstruction of Unobserved States (PICRUSt2) [31].

The bacteria were obtained from DSMZ (Deutsche Sammlung von Mikroorganismen und Zellkulturen GmbH, Braunschweig, Germany) and cultured as recommended. Specifically, Lactobacillus plantarum CCDM 182 (ATCC Medium No. 416); Bifidobacterium adolescentis CCUG 18363 (DSMZ medium No. 58.); Blautia coccoides (ATCC Medium No. 1490); Roseburia intestinalis L1-82 (ATCC Medium No. 2695); Eubacterium rectale ATCC 3365 (ATCC Medium No 1703); Faecalibacterium prausnitzii A2-165 (DSMZ medium No. 1611); Ruminococcus flavefaciens (ATCC Medium No. 1365 E); Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron VPI 5482 (ATCC Medium No. 1490); Prevotella ruminicola M384 (ATCC Medium No 1703); Escherichia coli K6 (Merck, Kenilworth, NJ, USA, L3022). All bacteria except Escherichia coli K6 were grown under anaerobic conditions. Bacterial lysates were prepared as previously described and used for either PBMCs stimulation or for antigen coating in an indirect ELISA [32,33].

Serum concentrations of total immunoglobulin G (IgG), immunoglobulin A (IgA), and immunoglobulin M (IgM) were determined using commercially available kits according to manufacturers’ instructions (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA). The serum concentrations of anti-bacterial antibodies of IgM, IgG, and IgA isotypes were analyzed by an in-house developed indirect ELISA as described previously [27]. All serum samples were diluted at 1:200. Antibody levels are reported in arbitrary units (AU), where a reference serum sample was applied on each ELISA plate and its mean value of OD (450–650 nm) was used as thousand arbitrary unit (1000 AU).

PBMCs were isolated and cultivated as previously described [27]. Interleukin-17A (IL-17A) in supernatants of PBMCs stimulated by bacterial antigens was quantified by a commercially available ELISA kit (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA).

Differences in alpha diversity were evaluated using non-parametric tests, specifically the Mann–Whitney-U test or Kruskal–Wallis test for multiple group comparison and Wilcoxon signed-rank test for paired comparisons. A Benjamini and Hochberg procedure was applied to control the false discovery rate. The relationship between alpha diversity and disease severity was assessed using the Spearman correlation. Beta diversity variance was determined by the qiime2 plugin ADONIS [30]. For beta diversity comparisons, permutation tests including PERMANOVA and PERMDISP (with 999 permutations) were used. Beta diversity similarities of HC and patients with IBD at baseline and at the endpoint of the study were assessed by a restricted permutational design implemented in the ADONIS function from the R package Vegan (version 4.0). Differential abundance analysis was performed with the aid of ANCOM v2.1, a modified version of the original ANCOM [34], which allows paired design and adjustment for covariates. For diversity analysis, reads were rarefied to the minimum sample depth. For taxonomic analysis, unrarefied sequences were used. Antibody and cytokine levels were log-transformed and compared with one-way ANOVA or Student’s t-test along with Tukey multiple comparison test. Graphs were generated using python 3.9. with the packages Matplotlib, Seaborn, and Sklego and in GraphPad Prism (version 9.1.2).

In the microbiome study, 52 patients suffering from IBD (34 CD, 18 UC) and 37 healthy controls were observed longitudinally. A total of 352 samples from 89 individuals at several time points were collected. Out of the 52 patients who brought their fecal sample at baseline (week 0), only 27 (17 patients with CD and 10 patients with UC) reached the endpoint at week 38. The clinical data for patients who participated in the study until week 38 and healthy controls are summarized in Table 1. The mean age at diagnosis was very similar in patients with CD and UC. The sex ratio was skewed towards females in both HC and patients with IBD (Table 1). Basic clinical parameters, such as CRP, WBC, PLT, ferritin, Hb, and FC were measured (Table 1) and the elevated levels point to an ongoing inflammation in the patients with IBD. At baseline (week 0) 65% (22/34) of patients with CD were in clinical remission but no patient from the patient group with UC was in remission (0/18).

Healthy controls comprised 37 individuals, 12 of them subjected to repeated sampling. The bacterial alpha diversity represented by Shannon entropy was significantly different (p < 0.001) among healthy individuals (Figure S1A). The high interindividual variability was also evident in beta diversity dissimilarities represented by the Bray–Curtis metric (Figure 1). Forty-three percent of the overall variance can be attributed to the individual, whereas only 2% to the time of sampling (visit). The residual variance of 26% includes the variance of each individual in time, sequencing variance, or variance not explained by our metadata categories. Importantly, in the healthy controls group, there is no significant temporal variation in bacterial diversity (Figure S2).

The bacterial diversity at baseline (week 0) differed between patients with CD and UC and healthy controls (Figure 2). Bacterial alpha diversity represented by Shannon entropy was highest in the HC group and lowest in the UC group (Figure 2A). Bacterial beta diversity represented by Bray–Curtis distance is illustrated by PCoA (Figure 2B). Statistically significant differences between the cluster centroids are supported by PERMANOVA and PERMDISP tests, but the contribution of diagnosis to the overall beta diversity variation is quite small.

Both patients with CD and UC experienced changes in bacterial alpha diversity and disease severity during the study. These changes were more pronounced in the patient group with UC (Figure S3). In patients with UC, we observed a negative association between the clinical score and Shannon entropy with bacterial diversity more compromised in more severe cases (Figure 3A), whereas in patients with CD, the diversity was more evenly distributed across the clinical scores (Figure 3B).

We also found that patients with CD who had undergone intestinal surgery (drainage, ileocecal resection) in the past showed a different beta diversity (Figure 5A), and their alpha diversity was diminished both at baseline (Figure 5B) and during the whole observation period (Figure 5C). No patients with UC had undergone surgery.

Twenty-seven stool samples (17 CD, 10 UC) were obtained from patients at the endpoint of the study (week 38). We did not detect any changes in bacterial alpha diversity between week 0 (baseline) and week 38 in either patients with CD (Wilcoxon signed-rank test: p = 0.353) or patients with UC (Wilcoxon signed-rank test: p = 0.064) patients. In patients with UC, the difference between the baseline and the endpoint was larger than in patients with CD, but it was statistically insignificant (Figure S5). Thirteen taxa turned out to be differentially abundant between baseline and endpoint in patients with CD and 10 in patients with UC. Nevertheless, all of the differentially abundant taxa turned out to be structural zeros except for Ruminococcus, which was increased in patients with UC at the study endpoint (Table S1). The relative abundances of Ruminococcus during the observation period are shown in Figure S6.

To evaluate changes in the gut bacteriome during anti-TNF therapy, we assessed the degree of beta diversity similarity to healthy controls (Figure 6). We calculated a Bray–Curtis distance matrix between all samples and then applied a restricted permutation test specifically designed to compare only the distances to HC at baseline (week 0) and at the endpoint (week 38). We discovered a significant difference between the baseline distance to HC and the endpoint distance to HC in both patients with CD and UC. However, due to the very low contribution of the diagnosis factor to the overall variance in the whole cohort (4%), we cannot rule out that these differences are caused by large dispersion of the measurements.

Metabolic pathways from MetaCyc were reconstructed from our 16S rRNA data using PICRUST2 [31]. We identified a significant increase in multiple metabolic pathways in patients with IBD compared with HC (Figure 7, Table S2), further we describe only the most relevant to IBD pathology. The underrepresented metabolic pathways include fermentation to butyrate and propionate (PWY-5677, PWY-5088, PWY-5676). Further, biotin biosynthesis was decreased in patients with IBD (PWY-5005). Pathways including the biosynthesis of enterobactin, an iron chelator utilized by bacteria to acquire iron from the environment, and enterobacterial common antigen were increased in patients with IBD (ENTBACSYN-PWY, ECASYN-PWY).

We found no differences in alpha diversity represented by Shannon entropy between individuals in the healthy controls group (p = 0.327), probably due to the small sample size, because in the patient group the differences were significant (p = 0.009) between individuals (Figure S7). In terms of beta diversity calculated using Bray–Curtis dissimilarity, the individual factor explained only 5% of the variance in the HC group and 6% in the IBD group (Figure 1).

At baseline, the fungal community composition of patients with IBD was not significantly different from that of healthy controls. We did not find any significant changes in Shannon entropy over the course of therapy. Similarly, we observed no significant differences in Shannon entropy between the baseline and the endpoint of the study. Additionally, patients’ fungal communities were not shifted towards the HC mycobiome at the endpoint compared to the baseline (data not shown).

Total levels of IgM, IgA, and IgG were measured in the serum of HC and patients with IBD at baseline (week 0) and at the endpoint (week 38; Table 2).

We measured specific IgM targeted against antigenic structures of assorted bacteria (Lactobacillus plantarum, Bifidobacterium adolescentis, Blautia coccoides, Roseburia intestinalis, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, Escherichia coli, Prevotella ruminicola, Ruminococcus flavefaciens, and Eubacterium rectale). We detected a significant increase in antibodies against most of the bacteria (except F. prausnitzii) between the baseline and the endpoint of the therapy in patients with CD (Table 3). Conversely, in patients with UC none of the specific antibodies were significantly different between the baseline and the endpoint. We did not detect any significant differences between specific antibody levels of healthy controls and patients with IBD.

Since the immune response to microbiota might change during anti-TNF therapy, we analyzed the T cell response to microbial stimuli before the start of the therapy (week 0) and after 38 weeks. We isolated PBMCs and challenged them in vitro with a panel of gut commensals and measured the levels of IL-17A produced. We found that at week 38 T cells from patients with UC react with increased IL-17 production to antigens from Blautia (Figure S8A). Additionally, PBMCs isolated from patients with CD react more strongly to antigens isolated from E. coli K6 at week 38 (Figure S8B).

Monitoring the microbiome during anti-TNF therapy provided interesting insights into the link between gut microbial composition and disease advancement and severity.

Accumulating evidence suggests that the role of TNF-α and IL-17 in IBD pathogenesis is more complicated than previously thought since these cytokines can exert both pro- and anti-inflammatory effects [78,79]. They can promote intestinal barrier repair and several mouse studies confirmed that they might suppress intestinal inflammation [80,81]. In addition, anti-IL-17 therapy has not shown therapeutic efficacy in the treatment of patients with CD [82]. Besides, new cases of IBD have been reported in patients receiving anti-IL-17 therapy to treat their dermatological and rheumatic diseases [83]. Thus, the intriguing question is how anti-TNF treatment affects IL-17 production. In our study, we have shown that blood cells isolated after 38 weeks of therapy respond with increased IL-17 production to specific bacterial antigens (Figure S8). This finding is consistent with a study that found increased serum production of IL-17 in patients receiving anti-TNF treatment [84]. Similarly, serum IL-17 levels of patients with CD with active disease were reported to be lower than those of healthy controls and patients with CD in remission [85]. The importance of IL-17 production in IBD could be also in its influence on the induction of anti-microbial peptides and consequent maintenance of gut homeostasis [86]. Future microbiome studies would benefit from targeting a very particular patient group within one diagnosis, defined disease localization and treatment to eliminate as many variables influencing microbial diversity as possible. These variables and not so large sample size were the main limitations of our study which made the results challenging to interpret.

In conclusion, we confirmed differences in the bacterial microbiome of HC and patients with IBD and also between patients with CD and UC. These results are complemented by metabolic pathways predictions, which also differed between HC and patients with IBD. Moreover, we highlight that interindividual variability in bacteriome diversity plays a greater role than temporal variability and disease phenotype. This might explain why studies consistently report changes in diversity, but evidence for differential abundance has been mixed. In addition, we demonstrated the importance of disease severity, disease localization, and intestinal surgical interventions in bacterial microbiome research suggesting the study cohort composition has tremendous impact in the observed diversity. We showed that at the study endpoint, beta diversity of both patients with CD and UC were more similar to HC subjects than at baseline, although we have identified only Ruminococcus to be differentially abundant in patients with UC. Furthermore, we detected an increased humoral response to multiple gut commensals in patients with CD at the study endpoint. These results emphasize the importance of gut microbiota diversity and composition as well as specific immune response to gut bacteria in IBD pathogenesis. TNF inhibitor therapy influences these factors to a different extent in patients with CD and UC.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

