Sex, gut microbiome, and cardiovascular disease risk

Key differences exist between men and women in the determinants and manifestations of cardiovascular and cardiometabolic diseases. Recently, gut microbiome-host relations have been implicated in cardiovascular disease and associated metabolic conditions; therefore, gut microbiota may be key mediators or modulators driving the observed sexual dimorphism in disease onset and progression. While current evidence regarding pure physiological sex differences in gut microbiome composition is modest, robust research suggests that gut microbiome-dependent metabolites may interact with important biological pathways under sex hormone control, including toll-like receptor and flavin monooxygenase signaling. Here, we review key sex differences in gut microbiome interactions with four primary determinants of cardiovascular disease, impaired glucose regulation, dyslipidemia, hypertension, and obesity. Through this process, we propose important sex differences in downstream metabolic pathways that may be at the interface of the gut microbiome and cardiovascular disease.

It is increasingly appreciated that the human gut microbiome, a network that includes over 100 trillion bacteria, and its changes over the lifespan are involved in the pathophysiology of cardiovascular disease (CVD) [1–3]. For example, gut microbial-dependent metabolites including, short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) and trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO), may modify CVD determinants through G protein-coupled receptors (GPCR) that modulate blood pressure [4] or through inhibition of high density lipoprotein (HDL)-coordinated reverse cholesterol transport [2], respectively. The extent to whether such microbe-host physiology exhibits sexual dimorphism in the setting of CVD remains largely unexplored, as these dynamic relationships have not been clearly defined or systematically reviewed across both men and women.

This review focuses on the biological pathways underlying sex differences in CVD, particularly involving novel relationships between the gut microbiome and CVD risk factors. We will first review sex differences regarding four primary determinants of disease including blood pressure, lipid metabolism, glucose metabolism, and body weight. We will then introduce the gut microbiome, highlighting its intricate relationship with the human diet, and discuss the downstream microbiome-dependent metabolites and pathways influencing CVD. Through this process, we will assess the current evidence regarding the relationships of the gut microbiome with blood pressure, serum lipid, and glycemic profiles, as well as body weight, and the potential influence of sexual dimorphism in these gut microbiome-host relations.

CVD is responsible for the greatest proportion of deaths in both men and women, with CVD mortality rates approximately 32% and 35%, respectively [5, 6]. While age-adjusted CVD mortality rates are higher in men compared to premenopausal women [6, 7], one third of women in the USA are affected by CVD, and nearly 50% of women in Western countries will die from coronary heart disease or stroke [8]. Furthermore, whereas clinical and public health CVD efforts must continue to target both sexes equally, key differences in the epidemiology and pathophysiology of risk factors have been identified in men and women. These corresponding differences underline the need to examine the role of sex in the development and progression of CVD and its respective upstream disease risk factors.

A large body of evidence has demonstrated sex differences in CVD risk over the past several decades. Impaired glucose regulation, dyslipidemia, hypertension, and obesity are among the most important CVD risk factors in the general population. Table 1 highlights fundamental biological sex differences in these four risk factors as well as the evidence and potential underlying mechanisms that may mediate such observations.

The human microbiota represents the collection of microorganisms that live in and on the human body, including the gastrointestinal tract, urogenital system, and skin. The human microbiome, precisely, refers to the genomes of such microorganisms, including bacteria, fungi, archae, protists, and viruses [9]. While all five latter microorganisms are found in the human gut, bacteria are the most prevalent and well-studied, and relationships of the virome, mycobiota, and archae with human health remain largely unexplored. Microbial cells outnumber host cells in the human body, and the gut microbiome plays a critical role in host metabolism, physiology, and susceptibility to and risk of disease, particularly CVD [10]. Our gut microbiota, predominantly bacteria, helps absorb and metabolize food constituents, producing biologically active microbial metabolites that proceed through the portal system, entering systemic circulation to influence human physiology.

The gut microbiome serves as a filter for perhaps the most common human environmental exposure, diet. Our diets are one the most important modulators of microbiota composition and its respective metabolites, notably TMAO and SCFA [11]. While sex differences were not explored in the analysis, one study comparing children adherent to a rural diet in Burkina Faso (vegetarian, high fiber, low fat) versus a modernized western diet in Europe (animal protein, low fiber, high fat) found that rural children had significant increases in Bacteroidetes phyla as well as Prevotella and Xylanibacter genera and a reduction in the Firmicutes bacterial phylum [12]. Together, this microbial composition also led to a significant increased production of the three most prevalent SCFA, acetate, propionate, and butyrate. Thus, diets high in fiber and plant protein as well as low in saturated fat may lead to increased microbial richness and more abundant production of SCFA [12]. SCFAs are fermentation by-products of carbohydrates and proteins that help maintain the integrity of the intestinal brush border but may also reduce CVD risk through reductions in systolic blood pressure and serum cholesterol, as well as through improved insulin sensitivity [13, 14]. Similar to SCFA, gut microbiota-dependent metabolite, TMAO, is intricately associated with dietary intakes. TMAO has been causally associated with atherosclerosis, and this metabolite derives from foods rich in choline, phosphatidylcholine, and carnitine [11]. The latter three dietary metabolites are predominantly found in animal-based foods, including eggs, red meat, and dairy, and studies in vegetarians and vegans have confirmed that individuals adherent to plant-based diets produce less TMAO compared omnivorous to subjects [15] (Table 2). Mechanistically, dietary foods that contain TMAO metabolite substrates are converted by gut microbial enzymes to trimethylamine, which is subsequently oxidized by hepatic flavin monooxygenase 3 (FMO3) to yield TMAO [3].

Differences in dietary intake between men and women may thus be an important source of sexual dimorphism in CVD risk. While not all reports have observed sex differences in diet [16, 17], several studies have reported that men consume fewer high-fiber foods, including fruits and vegetables, and have higher dietary intakes of fat and salt compared to women in both childhood and adulthood [18–20]. Likewise, consistent associations have been reported between specific foods and gender, with red meat and alcohol associated with masculinity, whereas femininity has been correlated with fish, fruits, and vegetables [21]. Therefore, differences in dietary intake in men and women, perhaps stemming from societal and behavioral factors, may be important to consider when assessing the role of the gut microbiome in sexual dimorphism in CVD and its associated risk factors.

Sexual dimorphism in the gut microbiome may be influenced by genotype, diet, age, ethnicity, geographic location, and/or the health status of the host [22]. Characterizing gut microbiome profiles through bacterial phyla [23, 24] demonstrates high proportions of Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes phyla in healthy adults, while Proteobacteria, Actinobacteria, Fusobacteria, and Verrucomicrobia are phyla less represented [25–27]. Evidence from studies suggests that women may harbor a higher ratio of Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes (F/B) in comparison to men [28–30]. The F/B ratio, increasing in magnitude from birth to adulthood [31], is used in microbiome studies as it is an important measure of human microbiota composition and appears to be a key component in biological aging and obesity [32]. Additionally, Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes are the two most common bacterial phyla in the human microbiome; therefore, perturbations in the proportional composition of these two taxonomical groups may provide insight into host health status. Bacteroidetes are the most prevalent phylum of gram-negative bacteria occupying the human gastrointestinal tract and are considered to be largely beneficial due to their functional capabilities of polysaccharide degradation and regulation of calorie absorption [33]. With respect to Firmicutes, most gut bacteria representing this phylum are gram-positive and are capable of producing several SCFAs, which may contribute to a protective CVD phenotype through improved blood pressure control and glucose homeostasis [13]. The F/B ratio is heavily influenced by BMI [34] and thus may play a significant role in regulation of adiposity. Among those with a BMI greater than 33, a significantly lower F/B ratio has been seen in men compared to women, while the opposite holds true in those with a BMI less than 33 as well as in postmenopausal women [35]. Adjusting for BMI, higher proportions of Firmicutes have been found in women compared to men. With respect to other less represented gut microbiome phyla, higher numbers of Proteobacteria, Veillonella, and Blautia have been reported in women in comparison with men [29, 35, 36]. The F/B ratio has been used as an indicator of gut dysbiosis, with a higher F/B ratio representing a more dysbiotic microbiome.

Very few studies have specifically explored gut microbiome differences between men and women as a primary research question, as much of the current evidence stems from sensitivity and post hoc analyses. Additionally, while a significant body of evidence demonstrates that early infant life and age are key determinants of gut microbial composition, no prospective longitudinal studies tracking potential sex differences in the gut microbiome across the lifespan have been conducted.

Bidirectionality is an important consideration when describing gut microbiome changes in relation to respective CVD risk factors. Dyslipidemia, dysglycemia, hypertension, and obesity may all induce or themselves be modified by gut microbiome changes [41] (Fig. 1). In spite of the prematurity of the scientific discipline and the need for longitudinal studies to establish temporality, there is a considerable amount of evidence to parse regarding sex-specific differences underlying the relationship of the gut microbiome and traditional CVD risk factors. The focus here is to highlight aspects of microbiome-CVD risk factor relationships that may be a result of or contribute to observed sex differences in disease.

Some of the evidence implicating microbiota with CVD risk factors and identifying sex differences in these relationships comes from experimental studies in mice that have used various biological mouse models. For example, apolipoprotein E-deficient mice are atherosclerosis-prone and have been used to assess the role of microbiota in atherosclerotic processes [42]. Ovariectomy and castration in female and male mice, respectively, allow for the study of hormonal influences on physiology and susceptibility to disease [43]. Germ-free mice are commonly used in microbiome-related research as they are raised in conditions that render them completely free of all (detectable) microorganisms. This offers the possibility of studying effects in the total absence of microbes (germ-free) and in the presence of known microbes (gnotobiotic) once introduced to the germ-free mice, for example after fecal transplantation. This model allows for studying the temporal and near direct effects of the gut microbiome on phenotypes, as gut microbiota are transferred from donor mice with a particular disease phenotype to recipient germ-free mice [44]. An alternative method to using germ-free mice is antibiotic treatment to depress resident microbes prior to introducing specific microbes for study [45]. Knockout mice have also been used to assess the impact of a loss of certain genes on the relationship between the microbiome and CVD risk factors [46].

Direct evidence for the involvement of the gut microbiome in the etiology of CVD comes from TMAO [47], a gut microbiome-dependent plasma metabolite that has been associated with increased CVD risk and events in several human and animal studies [47, 48]. TMAO is a prevalent metabolite in animals and humans, serving as an osmolyte particularly in the kidney, and high plasma concentrations of TMAO may suggest both underlying CVD and/or renal disease [49]. Of the metabolite’s many functions, TMAO modulates cholesterol metabolism in the liver, intestines, and arterial walls. When TMAO is present in systemic circulation, there is increased accumulation and decreased removal of cholesterol from peripheral endothelial cells lining arterial walls [50]. Circulating TMAO levels trigger increases in pro-inflammatory cytokine expression, leukocyte recruitment, and adhesion molecules, inducing vascular inflammation [51]. Wang et al. were able to prevent atherosclerosis in apolipoprotein E-deficient mice by reducing plasma TMAO levels [52], and TMAO levels may predict adverse cardiovascular events [53]. Heart failure patients have increased levels of TMAO compared with age- and sex-matched controls, and elevated TMAO is also associated with shorter survival in heart failure [48]. The cardiovascular risks of varying TMAO plasma levels were transferrable by gut microbiota transplantation in antibiotic-treated mice [45].

Overall, men may harbor protective physiological mechanisms with respect to endogenous TMAO production. Sexual dimorphism in the TMAO pathway may be attributable to diet, genetics, and hormones, as well as renal and immuno-physiologic factors. TMAO increases both platelet reactivity and thrombotic risk [54]. Sex differences in TMAO-induced platelet activation may be mediated by toll-like receptors (TLR); women contain more TLR mRNA transcripts compared to men [55], potentially making them more vulnerable to the adverse cardiovascular effects of TMAO. FMO3 catalyzes the rate-limiting step in TMAO production. Sex differences in hepatic FMO3 expression have been reported, with women expressing higher levels of this TMAO-producing enzyme compared to men [43]. FMO3 may be under hormonal regulation, as castrated male mice experience an over 100- and 7-fold rise in FMO3 mRNA and TMAO levels, respectively [43]. Estrogen, although to a smaller magnitude than androgens, also seems to influence FMO3 expression; estrogen supplementation in ovariectomized mice increases FMO3 expression. In total, these results suggest that androgens are the primary drivers of sex differences in hepatic FMO3 expression, with estrogens complementarily widening this difference although by a much smaller magnitude. Androgen-dependent reduction in FMO3 expression is thus a potential protective factor in the setting of atherogenic CVD. Farnesoid X receptor (FXR), which plays a role in bile acid receptor signaling [56, 57], may also regulate TMAO production via FMO3. Similar rises in plasma TMAO across both sexes are noted upon synthetic FXR activation in mice [43]. Though not previously reported, we believe that FXR-induced TMAO production may partially explain the observed potential deleterious effects of FXR on CVD risk, and that microbiome-derived secondary bile acids are a possible mediator of sexual dimorphism in this pathway. Women reportedly contain higher circulating concentrations of gut microbiome-dependent secondary bile acids compared to men, and this physiological manifestation may accelerate TMAO production, subsequently increasing atherogenic and thrombotic risk.

Gut microbiome dysbiosis has been implicated in the pathogenesis of type II diabetes [41]. Individuals with type II diabetes have both functional and compositional gut microbiota differences compared to those without disease [58]. Transfer of fecal microbiota from healthy human hosts to individuals with metabolic syndrome has increased gut microbial diversity and improved insulin sensitivity [59]. Such evidence demonstrates a role for the gut microbiome in the development of glycemic dysregulation and type II diabetes; however, mechanistic pathways and sex-specific pathophysiology remain to be elucidated.

The relationship between the gut microbiome and insulin sensitivity may be modified by the serum metabolome. Serum triglycerides [66], membrane phospholipids [67], and branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs) [68] are associated with insulin resistance and type II diabetes. Gut microbiota are intricately involved in metabolite biochemical pathways, helping synthesize vitamins, SCFAs, and amino acids, but also facilitate bile acid transformation and hydrolysis of non-digestible molecules [69]. In one study of 300 Danish individuals, insulin resistance was characterized by high serum concentrations of BCAAs and high proportions of gut microbiota Prevotella copri and Bacteroides vulgatus species, which have a high biosynthetic potential for producing BCAAs [70]. Notably, sex differences have been reported in BCAA and related degradation product metabolism, with men exhibiting higher serum metabolome concentrations of BCAA compared to metabolically similar women [71]. These findings are in line with data demonstrating that the Bacteroides-Prevotella groups are more prevalent in men compared to women [30]. In an animal model, female rats have more pronounced diurnal variation in hepatic branched-chain 2-oxoacid dehydrogenase (BCODH) activity, with over a twofold increase in morning expression of BCODH compared to male rats [72]. BCODH facilitates the catabolism of circulating BCAAs. Female sex hormones may be responsible for BCODH diurnal variation, as gonadectomy inhibits diurnal variation in female but not male rats [72]. Given that higher serum BCAA concentrations confer increased risk for glucose abnormalities [68, 73], female sex hormone regulation of BCODH may confer a protective effect for insulin resistance and type II diabetes.

Gut microbes may affect lipid metabolism through several potential mechanisms. One biologic pathway implicated is gut microbial fermentation of non-digestible carbohydrates. Anaerobic bacteria are uniquely capable of digesting complex carbohydrates, or dietary fiber, with one primary product being SCFAs [41]. There is significant heterogeneity with respect to dietary fiber and SCFA production, of which butyrate, propionate, and acetate are the most abundant. In vitro studies suggest that hydrolyzed guar gums lead to the highest gut microbiota-dependent production of butyrate, while pine fiber and arabinogalactan are the major contributors to acetate and propionate production, respectively [74]. Likewise, fermentation of resistant starch, a dietary and functional fiber found in high amounts in specific foods, including banana flour and rolled oats, favors butyrate production [74]. SCFAs may affect CVD risk via a wide variety of mechanisms including lipid and glucose metabolism, as well as blood pressure modulation [75]. For example, evidence suggests that propionate prevents de novo lipogenesis and cholesterogenesis and may also reduce visceral and liver fat [76]. Such physiology may be mediated through propionate’s activation of GPCR43, a receptor expressed in intestinal and adipose tissue, as well as in immune cells [77]. No sex differences were observed in one rodent study involving production of propionate in response to oligofructose-supplemented diets [78]. Butyrate and acetate have higher selectivity for GPCR41 and GPCR43, respectively, and are both metabolized to become incorporated into fatty acids and cholesterol [13]. Acetate, propionate, and butyrate may interact with peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) in liver, heart, and skeletal muscle tissue, increasing mitochondrial biogenesis and fatty acid oxidation that ultimately lowers lipid levels [79]. PPARs occupy a critical role in the regulation of lipid and carbohydrate metabolism, and sex differences have been reported in the stimulation of PPAR gamma [80]. Pioglitazone, a PPAR-gamma agonist, exhibits stronger efficacy in female mice compared to male mice [81]. This finding may be attributed to 17B-estradiol and a downstream increase in PPAR gamma receptor expression [82]. Besides biological sex, differences in dietary habits and/or genetics are also important variables to consider in the setting of SCFA production and lipid metabolism.

In addition to bile acids, cholesterol-derived steroid hormones may hold an important relationship with gut microbiota in the setting of CVD. Male mice have lower gut microbiome diversity compared to female mice in the same environment [44, 91, 92], and this difference is reduced upon the gonadectomy of male mice. Similarly, animal models demonstrate that gut microbiota are vital in supporting regular estrogen cycles, testosterone concentration, and reproductive roles in men and women [91–93]. Gut bacteria may facilitate the reabsorption of conjugated estrogens, as antibiotic administration has been associated with a 60-fold rise in conjugated estrogen excretion in feces [94, 95]. Bacterial beta-glucuronidase is the primary enzyme involved in deconjugating estrogens for reabsorption in the intestines [96], and the genes encoding this protein are primarily found in the Firmicutes phylum [97, 98]. Though levels of Firmicutes appear to be influenced by body weight, women may harbor higher intestinal Firmicutes compared to men irrespective of BMI [35]. These results suggest that gut microbiota may play a role in key steroid hormone changes across the lifespan that underlie CVD risk, for example, the menopausal estrogen decline and consequent proatherogenic shift of lipid profiles in women.

The gut microbiota has been implicated in hypertension in both animal and human studies [99–102]. High blood pressure is associated with gut microbiota dysbiosis [103], and the hypertensive phenotype is transferable from humans to germ-free mice through gut microbiota via fecal transplantation [104]. Decreased diversity of gut microbiota has been found in prehypertensive and hypertensive patients [103, 104]. Gut-derived SCFAs, prebiotics, and probiotics have all shown potential to decrease both systolic and diastolic blood pressure in humans [105, 106].

Recent compelling evidence for the role of the gut microbiome in hypertension comes from a study by Menni et al. that found an inverse association between gut microbial diversity and arterial stiffness, as measured via pulse wave velocity, in women [132]. This association was mostly independent of other metabolic syndrome markers. Further evidence is needed to determine if this effect is similar for men or if this could be a factor contributing to sex differences in hypertension.

The gut microbiome has been implicated in the etiology of obesity, particularly through energy extraction [133] as well as energy expenditure [99, 134]. At the same time, obesity alters the composition of the gastrointestinal microbiota [34, 35, 135, 136], indicating a bidirectional relationship.

Although evidence is mounting for the microbiota as a mediator of diet on obesity and other metabolic diseases [143], additional longitudinal research in humans is needed to elucidate the complex interplay and directionality of the microbiota-obesity relationship as well as to understand the influence of and resultant sex differences in these processes.

Recent investigations have highlighted key sex differences with respect to CVD prevalence, risk, and progression that may be driven by traditional risk factors including dyslipidemia, hypertension, insulin resistance, and obesity. Furthermore, while preliminary research has implicated a potential role of the microbiome in mediating the relationships of upstream risk factors and CVD, sexual dimorphism in this research area remains largely unexplored. Future studies must clearly isolate the role of sex from diet, host health, age, ethnicity, and environment to conclusively identify potential biological sex differences in the gut microbiome. In particular, prospective study designs are necessary to document temporal changes in the gut microbiome as they relate to physiological hormonal cycles and critical hormonal time periods that associate with determinants of CVD, including puberty and menopause. Initial studies suggest that microbiome-associated toll-like receptor signaling cascades, bile acid metabolism, and steroid hormone modulation may be important drivers in sex differences in CVD risk. Additional mechanistic studies are necessary to discover how gut microbiota may initiate or mediate key sex-specific biological determinants of CVD, particularly through the serum metabolome, in the general population. Future evidence derived from mechanistic studies may pave the way for potential low risk interventions involving microbiota to reduce CVD risk throughout the lifespan.

LAD, MD, PhD, is the Director of the Center for Lifespan Epidemiology Research at Tulane University School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine.

KSP is a PhD student at Tulane University School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine, Department of Epidemiology

Publisher’s Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

