Nutritional Modulation of Immune and Central Nervous System Homeostasis: The Role of Diet in Development of Neuroinflammation and Neurological Disease

The gut-microbiome-brain axis is now recognized as an essential part in the regulation of systemic metabolism and homeostasis. Accumulating evidence has demonstrated that dietary patterns can influence the development of metabolic alterations and inflammation through the effects of nutrients on a multitude of variables, including microbiome composition, release of microbial products, gastrointestinal signaling molecules, and neurotransmitters. These signaling molecules are, in turn, implicated in the regulation of the immune system, either promoting or inhibiting the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and the expansion of specific leukocyte subpopulations, such as Th17 and Treg cells, which are relevant in the development of neuroinflammatory and neurodegenerative conditions. Metabolic diseases, like obesity and type 2 diabetes mellitus, are related to inadequate dietary patterns and promote variations in the aforementioned signaling pathways in patients with these conditions, which have been linked to alterations in neurological functions and mental health. Thus, maintenance of adequate dietary patterns should be an essential component of any strategy aiming to prevent neurological pathologies derived from systemic metabolic alterations. The present review summarizes current knowledge on the role of nutrition in the modulation of the immune system and its impact in the development of neuroinflammation and neurological disease.

The role of diet in the development of metabolic alterations leading to chronic inflammatory disease is becoming increasingly clear, owing to extensive research on the subject in recent years. There is ample evidence connecting metabolic disease, such as obesity and and type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), to dietary changes, including increased intake of high-calorie content, highly processed food and their constituent additives, as well as decreased consumption of fruits, vegetables, and other sources of dietary fiber, common characteristics of what is known as “western” diets [1,2,3].

There is accumulating evidence on the link between diet and mental health, in particular through the dependence of systemic metabolism on the quality of diet, but also due to the effects of dietary components on immune functions and inflammation, not only at the intestinal level, but also in other organs and tissues, including the central nervous system. The following sections will describe the modulatory effects of dietary and intestinal microbiome-derived components on the immune system and how they may relate to immune dysregulation and development of neurologic pathologies.

The human microbiome comprises a variety of microorganisms from multiple phyla, inhabiting the skin and mucosal tissues [7]. The intestinal microbiota, in particular, is comprised mainly by five different phyla and multiple genera of the Eubacteria domain: Actinobacteria (Bifidobacterium), Bacteroidetes (Bacteroides and Prevotella), Firmicutes (Clostridium and Lactobacillus), Proteobacteria (Escherichia), and Verrucomicrobia (Akkermansia), which present significant variability among individuals and populations, with some estimates suggesting over 1000 bacterial species that may be present within specific populations [8,9,10]. The relevance of the microbiome for the modulation of metabolism has become evident with studies on biochemical parameters related to glucose tolerance and insulin production in germ-free mice [11], with further evidence emerging from studies on changes in the susceptibility to obesity in genetically obese and lean animals with altered microbiomes [12]. Presently, the microbiome is known to participate in the regulation of multiple physiological processes, including energy balance and the development and functions of the immune system, with alterations in its composition and functions modifying the development and evolution of multiple pathologies [13].

In addition to its regulatory effects on metabolism, the intestinal microbiome plays an essential role in the modulation of immune and nervous system functions, either through direct production of bioactive components affecting the release of hormones, incretins and neurotransmitters, or by regulation of leukocyte functions, such as cytokine production [19]. Therefore, the microbiome is part of a complex bidirectional communication system integrating the gastrointestinal, immune, and nervous systems and its stability and adequate functional status is necessary for maintenance of human health.

Diet has been extensively demonstrated to modify the colonization and permanence of intestinal bacterial populations. In general, studies point to specific “enterotypes” in humans, which are determined by the presence of specific bacterial sub-types that can be found in different populations [20,21]. These enterotypes are shaped in large part by the particular long-term dietary habits of every individual; for example, protein- and fat-rich diets favor the proliferation of bacteria of the Bacteroides genus [22]. Defining dietary patterns is a complex issue, since they vary widely, even within a specific geographic region. Therefore, these patterns are usually defined based on a particular set of dietary components that are prevalent in each region and can be found in increased quantities in each diet sub-type, even though each pattern may comprise multiple sub-regional variations with different ingredients and amounts used, but which maintain the general characteristics of a given pattern. The following sections illustrate the kinds of components that characterize each specific pattern described and their known effects on microbiome composition.

Western-type diets are usually considered to have high concentrations of dietary fat, consisting particularly of saturated fatty acids (e.g., butyric, lauric, myristic, palmitic, and stearic acids), which are non-essential lipids found in large quantities in animal products, containing no double carbon-carbon bonds and related to increases in blood triglycerides and cholesterol levels, as well as very high quantities of red meat protein, sugar, salt, and low amounts of dietary fiber, due to low consumption of fruits and vegetables [23]. The high-carbohydrate, high-fat, low-fiber characteristics of western-type diets have profound effects on the composition of the intestinal microbiome and the regulation of the immune system, as they are related to an enhanced pro-inflammatory intestinal milieu and development of metabolic and immune abnormalities that are relevant for the incidence and evolution of chronic and degenerative pathologies. Western-type diets favor the proliferation of gram-negative bacteria like E. coli, which produce endotoxins and contribute to systemic pro-inflammatory immune responses and metabolic dysregulation [24,25].

In contrast to western-type diets, traditional Mediterranean diets are characterized by high intake of low-starch vegetables, fruits, legumes, nuts, and whole-grain cereals, using olive oil as a main source of unsaturated fat. This fiber-rich diet has been related to several health benefits, including lower blood cholesterol, inflammation, and oxidative stress [26]. Mediterranean diets usually contain high quantities of unsaturated fatty acids (e.g., linolenic, linoleic, eicosapetaenoic, docoshexaenoic, and arachidonic acids), essential components of cellular membranes which contain at least one double carbon-carbon bond and which include the omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids found in large quatities in fish and nuts, as well as low glycemic index carbohydrates, which promote healthy metabolic profiles in humans [27]. In contrast to western-type, protein-rich diets, the low concentrations of animal protein and fat, along with increased quantities of complex carbohydrates and fiber in Mediterranean diets, promote the proliferation of Bacteroides, Prevotella, and Faecalibacterium species, which are considered beneficial for health, while decreasing the proportion of potentially detrimental Firmicutes and Proteobacteria [28,29].

Asian-style diets are typically rich in polysaccharides from cereals, particularly rice, as well as different root vegetables, like onion, garlic and ginger, as well as algae, along with protein and fat derived from fish and soy. Traditional Asian diets present high concentrations of quercetin and alliin, plant-derived components with anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidant functions that relate to increased presence of Firmicutes genera, with decreased presence of Bacteroidetes and Proteobacteria in the intestine, concomitant with reduced incidence of inflammatory bowel disease [30,31]. Microbial production of immunoregulatory SCFAs, including butyrate, acetate, and indole, are also increased in animals fed Asian-style diets [30].

The general effects of dietary fiber, polysaccharides, fat, and proteins, found in different proportions in these diets, on the intestinal microbiome, are described below.

Significant modifications to intestinal bacterial populations may be observed within two days of acute dietary modifications, such as going from low-fiber to high-fiber or increasing/decreasing the amount of meat-derived protein in diet, even though the general composition of the microbiome is fairly stable and dependent on long-term dietary habits [22,32]. The microbiome plays important roles in the metabolism of dietary components within the intestine; fiber is particularly important in shaping the microbial composition in the colon, which harbors the highest density of microbes within the intestine [33]. Bacteria utilize the complex carbohydrates found in dietary fiber to produce a variety of SCFAs, including acetate, propionate, and butyrate, which are relevant for energy metabolism within the host, as well as for regulation of intestinal pH, which is in turn important for the presence of specific bacterial genera in the intestine [11,34].

Galacto-oligosaccharides and Fructo-oligosaccharides are found in human milk and have an important role in establishing the microbiome in infants early in development. These oligosaccharides, which are produced by enzymatic modification of lactose and inulin, respectively, promote the growth of Bifidobacteria and Lactobacilli [42]. These bacteria are relevant in the maturation of the intestinal epithelium, as well as in the establishment of the intestinal immune system and the regulation of leukocyte proliferation and secretion of cytokines like IFN-γ and IL-10 by leukocytes in circulation [43].

The quantity and quality of dietary fat is also important to determine intestinal colonization and proliferation of specific bacterial species, although its effects do not appear to be as pronounced as those from dietary fiber and polysaccharides. There are reports demonstrating the effects of low- and high-fat diets on the intestinal microbiome, increasing the proportion of Faecalibacterium and Bacteroides, respectively [44]. Similarly, high-fat diets have been shown to rapidly affect the composition of the intestinal microbiome, favoring the proliferation of Firmicutes and Proteobacteria over Bacteroidetes [45]. These alterations are also related to increased concentrations of lipopolysaccharides in circulation in animals and humans fed with fat-rich diets [46,47]. However, further evidence shows that polyunsaturated fatty acids do not have a clear effect on the intestinal microbiome, whereas diets rich in monounsaturated fatty acids decrease the total amount of intestinal bacteria and high-fat diets rich in saturated fatty acids limit the diversity of the intestinal microbiome [48].

In contrast to lipids, the protein content in diet has important implications for the metabolic profile of the intestinal microbiome. High-protein diets are directly related to proliferation of Escherichia species and with decreased presence of Bifidobacterium, Prevotella, and Akkermansia species in animal models [23]. Studies in humans suggest that high-protein diets do not have a large impact on the composition of the intestinal microbiome, but that they modify bacterial amino acid metabolism, producing metabolites with multiple modulatory functions, depending on the type of proteins found in diet [49]. These metabolic alterations are related to increased risk for intestinal pathologies, since they reduce the production of immunoregulatory specific SCFAs, like butyrate, as well as the concentration of anti-oxidant compounds [49].

Once established, the intestinal microbiome becomes a permanent source of bioactive metabolites with multiple regulatory functions on systemic metabolism. Metabolites produced by the intestinal microbiome can modulate immune and nervous system functions through multiple mechanisms. The modulatory effects of some of the most well studied microbiome-related metabolites on these systems are described below and are shown in Figure 1.

Extensive evidence has linked the development of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) to disruption of the intestinal microbiome and decreased concentrations of secondary bile acids. Bacteria in the intestine are capable of converting primary bile acids into secondary bile acids by dehydration and deconjugation of the aminoacids taurine and glycine from their structure, after they have been modified in the liver, thus changing their properties and functions and regulating bile acid excretion [14,50]. Both primary and secondary bile acids are considered modulators of leukocyte functions through the activation of G protein-coupled bile acid receptor 1 (GPBAR1) and nuclear receptor subfamily 1 H4 (NR1H4; also known as farnesoid X-activated receptor, FXR) [51]. Both receptors are expressed in different leukocyte subpopulations and have been linked with anti-inflammatory activity dependent on downregulation of STAT-1 and NF-κB signaling in macrophages and dendritic cells, decreasing production of nitric oxide and the pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-1β, TNF-α, and IL-6 [52,53,54]. Absence of GPBAR1 in knockout animals worsens pathology in models of intestinal inflammation [55].

The possibility of using bile acids as a therapeutic alternative for the treatment of neurological disease stems from studies demonstrating that signaling through bile acid receptors have anti-inflammatory roles in the EAE model, reducing disease severity [66]. Additionally, dietary supplementation with conjugated bile acids has been shown to ameliorate pathology in animal models of AD and PD [67,68].

SCFAs are a group of saturated organic acids, containing one to six carbon atoms, with acetate, propionate, and butyrate being the most common in the human intestine. Dietary fiber is the common substrate for the production of SCFAs in the gastrointestinal system. Humans are incapable of digesting most of the structural carbohydrates found in dietary fiber, such as cellulose and inulin, which traverse the intestinal tract until they reach the cecum and colon, were they are fermented by bacteria, producing SCFAs as a metabolic byproduct [69]. It is estimated that SCFAs account for around 10% of daily caloric production from diet in humans, with butyrate acting as the main source of energy for enteric cells in the colon, while the liver is able to uptake circulating SCFAs to promote synthesis of fatty acids, cholesterol, glucose, and other metabolic products [36,70,71,72]. Absorbed SCFAs interact with cellular components through G protein-coupled receptors, particularly GPR43 (also known as free fatty acid receptor 2, Ffar2) and GPR41 (Ffar3) [73]. These receptors are highly expressed in different leukocyte subpopulations [73]. SCFAs have potential for the prevention and treatment of metabolic and inflammatory pathologies like metabolic syndrome, intestinal bowel disease, ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s disease, and colon cancer, as they present potent immunomodulatory activity [74,75,76,77].

SCFAs have also been related to development or progression of neurological pathologies. There are reports on decreased production of microbiome-derived SCFAs in patients with multiple sclerosis and several studies have demonstrated anti-inflammatory properties for these molecules in the EAE model [93]. These regulatory properties are thought to derive from inhibition of Th1 and Th17 responses and promotion of Treg differentiation and production of anti-inflammatory cytokines [94]. Similarly, microbiome-dependent SCFA production is reduced in animal models of AD and these molecules are able to prevent clumping of amyloid beta peptides into neurotoxic aggregates in vitro, although their therapeutic potential in humans has not been determined [95]. Microbiome-derived SCFAs also have a permanent role in the modulation of microglial phenotype and effector functions. Germ-free or antibiotic-treated mice present microglial alterations characterized by decreased expression of genes related to JAK/STAT signaling pathways and reduced expression of MHC-I and costimulatory molecules, appearing to have an immature phenotype, which can be counteracted by reconstitution of the microbiome. These alterations are dependent on expression of GCPR43 and production of SCFAs and may have important implications for microglial functions in health and disease [96].

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a nuclear receptor recognized for its involvement in the detoxification of xenobiotics through cytochrome enzymes and is known to respond to tryptophan- and microbiome-derived metabolites, including SCFAs, as well as several endogenous molecules, like bilirubin, biliverdin, arachidonic acid metabolites, including prostaglandins, leukotrienes, and lipoxins, as well as kinurenines, serotonin, and triptamine, derived from endogenous and microbiome-dependent tryptophan metabolism [97,98,99]. It presents high expression in epithelia and appears to be necessary for adequate development of the gastrointestinal immune system and intestinal epithelial barrier [100].

Further evidence for the role of AhR in the regulation of CNS inflammation comes from studies showing decreased production of AhR ligands in relapsing-remitting MS patients and upregulation of these ligands during active disease [112], as well as the demonstration of the relevance of type I interferon-dependent signaling through AhR in astrocytes to reduce inflammation and disease severity in the EAE model [113]. Furthermore, AhR signaling appears to be at least partially dependent on tryptophan metabolism by the microbiome in this model, as antibiotic treatment enhances disease severity, which can be inhibited by supplementation with tryptophan metabolites [113].

Intestinal bacterial are capable of releasing ATP into the intestinal milieu [114]. Extracellular ATP functions as a signaling molecule with relevant pro-inflammatory properties, which is also released from damaged cells in all tissues, as well as by activated leukocytes [115]. Bacterial ATP, signaling through purinergic P2X or P2Y receptors, promotes chemotaxis and pro-inflammatory cytokine production by leukocytes, enhancing production of CCL2, CCL3, and CXCL8, along with IL-6, TNF-α, IL23p19, and TGF-β by intestinal dendritic cells, as well as promoting differentiation and proliferation of Th17 cells [114,116]. These effects are reduced in germ-free mice and can be rescued by intestinal or systemic administration of exogenous ATP [117]. Additionally, activation of P2X receptors also promotes production of IL-1β and IL-18 by antigen-stimulated macrophages [118], as well as enhancing intestinal B cell activation and secretion of IgA and regulating lymphocyte apoptosis [119].

Ionotropic P2X and metabotropic P2Y receptors are also expressed in astrocytes, oligodendrocytes and microglia in the CNS, with the possibility of neuronal expression still in question. ATP is an important CNS signaling molecule, regulating neurotransmission, and myelination at neuronal synapses [128,129]. P2X receptors have been related to inflammatory post-ischemic damage in animal models of stroke and hippocampal ischemia-reperfusion injury, where inhibition of P2X7 receptors promotes neuronal survival and maintains cognitive performance [130]. Inhibition of these receptors also inhibits epileptic activity in kainate-induced epilepsy models [131]. P2X receptors are also associated with release of IL-1β in the peripheral nervous system in neuropathic pain and activation of these receptors in microglia is considered a common characteristic in neurodegenerative diseases, including multiple sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, AD, PD, and HD [132]. The inflammatory processes that underlie pathology in neurodegenerative disease promote cellular release of ATP, which is then free to signal through P2X and P2Y receptors to modulate cellular functions. Alterations in ATP receptor expression has been found in animal models and patients with neurodegenerative disease, and blocking signaling through P2X7 receptors can prevent neuronal and oligodendrocyte apoptosis in experimental models of neurological pathology [132].

Microorganisms of the Bacteroides genus produce the sugar polymer polysaccharide A as part of their capsules [133]. This microbial product is capable of polarizing the adaptive immune response toward the Th2 and Treg phenotype by promoting dendritic cell activation and maturation via TLR2 signaling and stimulating secretion of the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 by antigen-specific CD4+ T cells, while enhancing phagocytosis and nitric oxide production by macrophages [134,135]. In the nervous system, polysaccharide A provides protection against demyelinating disease by enhancing CD4+ T cell differentiation into Treg cells and increasing production of IL-10 [136]. The beneficial effects of polysaccharide A on EAE appear to depend on CD4+ T cell expression of CD39 [137].

In contrast, LPS-stimulation may promote microglial polarization toward an M2 phenotype by indirect mechanisms, as it has been demonstrated that in vitro stimulation of macrophage cell lines with LPS promotes the release of exosomes that in turn, induce microglia polarization towards an M2 phenotype, reducing nervous tissue damage and improving neurological function in animal models of cerebral ischemia [144].

Importantly, it has been demonstrated that intestinal microbes from the Lactobacillus, Lactococcus, Bifidobacterium, Clostridium, Escherichia, Bacillus, and Saccharomyces genii are capable of direct production of various neurotransmitters, including gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), serotonin, dopamine, acetylcholine, and norepinephrine, while also intervening the regulation of neurotransmitter synthesis within their host by metabolizing substrates required for these processes, like tryptophan [145].

Alterations in the composition or functions of the intestinal microbiome have been related to modified neurotransmission in the hypothalamus and hippocampus, promoting development of anxiety and schizophrenia [147,148], and it has also been shown that some species of Proteobacteria are capable of producing amyloid peptides, which along with polysaccharides, may promote amyloid accumulation and inflammation in the brain, becoming a potential risk factor for development of AD [149]. Therefore, recent studies have focused on the therapeutic potential of intestinal bacteria for the regulation of neurotransmitter balance in the CNS and it has been demonstrated that administration of specific bacterial strains may reverse neuroendocrine alterations involved in anxiety- and depressive-like behaviors in obese animals [150].

The composition and quality of dietary components are important determinants for adequate functioning of systemic metabolism and, therefore, have relevant roles in the regulation of all systems within the organism, including the immune system. High-fat, low-fiber western-type diets are associated to development of obesity, which is a potent promoter of systemic inflammatory responses. In contrast to adipose tissue in lean people, adipocytes in obese individuals secrete pro-inflammatory cytokines, like IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α, which promote inflammation in acute settings, whereas in chronic settings they promote metabolic dysregulation, insulin resistance, and overall downregulation of immune responsiveness [151]. These changes lead, among other things, to increased susceptibility to infection and development of metabolic syndrome and T2DM in obese individuals.

As with the microbiome, some dietary components have direct influences on the activation and evolution of different types of immune responses. The specific effects of some of these components are described in the following section.

The quality of diet is relevant for the regulation of the immune system, since multiple dietary components or their metabolic products possess direct immunomodulatory properties. Similarly, these components may also have direct or indirect effects on neurological functions, thus linking diet to immune regulation, neuronal homeostasis, and mental health (Figure 2).

Long-chain fatty acids, such as the well-known omega-3 and omega-6 varieties, constitute essential components of cell membranes and cellular energy metabolism. Omega-6 LCFAs include arachidonic, linolenic, and linoleic acids, whereas omega-3 LCFAs include eicosapetaenoic (EPA) and docosahexaenoic (DHA) acids. Both types of LCFAs are essential and must be obtained from dietary components [158]. Similar to SCFAs, LCFAs activate multiple intracellular signaling pathways by interacting with GPRs, particularly GPR40 and GPR120 [159]. Signaling through GPR40 has been shown to inhibit activation of NF-κB and expression of TNF receptor 2 [160].

Contrary to SCFAs, LCFAs are implicated in the development of autoimmune CNS disease due to their ability to promote proliferation and differentiation of pathogenic Th1 and Th17 cells, as well as enhancing the production of IFN-γ, IL-2, IL-6, and IL-17 in EAE models [164,165]. Additionally, 12 h exposure of Schwann cells to LCFAs in culture promotes oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction in these cells, suggesting a possible toxic mechanism related to alterations in LCFA oxidation in pathologies like diabetic neuropathy [166].

Vitamins act as modulators for a variety of immune system functions, including activation, proliferation and cytokine production by T cells. Dietary vitamins also play important roles in the modulation of the intestinal microbiome, since bacteria are sensitive to these components [167]. For example, vitamin A plays an important role in shaping the composition of the intestinal microbiome, with some bacterial genera being directly sensitive to intestinal retinol. Vitamin A deficiency affects SCFA production by intestinal bacteria and promotes alterations in the metabolism of glucose, lipids, amino acids, and nucleic acids. Importantly, vitamin A deficiency is associated with changes in bile acid metabolism and liver dysfunction [168,169].

To conclude, vitamin K has recently been proposed to promote anti-inflammatory effects through the activation of the vitamin K-dependent Gla-rich protein (GRP), whose expression is upregulated after antigenic challenge and downregulates the activity of nuclear factor NF-κB, as well as inhibiting the expression of IL-1β and TNF-α in macrophage cell lines [212]. Decreased plasma concentrations of vitamin K1 have been described in patients with T2DM and its concentration appears to have an inverse correlation with glucose and lipid metabolism, insulin resistance, and pro-inflammatory activity [212,213]. On the other hand, vitamin K2 has been shown to suppress proliferation and promote IL-4 production in circulating leukocytes from healthy donors in a dose-dependent manner, an effect not observed for vitamin K1 [214].

Vitamins are also essential for the maintenance of neuronal functions and CNS homeostasis. Vitamin A is involved in the promotion of neurogenesis and synaptic plasticity in the hippocampus, hypothalamus and olfactory bulb. It has been involved in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disease, like multiple sclerosis, where it is considered to play an important role in the regulation of the Th1/Th17/Treg balance, inhibiting inflammation and promoting neuronal survival [215]. Vitamin A deficiency is also implicated in worsening of age-related cognitive deficits in elderly people and in animal models of AD, which can be improved by vitamin A supplementation [216]. Interestingly, retinoic acid has been implicated in development of schizophrenia, since it is involved in modulation of neural wave patterns, attention, sleep, and circadian rhythms; furthermore, recent evidence suggests that genetic alterations in retinoic acid receptor-dependent signaling are responsible in part for decreased grey matter volume in the brain and incidence of severe cognitive deficits in humans [217].

Finally, vitamin K improves anxiety- and depressive-like behavior in animal models of metabolic syndrome, although the mechanism involved was suggested to depend on an indirect effect through modulation of glucose metabolism [239]. Increased concentrations of vitamin K are related with improved cognitive performance in humans, and using vitamin K antagonists induces cognitive alterations in executive functions in geriatric patients [240], therefore, demonstrating the role of vitamin K in proper neuronal functioning, although the precise mechanisms involved in these effects have not been determined.

Like vitamins, amino acids are essential cellular components required not only for protein synthesis, but also as substrates for a multitude of metabolic functions regulating the immune and nervous systems. Arginine is an important amino acid for the regulation of macrophage and lymphocyte effector functions. Arginine is required for nitric oxide production in activated phagocytes and arginase expression in macrophages is related to decreased inflammation in models of inflammatory disease [241]. Similarly, arginine modulates T cell proliferation [242]. Arginine may be transformed by intestinal bacteria into metabolites denominated polyamines, including spermine, spermidine and putrescine. Intestinal arginine concentrations are higher in germ-free mice, suggesting that the microbiome has a significant role in intestinal arginine metabolism [243,244]. These compounds are known to promote intestinal homeostasis and maturation of intestinal intraepithelial leukocytes, including CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, B cells and NK cells [245]. Spermine also inhibits antigen-dependent production of pro-inflammatory cytokines by macrophages, promoting anti-inflammatory effects in various models [246,247]. In the CNS, arginine is involved in the regulation of oxidative stress and neurological alterations in neuroinflammatory, neurodegenerative, and psychiatric disorders, including stroke, AD, PD, epilepsy, autism, obsessive-compulsive disorder, depression, anxiety, and schizophrenia [248,249,250]. Agmantine, a metabolite derived from arginine decarboxylation that is found throughout the brain and particularly in the hypothalamus, is capable of selectively blocking neurotransmission through NMDA receptors in specific areas of the brain, like the hippocampus, and it has been shown to attenuate nitric oxide production, oxidative stress, and glutamate-dependent excitotoxicity in animal models of dyskinesia and hyperalgesia [250]. Furthermore, intra-peritoneal supplementation with agmantine reduces neuronal damage, atrogliosis, lipid peroxidation and production of IL-1β and TNF-α in animal models of PD [251]. Additionally, there is evidence that agmantine may have anti-depressant, anxiolytic, and anti-convulsive properties, derived from its capacity to bind to alpha-2 adrenergic receptors, nicotinic and muscarinic acetylcholine receptors, as well as alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionic acid (AMPA) receptors [250]. Finally, the use of a D- analog of arginine decreases arginine-dependent oxidative damage and neurotoxicity in the CNS [248]. Therefore, arginine is an important metabolite for the maintenance of neuronal homeostasis.

Taurine may be encountered in the intestine as a byproduct of bacterial deconjugation of secondary bile acids produced in the liver. It has been demonstrated that taurine enhances NLRP6-dependent production of IL-18 by intestinal epithelial cells, which is important for the maintenance of epithelial homeostasis by enhancing cell proliferation, mucus secretion, and production of antimicrobial peptides. The relevance of the microbiome for IL-18 production in the intestine has been demonstrated by showing decreased inflammasome activity and IL-18 concentrations in germ-free mice [257]. Taurine is present in high concentrations in the CNS, where it regulates ion and fluid exchange, as well as neurotransmission. It also acts as an agonist of glycine and GABAA receptors and, thus, it has been considered to have a potential role in neurological diseases associated to dysregulation in CNS inhibitory signals, like epilepsy and depression [258]. The therapeutic utility of taurine supplementation for prevention or treatment of neurological disease has been demonstrated in studies of high-dose supplementation with taurine in animal models of intracerebral hemorrhage, showing that this regime decreases edema and tissue damage, reducing leukocyte infiltration into the CNS, gliosis, and production of pro-inflammatory cytokines [259]. Similarly, taurine supplementation before disease induction in paraquat-dependent Parkinson’s-like disease in mice inhibits NF-κB-dependent microglial activation and oxidative stress, decreasing neurotoxicity [260].

The polyphenols include multiple compounds derived from plants, such as the flavonoid catechins found in different varieties of green, black and oolong teas, and the non-flavonoids curcumin, from the Curcuma longa plant, and resveratrol in grapes and berries. All of these compounds share similar properties, decreasing adipocyte proliferation and maturation, inhibiting lipogenesis and promoting lipolysis [261,262,263,264]. They also share similar anti-inflammatory properties. Studies of green tea supplementation in animal models have shown that polyphenols from green, black, and oolong teas are related to decreased production of IL-1β, IL-6, and CCL1, as well as increasing expression of antioxidant superoxide dismutase and anti-inflammatory adiponectin in animals fed high-fat or high sucrose diets [265,266]. Curcumin also prevents NF-κB activation and release of CCL1, TNF-α, and IL-6 from adipocytes [267]. Similarly, resveratrol has demonstrated anti-inflammatory properties that include the inhibition of NF-κB activation and production of CCL1, TNF-α, and IL-6 by adipocytes and antigen-stimulated macrophages [268,269].

The metabolic transformation of polyphenols by the intestinal microbiome produces metabolites that interfere with amyloid beta aggregation in vitro [270] and polyphenols from grape seeds are also able to inhibit aggregation of Tau peptides [271], implying that these compounds may be beneficial for the prevention and treatment of neurodegenerative pathologies like AD and PD. This idea is backed up by evidence demonstrating that dietary supplementation with grape-derived polyphenols decreases disease severity and progression, maintaining cognitive performance in memory tests, in animal models of AD [272].

Minerals are essential components of diet and are necessary for a large variety of functions within the organism. The functions of minerals in the immune system are too numerous to properly describe in this review, but a few examples include the functions of iron as an important component for antibacterial responses, since it is essential for cellular metabolism and redox reactions [273]. Copper is employed by phagocytes to induce bacterial toxicity [274]. Selenium is part of cellular glutathione-dependent antioxidant mechanisms and antimicrobial compounds in neutrophils, as well as for T cell and NK cell cytotoxic activity [275], while zinc deficiency affects thymic development, leukocyte proliferation, and T cell differentiation [276].

Likewise, minerals like iron, zinc, selenium, copper, manganese, and magnesium have all been implicated in CNS homeostasis and regulation of neuronal survival and functioning. For example, alterations in the copper/zinc ratio, iron and selenium concentrations have been observed in circulation in patients with depression and there are reports of alterations in the concentrations of iron, magnesium and zinc in ADHD [277,278]. Similarly, zinc supplementation has been suggested as a therapeutic alternative in depression and to prevent age-related cognitive deterioration [277]. Deficits in selenium are related to neurodegenerative pathologies like AD and PD, and this mineral has been proposed as a potential biomarker for disease development [279], while iron deficiency is widely known to affect CNS myelination and human cognition [280].

As described throughout this review, diet affects the composition and characteristics of the intestinal microbiome, as well as the functions of the immune and nervous systems, through multiple mechanisms. Chronic changes in dietary patterns are associated with a large variety of metabolic alterations, which may have important implications for neurological homeostasis and mental health.

The relationship between the diet, microbiome and mental health depends on a large variety of stimuli, including dietary components, microbial metabolites, gastrointestinal, endocrine, neuronal, and immunologic signals, all of them acting in concert to modulate systemic metabolism and tissue functions. Consequently, dietary patterns influence not only the development of immunological responses, but also the homeostasis and functions of the CNS. Nonetheless, although altered immune functions are a recognized common characteristic in neurological pathologies, research on the beneficial effects of diet on the immune and nervous systems remains mostly separate. There is a great need for studies integrating the effects of diet on the three main components discussed herein, the microbiome, immune, and nervous systems, together, in order to better understand their interplay in the regulation of neuronal homeostasis and mental health.

The profound effects of diet on the regulation of the intestinal microbiome, the immune system and the central nervous system make it a powerful tool for prevention and therapeutic intervention in a large range of human pathologies. In particular, the potential for therapeutic benefits derived from relatively simple dietary interventions in neurological and psychiatric pathologies must become a focus of more intensive research, since it opens up the possibility of ameliorating disease in patients suffering from emotional and behavioral disorders, like anxiety and depression, as well as in neurodegenerative pathologies and age-related cognitive decline. The evidence condensed in this review demonstrates the need for a balanced, high-quality diet to promote immune and neuronal homeostasis in order to maintain mental health.

