Gut microbiome diversity is an independent predictor of survival in cervical cancer patients receiving chemoradiation

Diversity of the gut microbiome is associated with higher response rates for cancer patients receiving immunotherapy but has not been investigated in patients receiving radiation therapy. Additionally, current studies investigating the gut microbiome and outcomes in cancer patients may not have adjusted for established risk factors. Here, we sought to determine if diversity and composition of the gut microbiome was independently associated with survival in cervical cancer patients receiving chemoradiation. Our study demonstrates that the diversity of gut microbiota is associated with a favorable response to chemoradiation. Additionally, compositional variation among patients correlated with short term and long-term survival. Short term survivor fecal samples were significantly enriched in Porphyromonas, Porphyromonadaceae, and Dialister, whereas long term survivor samples were significantly enriched in Escherichia Shigella, Enterobacteriaceae, and Enterobacteriales. Moreover, analysis of immune cells from cervical tumor brush samples by flow cytometry revealed that patients with a high microbiome diversity had increased tumor infiltration of CD4+ lymphocytes as well as activated subsets of CD4 cells expressing ki67+ and CD69+ over the course of radiation therapy. Modulation of the gut microbiota before chemoradiation might provide an alternative way to enhance treatment efficacy and improve treatment outcomes in cervical cancer patients.

Cervical cancer (CC) continues to be one of the leading causes of cancer-associated mortality globally1. More than 500,000 new cases of invasive CC will be diagnosed worldwide in 2020, resulting in over 300,000 deaths2. Multimodality therapy consisting of definitive chemoradiation (CRT) comprising external-beam radiotherapy (EBRT) followed by intracavitary brachytherapy with concurrent systemic chemotherapy continues to be the standard of care in clinical practice for locally advanced disease3.

Studies investigating the gut microbiome and outcomes in cancer patients often do not adjust for confounding patient and tumor characteristics. To assess this, we sought to identify independent gut microbial risk factors in CC patients receiving CRT and to evaluate their impact on survival. We hypothesize that gut microbial differences may affect clinical outcomes in patients with CC.

A total of 55 patients with a mean age of 47 years (range, 29–72 years) volunteered to participate in this study. The patients received standard treatment for CC with 5 weeks of EBRT and weekly cisplatin. After completion of EBRT, patients received brachytherapy. For evaluation of treatment response, patients underwent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at baseline and week 5 and positron emission tomography/computed tomography 3 months after treatment completion (Fig. 1a). Most patients had stage IIB disease (51%) and squamous histology (78%). Their clinicopathologic data are summarized in Supplementary Table 1 and 4. We staged CC using the 2014 International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) staging system. The median cervical tumor size according to MRI was 5.4 cm (range, 1.2–11.5 cm). Thirty patients (55%) had lymph node involvement according to imaging studies. We first analyzed the bacterial 16 S rRNA (16 Sv4) fecal microbiota at baseline with respect to disease histology, grade, and stage. We found that the baseline α-diversity (within tumor samples) and β-diversity (between samples) of the fecal microbiome in the CC patients did not differ according to histology, grade, or stage (P > 0.05) (Supplementary Fig. 1a–f).

In the univariate Cox proportional hazard regression model predicting RFS, three covariates showed P < 0.1. As shown in Table 1, univariate analysis identified older age (Hazard Ratio (HR) of 0.93 (95% CI = 0.87–0.98, P = 0.0096)), Shannon diversity index (SDI) (HR of 0.51 (95% CI = 0.23–1.1, P = 0.087)) and body mass index (BMI) (HR of 0.92 (95% CI = 0.84–1, P = 0.096)) as risk factors for RFS. Multivariate survival analyses identified BMI and SDI as independent prognostic factors for RFS with a HR of 0.87 (95% CI = 0.77–0.98, P = 0.02) and 0.36 (95% CI = 0.15–0.84, P = 0.018) respectively. As shown in Table 2, univariate analysis identified SDI (HR of 0.34 (95% CI = 0.1–1.1, P = 0.08) and BMI (HR of 0.83 (95% CI = 0.69–1, P = 0.055)) as risk factors for OS. For OS, multivariate survival analyses again identified BMI and SDI as independent prognostic factors with an HR of 0.78 (95% CI = 0.623–0.97, P = 0.025) and 0.19 (95% CI = 0.043–0.83, P = 0.028), respectively. Univariate Cox regression analysis for RFS and OS survival with respect to alpha diversity all time points is shown in Supplementary Table 2 and 3.

During the median follow-up period of 24.5 months, seven patients died; all patients (12.7% of the total study population) died of disease. Figure 1 shows the Kaplan–Meier curves for RFS and OS. Given our univariate and multivariate analyses performed by Cox proportional hazard model identified SDI as an independent predictor for RFS and OS, we first tested the relationship between gut diversity and RFS and OS in our cohort by stratifying patients based on high and low SDI. We stratified the patients by SDI as high-diversity versus low-diversity groups based on the cutoff value of SDI (2.69) calculated by receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC). The median RFS was 44 months for patients with low fecal alpha diversity at baseline, and not reached for patients with high fecal alpha diversity at baseline (P = 0.16) (Fig. 1a). The median OS was 48 months for patients with low fecal alpha diversity at baseline, and again not reached for patients with high fecal alpha diversity at baseline (P = 0.094) (Fig. 1b, Supplemental Fig. 3). Next, because our univariate and multivariate analyses performed by Cox proportional hazard model also identified BMI as an independent predictor for RFS and OS, we tested the relationship between diversity and RFS and OS in our cohort by stratifying patients based on high and low Shannon diversity metric and normal or high BMI. As shown in Fig. 1d, e, when BMI and gut diversity are stratified for at baseline, patients with normal BMI and higher SDI had a longer median RFS duration (P = 0.0023) (Fig. 1d). OS (Fig. 1e) was longer for patients with normal BMI and higher gut diversity (P = 0.19).

To further investigate whether the composition of gut microbiome was associated with response to CRT, we used linear discriminant analysis (LDA) Effect Size analysis to identify bacterial taxa that were differentially enriched in short-term and long-term CC patients (P < 0.05; LDA score >3.5). In all patients, multiple taxa differed significantly at baseline between short and long-term survivors. Specifically, short-term survivor fecal samples were significantly enriched in porphyromonas, porphyromonadaceae, and dialister, whereas long-term survivor samples were significantly enriched in Escherichia Shigella, Enterobacteriaceae, and Enterobacteriales (P < 0.05; LDA score > 3.5, Fig. 2a, b). Our univariate analyses performed by Cox proportional hazard model identified Pasteurellales, Haemophilus, and Veillonella as independent predictors for RFS and OS. We tested the relationship between these taxa and RFS and OS in our cohort by stratifying patients based on their relative abundance at baseline (Supplemental Fig. 2). In patients with a low relative abundance of Veillonella at baseline the median OS was 48 months, and in patients with a high relative abundance of Veillonella at baseline the median OS was still not reached (P = 0.054).

High SDI was positively correlated with tumor infiltration of CD4+ CD69+ and CD4+ PD1+ T-cells at week 3, and CD4+ ki67+ T-cells at week 5 (P = 0.004, Q = 0.14; P = 0.036, Q = 0.21; P = 0.004, Q = 0.07, respectively; Table 3). Testing for a correlation between SDI and CD4+ showed no significant associations (Fig. 3a). However, Spearman correlation showed a positive correlation between SDI and CD4+ Ki67+, CD4+ CD69+, and CD4+ PD1+ with higher Shannon diversity correlating with higher T cells (Fig. 3b–d).

The aim of this study was to identify independent gut microbial risk factors in CC patients receiving CRT and to evaluate their impact on survival. We found BMI and gut diversity to be independent risk factors for RFS and OS in CC patients undergoing CRT. Higher alpha gut diversity at baseline correlated with an improved RFS and OS. Our results indicate that overweight or obesity is a favorable prognostic factor independent of gut diversity. In addition, our results demonstrate that patients with better clinical survival exhibit higher diversity as well as a distinct gut microbiome composition. At last, the association between gut diversity and local immune signatures suggests that patients with high gut diversity develop increased infiltration of activated CD4+ T-cell subsets and highlights helper CD4+ T cells as potential mediators of antitumor immunity upon CRT treatment. Taken together, our results imply that the diversity of gut microbiota and increased infiltration of activated CD4+ T cells might be a shared benefit factor in those who respond well to CRT treatment.

In conclusion, our study demonstrates that the diversity of gut microbiota is associated with a favorable response to CRT. In addition, compositional variation among patients correlated with short-term and long-term survival. Our study demonstrates that gut diversity is a significant factor for predicting OS in CC patients undergoing CRT when BMI is accounted for and may help explain the “obesity paradox” in cancer response. Moreover, analysis of immune cells from cervical tumor brush samples by flow cytometry revealed an association between high microbial diversity, increased tumor infiltration of CD4+ lymphocytes and the activation of CD4 cells over the course of radiation therapy. The correlation between gut diversity and increased tumor infiltration of CD4+ lymphocytes suggest that patients harboring a more diverse gut microbiota at baseline may benefit from CRT to a greater extent. The significance of our study lies in that modulation of gut microbiota before CRT might provide an alternative way to enhance treatment efficacy and improve treatment outcomes in CC patients. Additional studies exploring the relationship between gut diversity, CRT, and treatment efficacy are needed to further understand the role of the gut microbiome in CC treatment.

Gut microbiome and cervical swab samples were collected prospectively from CC patients according to a protocol approved by The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center Institutional Review Board (MDACC 2014-0543) for patients with biopsy-proven carcinoma of the cervix treated at MD Anderson and the Lyndon B. Johnson Hospital Oncology Clinic from 22 September 2015 to 11 January 2019. Written informed consent from eligible patients willing to participate in this study was obtained. Inclusion criteria included all patients who had new diagnoses of locally advanced, nonmetastatic carcinoma of the cervix and underwent definitive CRT with EBRT followed by brachytherapy. None of the patients included in this cohort underwent surgery. Ineligibility criteria included currently pregnant or lactating women. Patients received a minimum of 45 Gy via EBRT in 25 fractions over 5 weeks with weekly cisplatin followed by two brachytherapy sessions at approximately weeks 5 and 7 with EBRT in between for gross nodal disease or persistent disease in the parametrium. Patients with stage IB1 cancer were given CRT due to the presence of nodal disease. Medical history and current medication use were assessed via an in-person interview with a clinical provider or trained study staff. Clinical variables, demographics, and pathologic reports were abstracted from electronic medical records.

Rectal swabs were collected from all patients by a clinician performing rectal exams at five time points (baseline; weeks 1, 3, and 5 of radiotherapy; and 3 months after CRT completion) using a matrix-designed quick-release Isohelix swab to characterize the diversity and composition of the microbiome over time (product # DSK-50 and XME-50, www.isohelix.com, UKSamples). The swabs were stored in 20 μl of protease K and 400 μl of lysis buffer (Isohelix) and kept at −80 °C within 1 h of sample collection.

16 S rRNA sequencing was performed for fecal samples obtained from all patients at four time points to characterize the diversity and composition of the microbiome over time. 16 S rRNA gene sequencing was done at the Alkek Center for Metagenomics and Microbiome Research at Baylor College of Medicine. 16 S rRNA was sequenced using approaches adapted from those used for the Human Microbiome Project4. The 16 S rRNA V4 region was amplified via polymerase chain reaction with primers that contained sequencing adapters and single-end barcodes, allowing for pooling and direct sequencing of polymerase chain reaction products. Amplicons were sequenced on the MiSeq platform (Illumina) using the 2 × 250-bp paired-end protocol, yielding paired-end reads that overlapped nearly completely. Sequence reads were demultiplexed, quality-filtered, and subsequently merged using the USEARCH sequence analysis tool (version 7.0.1090) (4). 16 S rRNA gene sequences were bundled into operational taxonomic units at a similarity cutoff value of 97% using the UPARSE algorithm48. 16 S amplicon sequences were processed using the Center for Metagenomic and Microbiome Research’s 16 S analysis pipeline which is based on the UPARSE49,50 clustering algorithm. In brief, amplicon reads are trimmed at Q = 5 and merged allowing three mismatches in the overlapping region. The resulting merged reads are filtered against an expected error filter of 0.05 across the entire merged read. Only merged reads of length between 252 and 254 bps are kept for downstream processes. The resulting readset is dereplicated and iteratively clustered using UPARSE in one bp step up to an 8 bp radius (3.2% radius). Counts per OTU are tabulated per sample and the resulting data set is processed with ATIMA2 (Agile Toolkit for Incisive Microbiome Analyses (https://github.com/cmmr/atima), which provides an integrated solution for exploring relationships between microbial communities and emergent properties of their hosts or environments. All the microbiome metrics presented in this manuscript were calculated using ATIMA2 except for the community evenness metrics Camargo and Pielou51,52 which were calculated using the function “evenness()” in the R package “microbiome”. To generate taxonomies, operational taxonomic units were mapped to an enhanced version of the SILVA rRNA database containing the 16Sv4 region. A custom script was used to create an operational taxonomic unit table from the output files generated as described above for downstream analyses of α-diversity, β-diversity, and phylogenetic trends. Principal coordinates analysis was performed by institution and sample set to make certain no batch effects were present.

In order to explore the association between the gut microbiota and immune signatures, we analyzed the cervical tumors in our cohort of patients via flow cytometry on tumor brushings performed before week 1, week 3, and week 5 of radiation therapy. Immunostaining was performed according to standard protocols53. Cells were fixed using the Foxp3/Transcription Factor Staining Buffer Set (eBioscience, Waltham, MA) and stained with a 16 color panel with antibodies from Biolegend (San Diego, CA), BD Bioscience (San Jose, CA), eBioscience (Waltham, MA), and Life Technologies (Carlsbad, CA). Analysis was performed on a 5-laser, 18 color LSRFortessa X-20 Flow Cytometer (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA). Analysis was performed using FlowJo version 10 (Flowjo LLC, Ashland, OR). We then followed a similar previously published method53. In brief, the cells were incubated with the antibodies for surface markers at 4 °C in dark for 30 minutes. They were then washed twice with fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) buffer and fixed and permeabilized with FOXP3 Fix/perm Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Next, intracellular staining was performed by preparing the antibodies in permeabilization buffer and incubating the cells for 30 minutes at 4 °C in the dark. Cells were washed with FACS buffer twice and prepared for acquisition on an LSR Fortessa X-20 analyzer at the Flow Cytometry Core at MD Anderson Cancer Center and were analyzed using FlowJo software (FlowJo, LLC, Ashland, OR). Compensation controls were prepared using OneComp ebeads (eBioscience, Waltham, MA) and fluorescence minus one controls were used53.

For microbiome analysis, rarefaction depth was set at 7066 reads. The SDI was used to evaluate α-diversity (within samples), and principle coordinates analysis of unweighted UniFrac distances was used to examine β-diversity (between samples). A ROC curve was calculated using a linear regression model. A table was constructed using the coordinates of the curve in order to identify the most appropriate cutoff for SDI. The cutoff for SDI was identified to be 2.69. Patient and tumor characteristics were analyzed by univariate and multivariate Cox regression models for RFS and OS. Covariates with a p value of ≤ 0.1 in the univariate model were chosen to be included in the multivariate analysis. RFS was defined as the time from the initiation of the therapy until the date of disease relapse or progression or death from any cause. Disease relapse or progression was defined as appearance or signs of the disease that were confirmed pathologically or radiographically. OS is defined as the time from the date of initiation of therapy until the date of death from any cause. Survival was estimated by the Kaplan–Meier method, and comparisons were made by log-rank tests. Characteristics included age, BMI, race, FIGO stage, grade, histology, nodal status, smoking status, antibiotic use, and max tumor size. For each outcome of interest, a multivariate Cox regression analysis was performed to adjust for the effects of prognostic factors identified on univariate analysis as influencing survival in CC. These analyses were conducted using covariates with p ≤ 0.1 in a stepwise fashion. We also ran a correlation analysis of alpha diversity metrics with tumor flow cytometry markers using a linear regression and Spearman’s correlation. Alpha (within sample) diversity was evaluated using SDI. The relative abundance of microbial taxa, classes, and genera present in long-term vs short-term survivors was determined using LDA Effect Size54, applying the one-against-all strategy with a threshold of 3.5 for the logarithmic LDA score for discriminative features and α of 0.05 for factorial Kruskal–Wallis testing among classes. Long-term survivors were classified as patients who had a follow-up of 2 years or more and were alive at time of last follow-up, whereas short-term survivors had a follow-up of one year or less. LDA Effect Size analysis was restricted to bacteria present in 20% or more of the study population. Kaplan–Meier curves were generated for patients with normal BMI and overweight/obese BMI based on Cox analysis and clostridia abundance (BMI cutoffs were based on WHO standards). The significance of differences was determined using the log-rank test. Statistical significance was set at an alpha of 5% for a two-sided p value. Analyses were conducted using Rstudio version Orange Blossom—1.2.5033.

Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.

Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

These authors contributed equally: Travis T. Sims, Molly B. El Alam.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s42003-021-01741-x.

