Gut Microbiome Composition in Obese and Non-Obese Persons: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis

Whether the gut microbiome in obesity is characterized by lower diversity and altered composition at the phylum or genus level may be more accurately investigated using high-throughput sequencing technologies. We conducted a systematic review in PubMed and Embase including 32 cross-sectional studies assessing the gut microbiome composition by high-throughput sequencing in obese and non-obese adults. A significantly lower alpha diversity (Shannon index) in obese versus non-obese adults was observed in nine out of 22 studies, and meta-analysis of seven studies revealed a non-significant mean difference (−0.06, 95% CI −0.24, 0.12, I2 = 81%). At the phylum level, significantly more Firmicutes and fewer Bacteroidetes in obese versus non-obese adults were observed in six out of seventeen, and in four out of eighteen studies, respectively. Meta-analyses of six studies revealed significantly higher Firmicutes (5.50, 95% 0.27, 10.73, I2 = 81%) and non-significantly lower Bacteroidetes (−4.79, 95% CI −10.77, 1.20, I2 = 86%). At the genus level, lower relative proportions of Bifidobacterium and Eggerthella and higher Acidaminococcus, Anaerococcus, Catenibacterium, Dialister, Dorea, Escherichia-Shigella, Eubacterium, Fusobacterium, Megasphera, Prevotella, Roseburia, Streptococcus, and Sutterella were found in obese versus non-obese adults. Although a proportion of studies found lower diversity and differences in gut microbiome composition in obese versus non-obese adults, the observed heterogeneity across studies precludes clear answers.

Obesity is a major public health problem worldwide [1]. In the year 2016, the global prevalence of overweight in adults (defined as body mass index, BMI ≥ 25 kg/m2) was 39% (1.9 billion adults), and the prevalence of obesity in adults (BMI ≥ 30 kg/m2) was 13% (650 million adults) [1]. It was estimated that by 2030, 2.16 billion (38%) individuals of the world’s adult population will be overweight and 1.12 billion (20%) will be obese [2]. Obesity is a risk factor for major chronic diseases, such as cardiovascular diseases [3], various types of cancer [4,5], and for premature death [6]. Obesity is the consequence of a positive energy balance resulting from the interaction of genetic and non-genetic factors, including personal, environmental, and nutritional factors [7]. There is evidence from animal studies that the gut microbiome may also play a role in the development of obesity [8,9]. Furthermore, some studies in humans suggest that the microbiome composition may differ between obese and non-obese persons, and it was speculated whether such differences may contribute to the higher disease risk observed in obese persons, but findings have been inconsistent [10].

This is the first systematic review with meta-analysis addressing differences in the gut microbiome composition in obese versus non-obese adults focusing on studies using high-throughput sequencing technologies (e.g., 16S rDNA/rRNA sequencing, shotgun metagenomics). Our primary aim was to assess differences in the gut microbiome composition and diversity (alpha and beta-diversity) at the phylum and genus levels between obese and non-obese adult individuals from the general population based on data from observational studies. Further, we aimed to test the hypothesis that obese as compared to non-obese persons have a higher F:B ratio, which could be considered a hallmark of the pathophysiology of obesity. We also describe microbial taxonomic signatures associated with obesity reported by the included studies.

This systematic review is reported in accordance with the recommendations set forth by the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) statement [30]. The protocol was prospectively registered at PROSPERO (CRD42021225730). A systematic search was conducted in November 2020 using computerized bibliographic databases, such as PubMed and EMBASE via Ovid from inception to 19 November 2020. The search included a combination of MeSH terms and free text to retrieve articles on obesity, including anthropometric measurements, and gut microbiome, and was restricted to English language (see Supplement Table S1 for the search strategy).

We obtained further references from the reference list of the studies included in the qualitative synthesis. Search results were imported from PubMed and EMBASE XML into the CAMARADES Preclinical Systematic Review & Meta-analysis Facility (SyRF) (https://app.syrf.org.uk/ (last accessed on 5 March 2021)) for title and abstract screening as well as for full text assessment. To manage the references, we used EndNote X7® (Thomson Reuters) software.

Obesity was the primary exposure of interest. Obesity was defined by body mass index (BMI) ≥ 30 kg/m2 as compared to non-obesity (BMI < 30 kg/m2). Secondary exposures were: (1) abdominal obesity based on waist circumference ≥102 cm in men and ≥88 cm in women, or waist-to-hip ratio ≥0.95 in men and ≥0.80 in women as compared to non-obesity based on waist circumference <102 cm in men and <88 cm in women, or waist-to-hip ratio <0.95 in men and <0.80 in women; (2) overweight individuals were defined by BMI ≥ 25 kg/m2 as compared to non-overweight (BMI < 25 kg/m2). Alternative BMI-based obesity definitions, e.g., for Asian populations, were also considered.

The primary outcomes of interest were: (1) differences in the alpha and beta-diversity between obese and non-obese persons; (2) differences in the Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes ratio between obese and non-obese persons; and (3) differences in gut microbiome composition between obese and non-obese persons.

The secondary outcome of interest was to describe microbial taxonomic signatures associated with obesity.

Inclusion criteria were human observational studies comparing the composition of the gut microbiome between obese and non-obese adult individuals (age ≥ 18 years) recruited from the general population, irrespective of ethnicity. If studies included a mixed population of children and adults, only those studies presenting their data for adults separately were included. A further inclusion criterion was that the gut microbiome was measured by means of high-throughput analyses (e.g., 16S rDNA/rRNA sequencing, shotgun metagenomics) in fecal samples.

Systematic and narrative reviews were kept for background only and their data were not extracted.

Two researchers (MP and KN) independently screened the titles and abstracts, and reviewed the full texts. Disagreements were resolved through discussion and consensus, or if necessary, with referral to a third researcher (TP). The same investigators designed and piloted a data extraction form before routine use, and extracted the data independently. When needed, the primary study author was contacted to obtain further information. For each included study the following information was extracted: study ID (first author and year of publication), country, study design, study population, sample size, definition of obesity, overweight and non-obesity, method used to measure microbiome, DNA extraction method, platform used, outcomes assessed, results on composition and diversity of gut microbiome in obese versus non-obese and/or differences in comparison groups, and characterization of microbiome taxonomic signatures in obese persons. We also selected relevant titles from the reference lists of those studies that were finally included for qualitative synthesis, obtained their abstract and followed the same procedure as above described to identify further studies.

Two independent researchers (MP and KN) appraised the risk of bias using an adapted version of the Risk Of Bias In Non-Randomized Studies of Interventions (ROBINS-I) tool [31], a tool proposed by Cochrane that can be also applied to appraise the risk of bias in observational studies. Discrepancies were resolved by discussion and consultation with a third author where necessary. The adapted version of ROBINS-I tool comprised six domains of bias due to: (1) confounding, (2) selection of participants, (3) exposure assessment, (4) missing data, (5) measurement of the outcome, and (6) selective reporting of the results, together with the signaling questions that facilitated the judgement of potential risk of bias for each domain as described in Supplement Table S2. The overall judgment of risk of bias was categorized as low, moderate or serious as previously described [31]. If at least one domain was judged to be of serious risk but not at critical risk in any other domain, then the overall judgment of the risk of bias was deemed as serious. If all domains were rated as being at low risk of bias, then the overall judgment was deemed as low. If all domains were rated at low or moderate risk of bias, then the overall judgement was deemed as moderate.

For the data synthesis studies that presented results separately for different subpopulations defined by sex [32,33] or geographic region [34,35] were counted as separate studies.

For the quantitative data synthesis, we used the extracted study-specific means and nominal p-values or the mean difference (MD) between obese and non-obese adults with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) to combine multiple studies that measured the same continuous outcome using similar methods and the same unit of measurement. We also extracted the means and standard deviation (SD) to calculate the MD 95% CIs for the meta-analysis. If standard deviation data were not available, it was calculated based on p values or standard errors, if possible (https://training.cochrane.org/resource/revman-calculator (accessed on 27 July 2021)). Because we anticipated substantial between-study heterogeneity, a random-effects model was applied to obtain pooled effect size estimates, 95% CIs and p-values through the inverse variance method and restricted maximum-likelihood estimator [36]. Statistical heterogeneity was determined by the I2 statistic, and it was regarded as substantial if I2 was found to be between 40% and 70%. A sensitivity analysis was performed when estimates revealed heterogeneity >70% by removing one study at a time, and the study driving the heterogeneity was excluded from the meta-analysis. Because fewer than 10 studies for each outcome qualified for meta-analyses, publication bias was not inspected. The “meta” (Version 4.18-0) and “metaphor” (Version 2.4-0) packages were used to perform meta-analyses in R and statistical significance was determined at the p < 0.05 level.

The detailed output of the searches and the process followed for the identification is displayed in the PRISMA flowchart (Figure 1). From a total of 2445 unique hits, 116 studies were selected for full-text review. Of these, 33 primary reports [17,18,19,20,21,32,33,34,35,37,38,39,40,41,42,43,44,45,46,47,48,49,50,51,52,53,54,55,56,57,58,59,60], including 32 studies met the criteria for inclusion and were selected for data extraction and synthesis.

1 H: Healthy, L: Lean, NO: non-obese, NW: Normal weight, OW: Overweight, O: Obese, UW: underweight, WHO: world Health Organization; 2 ♂: males, ♀: females, MZ: monozygotic, DZ: dizygotic, SD: standard deviation; 3 RoB: Risk of Bias; 4 M: moderate risk of bias, S: serious risk of bias; 5 TUK-D: TwinsUK Adult Twin Registry; 6 UHFJF: University Hospital–Federal University of Juiz de Fora; 7 GOS: Geelong Osteoporosis Study; 8 METS: Modeling the Epidemiologic Transition Study; 9 HMP: Human Microbiome Project; 10 MetaHIT: METAgenomics of the Human Intestinal Tract; 11 H3Africa: Human, Heredity and Health in Africa consortium; 12 METSIM: METabolic Syndrome In Men; 13 HEALS: Health Effects of Arsenic Longitudinal Study; 14 CDC: the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Study of In-home Tests for Colorectal Cancer; 15 NYU: New York University Human Microbiome and Colorectal Tumor study; 16 PopGEN: Population Genomic Diversity of Germany; 17 FoCus: Food Chain Plus; 18 BMIS: transnational Body Mass Index spectrum cohort; 19 departments of the Pitie-Salpetriere Hospital (Paris, France), the Integrated Research and Treatment Center for Adiposity Diseases (Leipzig, Germany), and the Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research (Copenhagen, Denmark); 20 SA: Saudi Arabia; 21 VFM: visceral fat mass; 22 SFM: subcutaneous fat mass, 23 pFT: % trunk fat, 24 AGR: android/gynoid ratio; 25 WHR: waist/hip ratio; 26 FMI: fat mass index; 27 WC: waist circumference; 28 VFA: visceral fat area where VFA ≥ 100 cm2 (obesity); 29 SG; 30 AGB:; 31 T2D: type 2 Diabetes; 32 CVD: cardiovascular diseases; 33 KD: kidney diseases; 34 IHMS: International Human Microbiome Standards guidelines; 35 NCBI: National Center for Biotechnology Information; 36 RDP: Ribosomal Database Project; 37 KEGGS: Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes; 38 KO: Kyoto Orthology Database; 39 NGS: next-generation sequencing. NR: not reported.

A total of two studies used BMI < 30 as reference [20,57], nine studies used BMI < 25 [18,26,34,35,43,44,47,53,55], one study used BMI < 20 [21], fifteen studies used BMI 18.5–24.9 [19,32,33,41,45,46,48,49,51,52,54,56,58,59,60], and one study from Japan used BMI < 18.5 as a reference [17]. However, in general, studies from Asia used lower cut-offs than studies from Europe to define obesity. Three other studies did not specify the BMI cut-offs of comparison groups [9,37,38]. One study did not use the BMI but instead used the fat mass index (FMI) [39], and two studies used both the BMI and the visceral fat area (VFA) [32] or the waist circumference [43].

Of the 32 included studies, 25 studies investigated alpha diversity in obese versus non-obese adults, two did not assess alpha diversity, and five studies did not report alpha diversity stratified by BMI (Table 2). At the individual study level, results on the difference in alpha diversity between obese and non-obese persons were discrepant (Figure 3): the Shannon index, reported in 22 studies, was found to be significantly lower in obese compared to non-obese adults in nine studies [17,32,35,37,41,46,48,51,54], higher in two studies [21,54], and not significantly different in eleven studies [19,33,34,35,39,44,45,47,49,52,53]. The study of Salah et al. [54] found significantly lower diversity (Shannon index) among obese as compared to non-obese persons and higher diversity among obese diabetic compared to non-obese persons. Yasir et al. [35] found significantly lower diversity (Shannon index) among obese as compared to non-obese persons only among the French participants, but no significant differences among the Saudi Arabian participants. In order to further explore the role of methodological factors in microbiome measurement, we restricted the qualitative analysis of the Shannon index (n = 22 studies in total) to studies that amplified the V3–V4 region (most commonly amplified region, n = 12 studies), studies that used the Greengenes database (most commonly used database, n = 10 studies) as well as studies that amplified the V3–V4 region and used Greengenes database (n = 3 studies) (Supplement Figure S1). Restriction to studies amplifying the V3–V4 region revealed that half of the studies (six out of twelve) observed a lower Shannon index in obese versus non-obese persons and restriction to studies amplifying the V3–V4 region and using the Greengenes database revealed that a fifth of the studies (two out of ten) observed a lower Shannon index in obese versus non-obese persons (Supplement Figure S1).

1 L: Lean; NO: non-obese; NW: Normal weight; OW: Overweight; O: Obese; OD: obese diabetic; OMS: Obese and metabolic syndrome; UW: underweight; VFA: visceral fat area; FMI: fat mass index; 2 PD: phylogenetic distance; OTUs: operational taxonomic units; 3 PCA: Principal component analysis; 4 UniFrac: unique fraction metric; 5 PCoA: Principal Coordinates analysis; 6 PERMANOVA: permutational multivariate analysis of variance 7 LAM: lumen-associated microbiota; 8 ANOSIM: Analysis of Similarities; 9 QIIME: Quantitative Insights Into Microbial Ecology. NR: not reported.

A total of 24 studies assessed beta diversity, although nine studies did not report beta diversity by BMI. Eleven studies [17,19,21,33,34,35,49,52,54,55,60] found microbial dissimilarities across the BMI groups, whereas only four studies did not find any [18,45,46,53].

Differences in the relative abundance of the gut microbial composition at the phylum level between obese and non-obese persons are depicted in Table 3.

1 D: diabetes; G1–4; Groups 1–4; L: lean; NO: non-obese; NW: normal weight; O: obese; OD: obesity and diabetes; O+MetS: obesity and metabolic syndrome; OW: overweight; UW: underweight; 2 B/F ratio: Bacteroidetes to Firmicutes ratio; 3 F/B ratio: Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes ratio; 4 SA: Saudi Arabia. N.A.: not available.

Differences in the relative abundance between obese and non-obese persons for the phyla of Actinobacteria (n = 11 studies), Fusobacterium (n = 8), Proteobacteria (n = 12) and Verrucomicrobia (n = 4) are depicted in Table 3 and Figure 5. Regarding Actinobacteria (n = 11), none of the studies found differences between the groups, with the exception of one study that found a higher abundance of Actinobacteria in obese persons compared to the rest of the groups (normal weight, diabetes, and obese with diabetes) (p = 0.04) [54]. Regarding the phylum Fusobacteria (n = 8), five studies found no differences in their relative abundance between obese and none obese persons [19,20,21,34,54], whereas two found a higher proportion [17,46], and one found a lower proportion of Fusobacteria in obese persons compared to the non-obese [47]. Regarding the phylum of Proteobacteria (n = 12), eight studies did not observe statistically significant differences between obese and non-obese persons [17,18,19,21,32,34,44,52], three found higher proportions of Proteobacteria in obese persons [35,46,56], and one found lower proportions [54]. The study of Yasir et al. [35] found significantly higher proportions in the relative abundance of Proteobacteria in French obese persons compared to their non-obese counterparts (including both men and women), whereas no significant differences were observed in Saudi obese persons compared to their non-obese counterpart (men only). Regarding the phylum Verrucomicrobia (n = 4), three studies found no differences in their relative abundance between obese and non-obese persons [18,34,35], whereas one study found a higher proportion of Verrucomicrobia in obese compared to non-obese persons [54].

A total of 27 studies reported data on the relative abundance between obese and non-obese persons at the genus level. A list of bacteria found to be statistically significantly higher or lower in obese compared to non-obese persons is depicted in Table 4.

1 Ref. [43]: in Bushbuckridge; 2 Ref. [57]: in France; 3 Ref. [43]: in Soweto; 4 Ref. [57]: in Saudi Arabia; 5 Ref. [56]: no longer significant after adjustment for carbohydrate.

Discrepant results were found in 13 genera of the bacteria Akkermansia, Alistipes, Anaerotruncus, Bacteroides, Blautia, Clostridium, Coproccocus, Desulfovibrio, Faecalibacterium, Oscillibacter, Oscillospira, Parabacteroides, and Ruminoccocus where they have been found in higher relative abundance in obese persons in some studies and in lower relative abundance in others, compared to non-obese persons (Table 4).

Only two studies investigated differences in the mycobiota composition between obese and non-obese persons. The study of Borges et al. [38] found that Penicillium sp., Paecilomyces sp., and Fonsecaea sp. fungi separated the obese group from the other groups (overweight and normal weight). A slightly higher diversity was found in normal weight persons, and Syncephalastrum sp. (Zygomycota), which was found only in normal weight persons. Paecilomyces sp. was predominant in normal weight and overweight persons, whereas Penicillium sp. was the most frequently identified fungi in the obese group. Furthermore, obese persons displayed higher yeast counts. Whilst Trichosporon sp. was the most prevalent yeast in normal weight persons, Rhodotorula was increased in overweight and obese persons. The study of Kaplan et al. [48] failed to find fungal correlates of obesity, with only Debaryomyces achieving a nominal p value < 0.05.

Only two studies explicitly assessed taxonomic signatures associated with obesity [33,44]. In the Peters study [33], a microbiome-based machine learning model accurately classified obese persons and thus revealed an emerging taxonomic signature of obesity. Obesity was characterized by a higher abundance of class Bacilli and its families Streptococcaceae and Lactobacillaceae, and a lower abundance of several groups within the class Clostridia, including Christensenellaceae, Clostridiaceae, and Dehalobacteriaceae (q < 0.05). Their findings were consistent across two independent study populations. However, the Finucane study [44] concluded that there is no simple taxonomic signature of obesity in the microbiota of the human gut, since they found a large variability between studies (Human Microbiome Project (HMP) and MetaHIT) in the taxonomic composition of stool microbiomes that did not allow differences to be evident between lean and obese persons within studies and even across individuals.

Another study assessed enterotypes in obese persons and found that the Bact2 enterotype, which is characterized by a high proportion of Bacteroides, a low proportion of Faecalibacterium and low microbial cell densities, is more common in obese (17.7%) compared to non-obese persons (lean or overweight, 3.90%). However, obese persons who received statin treatment had a lower Bact2 prevalence (5.88%) [57].

A serious risk of bias was mainly found in the first two domains: confounding (n = 18), because studies did not adjust for potential confounders, and the selection of participants (n = 12), because nine studies recruited volunteers [17,19,35,37,45,46,47,52,58], two studies recruited participants through advertisement [53,56], and one study did not provide enough information on the recruitment process [54]. Of those studies of moderate risk for confounding, two studies did not adjust for variables but stratified results or excluded patients to minimize confounding [34,46], and 12 adjusted mainly for age and/or sex [20,32,33,37,43,45,48,49,51,53,55,60]. Other variables used for adjustment were dietary factors (e.g., intake of carbohydrates, vegetables excluding potatoes, intake of whole fruit, intake of whole grains) [33,48,53,55,60], batch effect [20], country [43], smoking status [49], BMI [48,49,55], study center [33,48], moderate-to-vigorous physical activity (MVPA) [48], diabetes [48], heath status [55], polyp status [33], visits returning to home country [48], education and income [48], and medications, including use of antibiotics and metformin [48]. Of the 32 studies, 11 were deemed as having an overall moderate risk of bias and 21 as having an overall serious risk of bias. In general, the meta-analyzed studies had a serious risk of bias (Table 1, Supplement Table S3).

In the present systematic review, we found discrepant results on gut microbiome composition in obese versus non-obese persons across the studies. Statistically significant lower alpha diversity in obese versus non-obese persons was observed in a substantial proportion of studies, i.e., less than half for the Shannon index (nine out of 22 studies), half for the Simpson index (two out of four studies) and number of observed species/OTUs (four out of eight), and more than half for phylogenic distance (three out of four), and Chao1 (three out of five). No significant differences in obese versus non-obese persons were observed in meta-analysis of seven studies for the Shannon index. Microbial dissimilarities (beta diversity) were observed among BMI categories in the majority of the included studies.

Overall, discrepancies found for each outcome when comparing obese with non-obese persons may be explained by factors such as sex and geographical differences, which may also reflect differences in their dietary habits. For example, Yasir et al. [35] compared the gut microbiome of obese and non-obese persons in France and Saudi Arabia with discrepant results, which may be likely due to, on the one hand, sex-differences, given that the French study population included both men and women whereas the Saudi population included only men, and, on the other hand, geographical differences in diet [35]. A large amount of study-specific variation can likely be attributed to differences in DNA isolation, sequencing and bioinformatic processing. Several studies have demonstrated that methodological differences can yield substantial variation in the results [72,73,74,75]. Our meta-analysis shows that technical variations may have masked potential biological differences when comparing across studies. The current method of analysis makes it very hard to make generic conclusions about the relation between microbiome and health and thereby cannot yet lead to medical grade interventions. Therefore, standardization and new analysis techniques are needed. An important factor that only recently has gained attention is the importance of including absolute counts, e.g., by applying spike-in standards [76] or flow cytometry based cell counting [77], to overcome the limitations of working with relative abundances. Additionally, some attempts have been made to unify several reference databases containing sequences of 16S rRNA genes to improve taxonomic classification [78]. Other factors that may contribute to discrepant findings are differences in the number and recruitment process of participants, which might preclude the observation of small differences between groups, as well as lack of adjustment for relevant lifestyle-associated factors that have an influence in the composition and diversity of the gut microbiome [27,61]. In order to increase the robustness of the available evidence, more individual-level meta-analyses contributing to the elucidation of the role of the gut microbiome in obesity are warranted, where the BMI comparison groups can be uniformly defined, and adjustment for confounders can be done in a comparable fashion covering critical factors influencing the gut microbiome composition, such as sex, age, diet, physical activity, and the microbiome data processed in a standardized manner [79].

This is the first systematic review assessing the differences in the gut microbiome composition between obese and non-obese persons in a quantitative fashion through meta-analysis. Furthermore, for better comparability, we only included studies that analyzed the gut microbiome composition by means of high-throughput sequencing techniques. Furthermore, we were able to conduct meta-analyses for the two dominant phyla in the gut microbiome, Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes, although only a third of the included studies provided sufficient data. Nevertheless, it should be acknowledged that because many studies could not be included in the meta-analysis due to insufficient availability of data, our meta-analysis does not necessarily reflect the full available evidence. We conducted our searches in Pubmed and EMBASE, the two most commonly used databases for searching biomedical literature, although we cannot rule out that we may have missed some studies given that the search was restricted to the English language. In order to enable the inclusion of more published studies in meta-analysis, more standardized reporting is essential. In line with the limited data available for meta-analysis, we were unable to stratify analysis by country (as a proxy for diet) or sex, two known factors that can greatly influence the composition of the gut microbiome. Moreover, the definition of obese and non-obese groups was very heterogeneous, which may lead to an under- or over-estimation of the observed differences in our meta-analyses. The included studies were conducted in different countries with distinct eating habits that have an impact on the microbial ecology of the human gut microbiome, and were also of observational design, which means that confounding could have precluded small but significant differences in the composition of the gut microbiome between obese and non-obese persons. There are other factors, apart from the aforementioned sex [20,33,45], ethnicity or geographical location [20,34,35,43,48], and diet [9,41,45,47,53], that have the capacity to influence and therefore modify the composition of the gut microbiome, such as physical activity [45,58], smoking [47], and changes in the metabolites produced by gut bacteria [19,50,53,55], among other factors, e.g., fecal calprotectin, intestinal permeability [56], or cardiometabolic status [41,42]. These factors may explain the heterogeneity found among the meta-analyzed studies. However, we were not able to conduct a meta-regression analysis to examine whether these factors could explain the variability found in the meta-analyses. Moreover, the majority of the meta-analyzed studies were judged as having a serious risk of bias, downgrading the value of the level of evidence provided. Of the eleven meta-analyzed studies, six were not population-based (participants recruited through advertisements or as volunteers), and ten did not adjust for covariates.

Overall, we observed discrepant findings in the gut microbiome composition of obese versus non-obese persons across studies both at the phylum and at the genus level. Lower alpha diversity in obese versus non-obese persons was observed in a substantial proportion of studies, but our meta-analysis on the Shannon Index yielded no significant differences. The B:F ratio might be considered as a marker of dysbiosis for obesity, although more research with standardized technologies is needed to consider it a hallmark of obesity or to replace it with a more fine-grained measure than comparing communities merely on the level of phyla. However, caution is required to infer these findings to any population given that few studies could be meta-analyzed and substantial heterogeneity was found. For the sake of data accuracy, reproducibility, and comparability of the results, standardization and harmonization of DNA extraction, amplification methods, high-throughput sequencing technologies and reference databases for taxonomic classification are needed to allow for better interoperability between studies, given that extensive omics data require more computational expertise and resources to manage and interpret results. More individual-level meta-analyses—preferably with standardized bioinformatics pipelines—allowing for more flexible and standardized approaches than study-level meta-analysis may help to clarify the here observed discrepant findings. Together with new studies using standardized and advanced methodologies this would allow for the design of disease prevention strategies, as well as personalized microbiome-modulating treatment strategies against obesity.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

