Type 2 diabetes, gut microbiome, and systems biology: A novel perspective for a new era

The association between the physio-pathological variables of type 2 diabetes (T2D) and gut microbiota composition suggests a new avenue to track the disease and improve the outcomes of pharmacological and non-pharmacological treatments. This enterprise requires new strategies to elucidate the metabolic disturbances occurring in the gut microbiome as the disease progresses. To this end, physiological knowledge and systems biology pave the way for characterizing microbiota and identifying strategies in a move toward healthy compositions. Here, we dissect the recent associations between gut microbiota and T2D. In addition, we discuss recent advances in how drugs, diet, and exercise modulate the microbiome to favor healthy stages. Finally, we present computational approaches for disentangling the metabolic activity underlying host-microbiota codependence. Altogether, we envision that the combination of physiology and computational modeling of microbiota metabolism will drive us to optimize the diagnosis and treatment of T2D patients in a personalized way.

Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D) is a metabolic disorder characterized by hyperglycemia as a result of insulin resistance (IR) and a relative lack of insulin in the human body.1 Notably, dysbiosis of the gut microbiome accompanies the progression of IR in T2D and the development of microvascular (retinopathy, nephropathy, and neuropathy) and macrovascular (atherosclerosis) complications of diabetes.2,3 This dysbiosis remodels the intestinal barrier and insulin signals through metabolites derived from bacteria, which interact with receptors on epithelial, fat, muscle, liver, pancreatic, and cardiac cells. Thus, metabolic signals produced by the gut microbiome can indirectly promote IR by altering the host’s metabolism. Among these metabolic changes, we highlight metabolic endotoxemia and the low rate of production of short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) and secondary bile acids (BAs).1 Although these findings have helped to characterize the association between the gut microbiome profile and T2D, it remains a challenge to grasp the mechanisms that drive their codependence; it is also difficult to use this knowledge to modulate the metabolic crosstalk between the microbiome and host.4

Currently, there is great interest in controlling external factors to modulate host-microbiome metabolic crosstalk and to restore patients to a healthy state. Thus, classical variables associated with lifestyle, such as diet and exercise, have increased their relevance in personalized medicine.5 Moreover, new technologies, such as fecal microbiota transplantation or bacteriophage intervention (phagosome), are promising technologies for enhancing patients’ wellness and treatment.6,7 Currently, two approaches are helping to reach these objectives. On the one hand, 16S rRNA and shotgun metagenome technologies allow us to carefully monitor the physiological state and composition of the gut microbiome in patients with different degrees of T2D.8,9 This massive amount of biological data contributes to characterizing the phenotype state of patients and evaluating how these phenotypes are altered as the disease progresses. On the other hand, the development of computational modeling approaches (CMAs) with the capacity to integrate high-throughput (HT) data is a pioneering effort to elucidate the ecological interactions of the bacterial community, and to postulate the metabolic mechanism by which T2D progresses. In particular, computational models based on inference microbial interactions and genome-scale metabolic reconstructions have emerged as a remarkable scheme required to understand the metabolic activity of the gut microbiome and to track the changes that follow the emergence of T2D.9 Currently, this field is nascent, but some pioneering advances have been reported in T2D and type 1 diabetes (T1D). In this narrative review, we analyze the state of the art of the association between the gut microbiome and T2D, the factors that modulate the interaction, and some in silico strategies to reveal the underlying metabolic mechanisms. First, we discuss the cutting-edge evidence of the relationship between host-microbiota metabolism and physiological alterations associated with T2D. Then, we discuss recent publications that highlight the importance of handling microbiome composition through lifestyle, diet, and promising intervention methods to modulate the gut microbiome. Finally, the last section is devoted to presenting and discussing frontiers in computational strategies to describe the complex interactions in the bacterial community, shed light on their organization, and build testable hypotheses to modulate metabolic mechanisms. Overall, our review highlights the importance of combining physiological knowledge, HT technologies, and computational modeling of microbiome metabolisms for designing microbiome interventions in favor of a healthy phenotype. To add an original contribution on the state of the art, the structure of the review was grounded in a bibliometric analysis with the Bibliometrix R library.10 This analysis was built with the terms “type 2 diabetes”, “gut microbiota”, “gut microbiome”, “systems biology” and “bioinformatics”, as keywords to find either in the documents’ titles or abstracts. Next, we filtered this search based on the review article as a type of document. Interestingly, we did not detect any document related to the content of our manuscript (Table S1-S2). Undoubtedly, the achievements around this field will have a strong impact on precision medicine for optimizing the outcome of treatments and improving patients’ quality of life.

The gut microbiome is a complex microbial ecosystem that coexists with various biological processes and metabolic capacities in the host.11 Through interactive evolutionary processes, hosts and their microbiomes have established mutual benefits. With the abundant evidence of this relationship and its influence on health, humans and their gut microbiome can be considered holobionts, and the health of the host depends on the microbiota and cannot be seen as disconnected from it.12 Nevertheless, there are intrinsic (genetics, age, sex, and health condition) and environmental factors (diet, antibiotic consumption, and lifestyle) that affect the composition of the gut microbiome and its structural functions. These factors, known as microbial disruptors, can alter a variety of physiological mechanisms that favor the development of pathologies such as intestinal permeability, chronic low-grade inflammation, and changes in carbohydrates metabolism and its associated signaling pathways (the insulin route).13

Given their importance, in the following sections, we describe the relationship among the gut microbiome and two variables with relevance in T2D physiopathology: IR and pancreatic β-cell dysfunction (PBD).

The gut microbiome plays an important role in the progression of IR to T2D.20 An imbalance between potentially pathogenic and nonpathogenic bacteria can induce crucial metabolic alterations in the entire organism, which in turn can disturb the physiological parameters in multiple body compartments.49 This perturbation has at least two complex consequences. First, IR promotes alterations in different metabolic pathways, such as lipids, amino acids, and bile acids. Second, these alterations have substantial implications for the modulation of insulin sensitivity.14 In this way, metabolites produced by GM may regulate insulin sensitivity through several components of the insulin signaling pathway, such as insulin receptor substrates (IRS) and the enzyme kinase AKT (Figure 2a).50 Furthermore, some of these IRSs can indirectly affect the flow of substrates through lipogenesis, lipid oxidation, protein synthesis and degradation, and hepatic gluconeogenesis.

On the other hand, branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs) have recently attracted significant scientific attention because elevated blood concentrations of BCAAs are associated with states of IR, such as obesity and T2D.51 The main species associated with T2D and BCAA biosynthesis are Prevotella copri and Bacteroides vulgatus in the Danish population.52 These bacteria decreased the expression of BCAAs through catabolizing enzymes in adipose tissue and liver, and promoted an increase in inflammation in WAT, stress on the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), and an alteration in insulin signaling at the hypothalamic level.14 Additionally, BCAAs increase lipid oxidation in muscle, accumulating acylcarnitines and generating mitochondrial dysfunction. In adipose tissue, the alteration of BCAA catabolism reduces substrate flow to lipogenesis, contributing to metabolic dysfunction in IR and linking it to the progressive loss of pancreatic β-cell function.14 Ultimately, these changes generate an acute secretory response in the β-cell, resulting in a progressive dysfunction characterized by an abnormal secretory process due to the pancreatic β-cell trying to adapt and compensate for the IR, as described in the following section.

Glucose homeostasis is the product of metabolic, hormonal, neural, and microbial signals whose regulation determines the degree of glucose-dependent insulin release. The progression from normoglycemia to glucose intolerance and later to T2D occurs due to a deterioration in these signals, which gradually decreases insulin sensitivity and β-cell functionality (Figure 2b).2 This dysfunction associated with GM can be induced by two effects: 1) the increase in intestinal permeability; and 2) the chronically elevated glucose levels in the host (islet glucotoxicity).53 This physiological imbalance causes an increase in intestinal permeability, which in turn promotes the translocation of some bacteria (Proteus mirabilis and Escherichia coli) and their metabolites.54 To respond to intestinal permeability in the host, two main detection systems continuously scan for bacteria capable of translocating the intestinal mucosa or adhering to the epithelium: 1) NOD-like receptors (NLRs), which detect the presence of intracellular microbes; and 2) TLRs.38

Concerning islet glucotoxicity, chronically elevated glucose levels have been reported to impair islet function and proliferation, and induce apoptosis. In addition, the intra-islet expression of IL-1β may contribute to T2D pathogenesis by inducing the loss of mass and β-cell function. Consequently, hyperglycemia and glucotoxicity result from pancreatic dysfunction, increase intestinal permeability, and activate the inflammatory response.53,58

GM have great plasticity, which implies the ability to adapt their populations to fluctuating environmental conditions.59 Currently, their composition and diversity are modulated through classical factors such as diet, exercise, drugs, and more recently through interventions such as fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT), bacteriophage intervention through phageome studies, antibiotics, and bariatric surgery. All of these modulator methods can generate beneficial changes in the structure and function of the GM and restore them temporarily or permanently.60 In the next section, we will analyze the effect of these modulators on microbiome composition (Figure 3).

Treatment strategies for T2D include lifestyle changes, such as dietary interventions with routine physical exercise.61 Diet is a fundamental environmental contributor that interferes with the structure and function of the GM, playing a key role in modulating the benefits of human health.60 Studies on diet and microbiome associations have shown that the consumption of prebiotics and dietary fibers increases the abundance of SCFA-producing bacteria in the gut.62 At present, this modulator has been extended to include dietary patterns, eating behaviors, diet quality, and food preparation methods.63 Therefore, an unbalanced diet causes unfavorable changes in energy balance and GM composition. This dysbiosis results in weight gain and a higher risk of developing metabolic illnesses. On the other hand, a balanced diet favors appropriate changes in the microbiome composition and can promote weight loss and a healthy metabolic transformation.16 Therefore, nutrient ratios in meals affect digestive secretions, absorption, and transit time. These factors also affect human GM.63 Recent studies have estimated that for an average diet, 40 g of carbohydrates, 12 to 18 g of protein, and 2 to 10 g of fat reach the colon undigested every day and serve as substrates for microbial metabolism.64 Based on recent estimations, the gut microbiome contains 16,000 active carbohydrate enzymes and 9,000 genes involved in the complex metabolism of carbohydrates and polysaccharides, while the human genome contains only 17 of these genes.63 The superiority of gut microbes to metabolize a wide range of non-digestible nutrients is remarkable. In this way, dietary interventions modulate the GM, and these changes might contribute to better glycemic control in T2D patients.65

Advances in microbiome research have revealed the importance of diet variability and its contribution to GM composition in supporting health. Because diet influences intestinal transit time, pH, and macronutrient intake, possible approaches to achieving a healthy microbiota are to directly manage beneficial bacteria through probiotics, a Mediterranean diet, diet restrictions, a content-modified diet, and a diet high in non-digestible polysaccharides.66 The shift in diet has a dynamic effect on the composition of the GM in the short and long term and is dependent on the type of food eaten.67 Table 1 summarizes studies with statistically significant differences in the composition after dietary intervention for T2D patients.68–70 Furthermore, the differences in clinical parameters are closely related to changes at various levels of taxa (phylum, family, genus, species, and Firmicutes: Bacteroidetes relationship) (Table 1 and Table S3).

T2D: Diabetes Mellitus type 2; a-LCD: almond-based low carbohydrate diet; LFD: Low-fat diet; GLP-1: glucagon-like peptide 1; BMI: body mass index; SCFA: short-chain fatty acids; SIT: sprint Interval; MICT: moderate-intensity continuous training; HFD: high-fat diet; STZ: streptozotocin; db/db: diabetic; SGLT2: sodium-glucose co-transporter-2.

Physical activity is an effective strategy to control diabetes; however, its benefits for metabolic homeostasis remain poorly understood.71 Recently, a modulating effect of exercise on the GM was reported in humans and animals, both with T2D.72 For example, murine models subjected to physical training simultaneously promoted an increase in the abundance of Bacteroidetes and a reduction in Firmicutes and Proteobacteria. Furthermore, individuals with physical activity had greater diversity in microbiota composition and better metabolic capacity than sedentary subjects.73

At the physiological level, the effect of physical exercise on GM composition has been associated with reducing inflammatory markers and metabolic endotoxemia, increasing the production of SCFAs, and degrading BCAAs.74 Notably, Y. Liu et al. reported that the relative abundance of Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, and Proteobacteria was significantly altered after 12 weeks of exercise in a human cohort. In addition, the species belonging to the genus Bacteroides (producers of SCFAs) increased significantly, suggesting that physical exercise for short periods of time exerts differential modulating effects on microbial composition.75 Moreover, chronic physical activity modifies GM composition and reduces intestinal permeability and systemic inflammation.76 On the other hand, Motiani et al. reported the effects of continuous training of different intensities (moderate intensity and speed interval training on intestinal metabolism) on the GM in subjects with T2D and pre-T2D. Remarkably, the authors concluded that the composition of the GM changed due to physical exercise in two weeks. Both forms of training decreased the Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio, Blautia spp., and Clostridium spp. Faecalibacterium increased only in continuous moderate-intensity training. Notably, these changes in microbiome abundances were correlated with clinical parameters. For example, a lower abundance of Blautia was associated with better insulin sensitivity. Overall, regular physical activity provides metabolic benefits, even in short periods of time73,77 (see Table 1).

Patients with T2D are clinically treated with various anti-diabetic drugs78 that normalize blood glucose by targeting different organs and through different mechanisms. For example, GLP-1 analogues stimulate insulin secretion and keep pancreatic β-cells healthy and proliferating. Inhibitors of intestinal hormones, such as dipeptide-4 (DPP-4), suppress appetite in the brain. On the other hand, sodium-dependent glucose transport-2 inhibitors (SGLT2) block renal reabsorption of glucose. Metformin (a biguanide) reduces hepatic gluconeogenesis. Meanwhile, thiazolidinediones (TZD) agonists of PPAR-γ increase glucose uptake in skeletal muscles and adipose tissues.79 Last, sulfonylureas (SUs) increase pancreatic insulin secretion.78,80,81 The effect between the GM and anti-diabetic drugs is bidirectional; the drug influences microbiota composition, and in turn, the metabolism of the microbiota may have a positive effect in the host.80 One effect of these drugs in the host is to modify the gut microbiome composition by increasing the bacteria that produce SCFAs.82 In turn, the GM and SCFAs exert effects on anti-diabetic agents, influencing their pharmacogenetics and bioavailability.80 Understanding the bidirectional drug-microbiome interaction and how it influences clinical outcomes in T2D patients is necessary to identify possible modulating mechanisms of the GM.80 Given their current application, we discuss and present some evidence of the interactions between the GM and three anti-diabetic drugs (biguanides, GLP-1 receptor antagonists, and DPP-4 inhibitors).

On the other hand, Lin-Wang et al. compared the GM structural modulation of body weight and serum glucose with two treatments: liraglutide (GLP-1 receptor agonist) and saxagliptin (DPP-4 inhibitor). The authors found that mice treated with liraglutide enriched the genera Allobacum (p = .004), and Turicibacter (p = 1.77e-8), the family Erysipelotrichaceae, specifically the genera Anaerostipes (p = 5.51e-5) and Blautia (p = .039), and the family Lachnospiraceae genus Lactobacillus (p = .013). These changes in GM composition were associated with a reduction in body weight in mice treated with liraglutide. In contrast, the GM composition in treatment with saxagliptin increased the abundance of some bacteria from the class Erysipelotrichaceae, such as Lactobacillus (p = .023), Allobaculum (p = .017), and Turicibacter (p = .001). Furthermore, the abundance of Bacteoridetes decreased, specifically the genera Bacteroides (p = .003) and Prevotella (p = .018). The random glucose concentration was lower in linagliptin-treated mice, p < .05. Liraglutide and saxagliptin were shown to enrich Lactobacillus and Turicibacter. Furthermore, Lactobacillus showed inhibitory activity against DPP-4, through increased incretins and glucose homeostasis.96

Antibiotics are administered to combat pathogens. However, their use disturbs the microbial composition of some important genera participating in immune, endocrinological, and metabolic functioning.97 The use of antibiotics has been associated with remarkable metabolic alterations, mainly when the application comprises broad-spectrum antibiotics and their use occurs in the first years of life. It has been estimated that antibiotics impact the abundance of 30% of the GM, producing a rapid and significant decline in richness, diversity, gene expression, and protein and metabolic activity.98 Despite the GM metabolically responding under this perturbation, the initial state is not fully recovered, and antibiotic-induced microbial alterations can remain for months or even years.99

Recently, murine model studies and human clinical trials have shown that antibiotics can modulate the GM with antibiotic treatment, which in turn, could reduce glucose intolerance, adiposity, and adipose tissue inflammation. Using a murine model, Fujisaka et al. determined the effect of antibiotics on the GM and host metabolism. In this study, cB6J, 129 T, and 129 J mice were treated with a placebo, vancomycin, or metronidazole in their drinking water. Vancomycin treatment lowered the relative abundance of Firmicutes in B6J mice to 37% (p = .009) and in 129 T mice to 50% of untreated HFD levels (p= .003). This dysbiosis was associated with a rise in the relative abundance of Proteobacteria.100 In 129 J mice, metronidazole and vancomycin markedly diminished Verrucomicrobia from 66 to 0% (p = .002) and 23% (p = .007), respectively, favoring the predominance of Proteobacteria and Firmicutes. HFD B6J mice treated with vancomycin and metronidazole exhibited reduced blood glucose levels and improved glucose tolerance during the OGTT.100 Furthermore, Gridhar et al. evaluated the effect of antibiotic treatment and an HFD on the metabolism and function of the pancreas. The C57BL/6 J mice were divided into four groups: 1) fed a standard chow diet, 2) an HFD for six weeks, 3) fed a standard diet plus oral vancomycin, and 4) metronidazole in the last two weeks of the experiment. Vancomycin treatment significantly increased glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity in HFD-exposed mice.101 On the other hand, Reijnders et al. investigated how GM manipulation by antibiotics (a 7-day administration of amoxicillin, vancomycin, or placebo) affects host metabolism in 57 obese and pre-diabetic men. This study was a double-blind controlled clinical trial in which the population was randomized into three groups: the placebo, amoxicillin, and vancomycin. Vancomycin at seven days decreased the diversity of intestinal microbiota compared to the placebo (p < .001); however, amoxicillin did not affect diversity (p = .42). Likewise, the group treated with vancomycin decreased the relative abundance of butyrate producing bacteria, such as Coprococcus eutactus, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, and Anaerostipes caccae, as well as species involved in BA dehydroxylation, like Clostridium leptum. In contrast, patients treated with amoxicillin did not experience a change in the composition of the microbiota after seven days of treatment.102 The data obtained in this clinical trial were in contrast with several previous studies on rodents, which indicated that antibiotic treatment can improve glucose homeostasis and metabolic alterations.103 In human species, the effects of antibiotics on glycemic control or insulin sensitivity remain inconclusive.102

Bariatric surgery (BS) refers to surgical procedures designed to achieve weight loss and long-term glycemic control in patients with T2D and obesity. Importantly, it can achieve better outcomes than non-surgical interventions (medication and diet).104 The two most common procedures in BS are sleeve gastrectomy (SG) and Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB), both with comparable efficacy. According to the American Diabetes Association (ADA) and the International Diabetes Federation (IDF) guidelines, BS is recommended in individuals with T2D and body max index (BMI) of at least 35 kg/m2, it can be an option for individuals with mild obesity (BMI of 30–34.9 kg/m2) who have inadequate glycemic control despite optimal medical management.104

Several microbiota-mediated mechanisms have been proposed to induce glycemic control and improve insulin sensitivity after BS. One of them is the crosstalk between the BAs and the GM. After BS, there is an increase in the blood concentrations of primary BAs and secondary BAs in T2D patients. Altogether, the overproduction of these BAs impacts lipid and glucose metabolism, and seems to be associated with the remission and improvements of T2D patients treated with BS.110 However, these outcomes are in contrast to those reported by Ilhan et al. who characterized the fecal metabolome of an American cohort with severe obesity and T2D after BS (the majority of subjects had resolution of diabetes and other comorbidities 12 months after treatment). They found a decline in the concentration of secondary BAs at 12 months after surgery compared to the non-surgical controls.111 Overall, these results imply that GM and BS have an important codependence in the improvement of T2D patients. Consequently, the study on the differences in GM composition is critical for understanding the pathways underlying metabolic improvement after surgery.

FMT has become an outstanding research topic with potential applications in clinical medicine and biomedicine.112 Recently, FMT has been proven to be an effective method for treating and preventing the recurrence of gastrointestinal disorders through host-microbiota interactions; for example, FMT treatment against Clostridium difficile infection.113 Furthermore, FMT has been suggested as a therapeutic approach to modulate chronic and metabolic conditions such as T2D.114 Vrieze et al. established the effects of infusing GM from lean donors to male recipients with metabolic syndrome on the recipients’ microbiota composition and glucose metabolism. Six weeks after microbiota infusion, receptor insulin sensitivity increased along with butyrate-producing bacteria levels.115 Likewise, the authors demonstrated that FMT with or without lifestyle changes increased butyrate-producing bacteria in subjects with obesity and T2D. A recent study highlighted that the combination of lifestyle changes and FMT increased Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus compared to FMT alone.116 In addition, Kootte et al. studied the effect of allogeneic FMT (from lean donors) on metabolism in relation to GM composition at 6 and 18 weeks after treatment. Moreover, the authors obtained microbiome composition in autologous FMT as the control treatment (placebo) in the donor subjects. In their clinical trial, the authors observed a statistically significant increase in insulin sensitivity after 6 weeks of allogeneic transplantation, accompanied by an altered composition of the GM. Further, using the GM composition, it was possible to classify the status of responders versus non-responders to the allogeneic FMT (recipient operating characteristics [ROC] AUC 0.88). Metabolic responders to FMT were characterized by lower baseline GM diversity and a higher abundance of Subdoligranulum variabile and Dorea longicatena than non-responders, while the abundance of Eubacterium ventriosum and Ruminococcus torques was lower in the baseline fecal samples. Although FMT has been proposed as a candidate to treat T2D, the molecular mechanisms underlying the therapeutic benefits are not yet understood.116

On the other hand, in a murine model with T2D, FMT increased the number of species and the alpha diversity indices (Shannon and Simpson). In addition, the level of HbA1c decreased and improved pancreatic β-cell function (measurement performed with HOMA-B) in the FMT group. Notably, this study suggests that GM transplantation reverses IR and damages islets.117 Additionally, Zhang et al. determined the effect of transplanted fecal bacteria from Kazakhs (the Kazakh Chinese ethnic group) with normal glucose tolerance on male db/db mice with T2D. In these recipient mice, the levels of Desulfovibrio and Clostridium coccoides in the intestine were significantly reduced, but the abundance of Akkermansia muciniphila and the expression of colonic protein histone deacetylase-3 (HDAC3) in the colon samples were increased. These results indicate that Akkermansia muciniphila could have affected the metabolism of the murine model by regulating the expression of HDAC3. This is because it can activate brown fat cells to oxidize lipids, increase metabolism and promote weight loss to counter T2D. Furthermore, in this study, HDAC3 was positively correlated with glycolipid levels, suggesting that Akkermansia muciniphila may be the main intestinal probiotic that improves metabolism in T2D.118 Based on previous evidence, FMT has been recognized as a therapeutic strategy that in combination with lifestyle can be potentially effective in the treatment of T2D.119 However, more evidence in humans needs to be generated, and we suggest that for future interventions, determining the baseline fecal microbiota composition may help predict treatment efficacy.112

Obesity and T2D are associated with changes in gut bacterial composition, but little is known about the role of the virome in T2D disease development. Yang et al. reported the results of viral-bacterial transkingdom correlation for a Chinese cohort of 101 lean controls and 128 obese subjects (74 diagnosed with T2D). The authors found a decreased number of correlations between the relative abundance of the virome and bacteriome in obese subjects compared to the lean controls. Furthermore, obese subjects with T2D displayed an increased number of negative correlations and a lower number of positive correlations compared to the lean controls.120

Given the extensive evidence that phages can shape the composition and function of bacterial communities, the phageome of the human gut has been studied in T2D patients. For example, Yingfei et al. conducted a computational study of associations (with SparCC, a tool to infer correlation networks) between bacterial and phage abundance in a Chinese cohort of 74 healthy patients and 71 T2D patients.121 Their results imply that the number of phages in the intestinal tract of diabetes subjects was significantly increased, especially in the group with seven phage OTUs (pOTUs) (Siphoviridae phage family for Lactobacillus, Listeria and Staphylococcus). However, they identified pOTUs belonging to the Caudovirales order, which has several limitations of taxonomic annotation. Despite these incipient achievements providing little insight into the mechanisms by which the phageome participates in T2D, they supply evidence of their involvement in the disease and pave the way for further research to discover human gut phage functions in the development of T2D.121

High-throughput technologies (HTs) are powerful tools, as they offer new insight into the functioning and behavior of microbial communities. However, data is not sufficient, and the generation of knowledge requires computational schemes with the capacity to integrate data and reach conclusions at a systemic level. As depicted in Figure 4, data obtained from HT can be used as input in several systems biology (SB) tools to provide insight into the structure and function of microbial communities.122 For example, proteomic studies and 16S rRNA data suggest a lower abundance of the Lachnospiraceae family in obese diabetic mice than in the control group.123 Additionally, Reeves et al. suggested that inoculation with Lachnospiraceae in germ-free mice is associated with suppression of Clostridium difficile colonization.124 Altogether, these findings suggest that an increase in the abundance of Lachnospiraceae can be considered beneficial and is highly associated with the maintenance of gut homeostasis and health.123 On the other hand, integration of whole metagenome shotgun (WMS) with metabolomics pointed out that a high fiber diet was associated with a decrease in the abundance of sulfate reducer bacteria and a rise in SCFA producers, which in turn is related to better levels of HbA1c and increased GLP-1 in the host.125 Moreover, an integrative analysis with WMS and targeted metabolomics performed on a T2D-Chinese cohort supplies evidence that SCFA metabolism enriches its activity after metformin application. Simultaneously, this last finding was associated with higher levels of butyrate and propionate metabolites.88

An effort to discover new insights about the function, structure, and design of GM has been triggered by the development of qualitative and quantitative computational models.129 Due to their relevance to elucidate regulatory and metabolic mechanisms, we discuss the main computational approaches that have been used to explore the relationship between GM and T2D, which are summarized in Figure 4.

The generation of extended comprehensive studies for GM requires massive high-quality data and bioinformatic methods to derive a proper biological interpretation. For example, one of the first and most fundamental questions belongs to the taxonomic composition of the GM and the phylogenetic connections of its members. An approach for taxonomic classification is based on the counts of specific marker genes., i.e., 16S rRNA, 18S rRNA, and internal transcribed spacer. These approaches have enabled the analysis of different and complex habitats in the GM. In particular, 16S rRNA has been frequently used due to its capacity to analyze large numbers of samples, i.e., multiple patients and longitudinal studies.130

However, we need to consider that HT data (e.g., 16S rRNA reads) fall into a class of data termed “closed” or “compositional”, which includes particular geometric and statistical properties; this makes establishing microbial taxa associations between communities challenging.136 Hence, the following bioinformatic tools have been developed for statistical analysis of microbiome data, such as LEfSe and MaAsLin2.137 They provide several methods for data normalization and transformation. Additionally, SparCC, and SPEIC-EASI address the compositional problem by assuming that few species are correlated, and BAnOCC makes no assumptions about the microbial data.138 In addition, several supervised learning algorithms have been proposed to identify a subset of highly predictive taxa from the different stages of the disease. Due to the high complexity of the data, it is necessary that these algorithms be able to model the complex interactions and non-linear effects between microbial communities. As such, the most commonly used methods are support vector machine, random forest, and multilayer perceptron with variable predictive accuracy.139

Among the computational approaches available to analyze the microbiome, we highlight those associated with reconstructing the ecological structure from HT, such as 16S rRNA and WMS, SparCC,140 MENA,141 LSA,141 CoNet,142 SPIEC-EASI,140 MetaMIS,143 and Web-gLV,144 among others fall in this category. These bioinformatic tools integrate correlation networks and include methods for OTU pre-processing and microbial associations. The most common output from all of these tools is the inference of a microbial association network and the estimation of its robustness through their topological parameters, such as cluster coefficient, connectivity, and modularity.145

*Normal Glucose Tolerance (NG), **A virus family.

Last, related to modeling based on sequence read abundance, generalized Lotka-Volterra modeling enhances the classical predator-prey models of the two species, which are broadly used in ecology.144 The main advantage of these models is their capacity to estimate the native growth and interaction constraints of uncultured microbes in a given environment from temporal data.155 Once the parameters are delimited, we can analyze the variations in GM composition over time with unidentified initial conditions.

Genome-scale metabolic reconstruction and constraint-based modeling is a paradigm in systems biology to quantitatively explore the metabolic activity of a bacterium or a group of bacteria constrained in a specific metabolic environment. This approach is characterized by three global elements: the use of genome-scale metabolic reconstruction for microorganisms, their mathematical representation to simulate their metabolic phenotypes, and their integrative description with HT technologies.156 A variety of computational tools based on genome-scale metabolic models (GEMS) has been developed in recent years with the purpose of quantitatively examining metabolic activity in the microbiome. Among these methods, we highlight the COBRA Toolbox and cobrapy, computational frameworks developed to model genome-scale metabolic reconstructions through constraint-based modeling.157 Based on this approach, there have been some efforts to characterize the microbial metabolic community at small, medium, and large scales. Among the efforts to model metabolic activity and species-level interactions in GM, we list computational strategies such as OptCom,158 cFBA,159 CASINO,160 BacArena,161 Dynamic OptCom,162 bialSim,163 and MICOM.9 These schemes differ from each other in several ways: 1) the amount of genome-scale metabolic reconstruction capable of being included in the simulation, 2) the dynamic condition constraining the state of the system (steady or unsteady state), and 3) the computational procedure to define and calculate the community objective function in the microbial community.164

From the other side, Diener et al. (2020) reported MICOM,9 an OptCom based framework capable of simulating the GM metabolism of almost 850 instances of genome-scale metabolic reconstruction simultaneously, starting from the relative abundance of bacteria obtained from 16S or metagenome technologies. Remarkably, the authors were able to derive the growth rates that correspond directly to the observed replication rates. Moreover, they integrated several constraints, such as taxon abundance and adjustable dietary input, to prepare personalized metabolic models for individual GM samples. With T2D, T1D, and the healthy control data of 186 subjects, the authors showed that the community-level production of SCFAs was heterogeneous and mostly distinctive at the individual level. Also, their model output showed complex cross-feeding associations among bacteria, which mirrors the complex community structure that is difficult to measure in vivo.9 In addition, MICOM was able to predict reduced SCFA (butyrate and propionate) production levels in T2D participants, with a consecutive restoration of these rates found in subjects with metformin treatment. In general, they reported that changes in taxon abundance or diet have highly personalized effects.9 Based on these findings, the in silico modeling of the metabolic activity of microbiota has started to be a fundamental and useful approach to obtain quantitative mechanistic explanations that complement association studies. This last point involves genome-scale metabolic reconstruction of bacterial communities in the gut microbiome and diet; all of these are placed in the context of a personalized background.

The prevalence of T2D has become a serious public health problem worldwide.167 Genetic components, a sedentary lifestyle, and dietary habits (low dietary fiber and high fat consumption) are etiological factors that contribute to the development of T2D.168 Recently, GM dysbiosis has been integrated as a factor associated with the rapid progression from IR to T2D. Notably, this dysbiosis can remodel functions of the intestinal barrier and metabolic pathways in the host. In particular, these alterations are closely associated with SCFA production, bile acid transformation, adipose tissue inflammation, and chronic low-grade systemic inflammation.169 In this review, we have discussed in detail how the physiological variables in T2D are associated with a disruption of microbiota in the host, as well as how lifestyle, drugs, and new promising interventions like FMT can control and reshape their profiles to benefit the health of the host. Altogether, these findings offer innovative possibilities for preventing and treating T2D. However, their implementation still faces some challenges that need to be addressed in the coming years. Let us review some of them.

Finally, in recent years, there has been a real revolution in the field of big data. In this sense, real-world data and real-world evidence play a more relevant role in medical care decisions.177 A vast amount of health-related data is now being collected and stored due to the increased use of computers, mobile devices, wearable devices, and other biosensors.178 These data have the potential to allow us to better design and conduct clinical trials and studies in health care to answer questions that were previously unfeasible. In addition, with the development of new and sophisticated analytical capabilities, we can better scrutinize data and apply the results of the analysis to the development and approval of medical products. For example, in the study of GM, it is necessary to design studies with a sufficient number of subjects of both sexes. In addition, information on lifestyle, diet, mental health, comorbidities, and metadata should be included that allow for comprehensive interpretation of the GM. To this end, it is necessary to have electronic databases at different levels (state, national, and world) for multicenter data analysis. Likewise, the capacity of omics sciences should be increased with shotgun studies, meta-transcriptomics, meta-metabolomics, meta-proteomics, and medium-term fluxomic studies to grasp the dynamics of metabolism in the microbial community and the host.122 In conclusion, we now have more measurable variables and are able to add more “data layers” to systems biology studies. Undoubtedly, we are only at the tip of the iceberg of understanding host-microbiome interactions and their specific mechanisms of modulation, one of the frontiers in the medicine of this century.

All authors wrote, discussed, and reviewed the manuscript.

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

Supplemental data for this article can be accessed online at https://doi.org/10.1080/19490976.2022.2111952

