Effects of Aleurone Supplementation on Glucose-Insulin Metabolism and Gut Microbiome in Untrained Healthy Horses



Aleurone, a layer of the bran fraction, is deemed to be responsible for the positive health effects associated with the consumption of whole-grain products. Studies on rodents, pigs, and humans report beneficial effects of aleurone in five main areas: the reduction of oxidative stress, immunomodulatory effects, modulation of energy management, digestive health, and the storage of vitamins and minerals. Our study is the first aleurone supplementation study performed in horses. The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of an increase in the dose levels of aleurone on the postprandial glucose-insulin metabolism and the gut microbiome in untrained healthy horses. Seven adult Standardbred horses were supplemented with four different dose levels of aleurone (50, 100, 200, and 400 g/day for 1 week) by using a Latin square model with a 1-week wash out in between doses. On day 7 of each supplementation week, postprandial blood glucose-insulin was measured and fecal samples were collected. 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene sequencing was performed and QIIME2 software was used for microbiome analysis. Microbial community function was assessed by using the predictive metagenome analysis tool Phylogenetic Investigation of Communities by Reconstruction of Unobserved States (PICRUSt) and using the Metacyc database of metabolic pathways. The relative abundancies of a pathway were analyzed by using analysis of composition of microbiomes (ANCOM) in R. There was a significant dose-dependent increase in the postprandial time to peak of glucose (p = 0.030), a significant delay in the time to peak of insulin (p = 0.025), and a significant decrease in both the insulin peak level (p = 0.049) and insulin area under the curve (AUC) (p = 0.019) with increasing dose levels of aleurone, with a consideration of 200 g being the lowest significant dose. Alpha diversity and beta diversity of the fecal microbiome showed no significant changes. Aleurone significantly decreased the relative abundance of the genera Roseburia, Shuttleworthia, Anaerostipes, Faecalibacter, and Succinovibrionaceae. The most pronounced changes in the relative abundance at phyla level were seen in Firmicutes and Verrucomicrobia (downregulation) and Bacteroidetes and Spirochaetes (upregulation). The PICRUSt analysis shows that aleurone induces a downregulation of the degradation of L-glutamate and taurine and an upregulation of the three consecutive pathways of the phospholipid membrane synthesis of the Archaea domain. The results of this study suggest a multimodal effect of aleurone on glucose-insulin metabolism, which is most likely to be caused by its effect on feed texture and subsequent digestive processing; and a synergistic effect of individual aleurone components on the glucose-insulin metabolism and microbiome composition and function.

Whole-grain products have been incorporated in human and animal diets for some decades, which not only meet the conventional nutritional needs such as dietary fiber content but also allow for an improvement of gut microbiome, a stimulation of increased metabolic health, lower risk of cardiovascular disease mortality, and a lower risk of cancer (1–8).

The main goal of this current study is to report the effect of increasing doses of aleurone supplementation in healthy untrained horses, focusing on two endpoints: the postprandial glucose and insulin response and shifts in the gut microbiome composition. We hypothesize that aleurone supplementation to non-trained horses dose dependently modulates the postprandial glucose and insulin dynamics and induces shifts in the gut microbiome.

Seven healthy untrained Standardbred horses (age 4–7 years, 4 ♀, 3♂) were housed in individual boxes (14 m2) on wood shavings and with ad libitum access to tap water and good quality hay. The amount of hay consumed by each horse was recorded daily. The composition of the hay batch was analyzed employing a Weende analysis. The horses were turned out in sand paddocks 2 h a day. Four different wheat aleurone ASP-01 dose levels were tested (50, 100, 200, and 400 g/day) for 10 consecutive weeks. Throughout this study, we will refer to the wheat aleurone ASP-01 as simply “aleurone.” Aleurone was supplemented at different dose levels following a Latin square design (Table 2). Each supplemented dose was fed for 7 consecutive days followed by a 1-week wash out during which no aleurone was supplemented. Two batches of concentrate feed were manufactured: one pelletized blanco batch in which aleurone was replaced by wheat bran and a pelletized batch containing 20% aleurone (Supplementary Table 1). Both the batches were mixed to achieve the proper aleurone dose. Horses were fed a concentrate meal twice a day at 8 a.m. and 8 p.m. The complete aleurone dose was provided at 8 a.m. Horses were allowed to adapt to the blanco concentrate feed for 4 weeks prior to the start of the study. Horses were checked for their vital signs, such as heart rate, respiratory rate, rectal temperature, the color of mucous membranes, capillary refill time, appetite, and the consistency of stools twice a day. The study was approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of the Ghent University EC 2014.14.

On day 7 of each supplementation week, horses were subjected to a postprandial glucose and insulin follow-up. A catheter was inserted into the jugular vein (over the needle, 16G, MILA International, KY, USA), and blood was sampled when feeding started (T0) and every 30 min for 4 consecutive hours and after that every 60 min for another 4 consecutive hours. Blood was collected in NaF-coated tubes for an immediate glucose level assessment (Alphatrak®, Zoetis, Belgium). Regarding insulin, blood was collected in heparin-coated tubes at T0 and every 10 min (1 h) followed by every 30 min (4 h). Insulin levels were assessed on the same day by performing a chemiluminescent immunoassay (CIA) [IMMULITE® 1000 Immunoassay System (Siemens Healthcare Diagnostics Inc., Tarrytown, NY, USA)]. On day 7 of the week in which 400 g aleurone was supplemented, blood was taken from the jugular vein (Vacutainer system) for the performance of a routine blood examination including the complete blood count (CBC) and clinical biochemistry.

On day 7 of each week, the fecal samples were collected from the rectum. The samples were immediately frozen in dry ice and stored at −80°C until they were processed. The samples collected at the beginning of the trial, collected on the last day of the trial (7 days after the last aleurone supplementation for all horses), collected at day 7 of a week in which aleurone was supplemented, and collected at day 7 of a week in which no aleurone was supplemented are labeled as “blanco horses,” “posttrial horses,” “aleurone supplemented horses,” and “non-supplemented horses,” respectively.

The quantity and quality of DNA were assessed by using a spectrophotometer [NanoDrop 1000 (Thermo Scientific, Wilmington, DE, USA)]. The metagenomics analysis was performed via 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing. One primer pair for the V3 and V4 region of the 16S rRNA gene was used for 25 PCR cycles to create a single amplicon of approximately 460 bp. These primers are described by Klindworth et al. (68) as the most promising bacterial primer pair for 16S sequencing. The gene-specific primers were appended with the adapter sequences that are compatible with a subsequent index PCR that attaches dual indices and Illumina sequencing adapters by using the Illumina Nextera XT Index Kit. By this way, up to 96 libraries can be created and pooled together for sequencing. Libraries are quantified by using quantitative PCR (qPCR) with primers on the required Illumina library adaptor sequences (following the Illumina qPCR quantification protocol guide) and pooled in an equimolar manner. The equimolar pool is denatured and diluted by following Illumina protocols to produce a final 4.5 pM sequencing library. About 20% denatured Illumina PhiX Control V3 library was admixed to increase the sequence diversity of this final library. Cluster generation and 2 x 300 paired-end sequencing is performed in one Illumina Miseq flow cell. Using the Illumina Miseq 300-bp paired-end sequencing, paired-end reads with overlapped ends are generated. The overlapping reads can be stitched to form high quality, full length reads of the V3 and V4 region.

All data were subject to an outlier analysis. Values more than 1.5 times the interquartile range were identified as outliers and the identified values were removed from the analysis (69). For responses where data was collected over the aleurone dosage levels of 50–400 g/day, statistical modeling of data was performed by using a mixed-model analysis using the PROC MIXED procedure in SAS (Version 9.3, SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA). The study design was an extended Latin square according to the model:

For repeated measurements of blood glucose and insulin, the fixed effect of time was added to the abovementioned model as well as the interaction effect of treatment by time and horse was identified as the subject for the random covariance of time effect. Preplanned contrasts were used to estimate regression coefficients over the aleurone dose level and to determine significant relationships for (1) a linear effect, (2) quadratic effect, and (3) cubic effect of aleurone supplementation. No significant effects were found for cubic and quadratic effects; therefore, only linear effects are reported.

Data preparation and metagenomics analyses both were done by using QIIME2 (v2020.2) (70, 71) unless otherwise mentioned. This includes sequenced read-pair quality trimming, mergence into reconstructed amplicons, operational taxonomic unit (OTU) picking, taxonomic assignment, and phylogenetic reconstruction. To build OTU tables and trees, open-reference OTU picking was performed against the Greengenes 16S reference collection (release 13.8) (72). With the exception of sample 52 (collected in a non-supplemented week of horse number 6), the 16S fragment sequencing depth across all the samples ranged from 28,619 to 128,871. Due to insufficient quality, sample 52 was removed from the analyses. Each downstream diversity metric requiring normalization by a rarefaction was calculated by using a sampling depth ranging between 16,253 and 34,211, corresponding to the lowest sequencing depth of the samples in each comparison we investigated. A rarefaction plot (Supplementary Figure 1) shows the observed OTU saturation after random sampling up to 50,000 sequenced features in each individual sample. To verify if the sequencing was adequate and reached feature saturation, we visually inspected rarefaction plots depicting the number of uniquely identified features at increasing sequencing depth for all individual samples. Alpha diversity metrics, such as Shannon's Diversity, Faith's Phylogenetic Diversity, and the observed OTUs were calculated for each comparison of sample groups and statistically analyzed by using the Kruskal–Wallis test. Beta diversity metrics, such as Weighted UniFrac, Unweighted UniFrac, and Bray–Curtis, were also calculated for each comparison of sample groups and statistically analyzed with a PERMANOVA test to assess the significance of the differences. To identify the taxonomic features that were differentially abundant between the conditions, an analysis of the composition of the microbiome was done in R by using analysis of composition of microbiomes (ANCOM) (v2.1) (73), including the horse identity as a blocking factor in the design. According to the recommendations of the software's authors, the minimum threshold for significantly different taxa was set at 70% for the W statistic (W0.7). Fold change (FC) was calculated by using the mean centered log ratio difference. Additionally, the microbial community function was assessed by using the predictive metagenome analysis provided by PICRUSt (74) using the Metacyc (75) metabolic pathways database. To identify differential pathways between the conditions, the resulting pathway abundancies were analyzed by using ANCOM in R.

Vital signs were monitored on a daily basis throughout the entire trial; respiratory rate, heart rate, temperature, and capillary refill time were always within the reference range. The color of mucous membranes, appetite, and the consistency of stool were considered normal throughout this study.

No parameters were out of the reference range for both CBC and clinical biochemistry for none of the horses that received 400 g of aleurone.

There was a significant increase in the postprandial time to peak of glucose (p = 0.030; Figure 1A). This effect was dose dependent and significant at a dose of 200 g of aleurone (Table 3). There were no significant changes in neither the glucose peak level nor the glucose area under the curve (AUC) for any of the used aleurone doses (Figures 1B,C).

For insulin, all three postprandial curve parameters were significantly changed (Table 4). There was a significant delay in the time to peak of insulin (p = 0.025) and a significant decrease in insulin peak level (p = 0.049) with increasing aleurone doses, with 200 g being the lowest significant dose (Figures 2A,B). The insulin AUC was also significantly reduced (p = 0.019) after supplementing horses with aleurone (Figure 2C).

Aleurone did not have any significant effects on alpha diversity or beta diversity in this study. Pairwise Kruskal–Wallis analysis using Faith's Phylogenetic diversity, Shannon's diversity, and Observed OTUs was performed but no statistical differences were detected for any alpha diversity metric. Beta diversity was assessed by using weighted and unweighted UniFrac distance as well as Bray–Curtis distance. No significant differences were found.

A principal coordinates analysis (PCoA) plot based on the weighted UniFrac metric (Figure 3) shows that there is large inter-individual variability of the microbiome in the studied group of horses.

When comparing “blanco horses” with the horses after 1 week of supplementation with 50 g/day aleurone, the ANCOM analysis reveals that one unclassified species from the genus Anaerostipes decreased significantly by a factor 2.94 (W = 73 ≥ W0.7; FC 0.34) after aleurone supplementation. At the genus level, this change in abundance was also significantly decreased 2.98 times (W = 68 ≥ W0.7; FC 0.34). After a week of feeding aleurone at 100 g/day, the abundance of Clostridium lavalense significantly increased 2.38 times when compared to the blanco week (W = 88 ≥ W0.7; FC 2.38). When aleurone was supplemented at a dose of 200 g/day for 1 week, this significantly decreased the relative abundance of Shuttleworthia and Anaerostipes at both the species (W = 87 ≥ W0.7; FC 0.28 and W = 85 ≥ W0.7; FC 0.28) and genus level (W = 81 ≥ W0.7; FC 0.28 and W = 78 ≥ W0.7; FC 0.28), and increased the abundance of C. lavalense (W = 83 ≥ W0.7; FC 2.38).

To further study the effect of the maximal dose of aleurone, the relative abundance of taxa in feces of the week before the feeding of 400 g/day was compared with their relative abundance after 1 week of 400 g/day supplementation. Feeding with 400 g/day of aleurone significantly decreased the relative abundance of an unclassified species out of the Roseburia family (W = 87 ≥ W0.7; FC 0.16) and an unclassified Succinovibrionaceae species (W = 72 ≥ W0.7; FC 0.18) was significantly decreased as well. At the genus level, Succinovibrionaceae (W = 66 ≥ W0.7; FC 0.18) and Shuttleworthia (W = 61 ≥ W0.7; FC 0.31) were significantly decreased. At the phyla level, Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, Spirochaetes, and Verrumicrobia showed the highest changes in average relative abundance after feeding 400 g/day of aleurone (Figure 4, Table 5). Firmicutes and Verrucomicrobia decreased and Bacteroidetes and Spirochaetes increased in the relative abundance.

A significant increased abundance of an unclassified bacteria was found when comparing the 200 g/day dose with the non-supplemented post-trial week. However, the particular bacteria were unclassifiable up to the phylum level, but the effect was measurable from the species (W = 96 ≥ W0.7; FC 2.92) to the phylum level (W = 15 ≥ W0.7; FC 5.02). Other aleurone doses did not cause long term changes in abundance.

When relative abundance of ‘blanco horses’ was compared to the “posttrial” abundance, one significantly decreased species and accompanying genus were identified: an unclassified species (W = 54 ≥ W0.7; FC 0.11) from the genus Faecalibacterium (W = 50 ≥ W0.7; FC 0.11).

Based on the functionality predictions using PICRUSt and ANCOM2, several significantly different metabolic pathways were detected from a pairwise comparison between the samples from blanco horses compared to the horses supplemented with different doses of aleurone. Aleurone supplementation of 50 g/day significantly decreased the lactose and galactose degradation I pathway 49.6 times (W = 278 ≥ W0.7; FC 0.02). Supplementation of 100 g/day aleurone significantly changed 15 predicted pathways and supplementation of 200 g/day aleurone significantly changed 7 predicted pathways (see Table 6). When 400 g/day aleurone was supplemented, the TCA cycle IV (2-oxoglutarate decarboxylase) was significantly increased (W = 246 ≥ W0.7; FC 12).

Based on the functionality predictions using PICRUSt and ANCOM, two significantly different metabolic pathways were detected with a pairwise comparison between the samples collected in the week before feeding 400 g/day aleurone and at the end of 1 week of feeding 400 g/day, namely: a decrease of superpathway of glycerol degradation to 1,3-propanediol (W = 249 ≥ W0.7; FC 0.005) and a decrease of the L-glutamate degradation VIII (to propanoate) pathway (W = 222 ≥ W0.7; FC 0.114).

Based on the functionality predictions using PICRUSt and ANCOM, four significantly decreased metabolic pathways were detected with a pairwise comparison between the samples collected in the “pretrial” week and the “posttrial” week. The pathway of photorespiration was significantly decreased (W = 302 ≥ W0.7; FC 0.077) in the “posttrial” week. The lactose and galactose degradation I pathway was significantly decreased as well (W = 292 ≥ W0.7; FC 0.006), and both the methanogenesis from acetate pathway (W = 227; FC 0.042) and the L-glutamate degradation VIII (to propanoate) pathway (W = 226 ≥ W0.7; FC 0.054) were decreased as well.

This is the first study focusing on the effects of aleurone supplementation in horses. A Latin square model was applied in seven horses to study the effect of different doses of aleurone on the postprandial glucose and insulin metabolism as well as the gut microbiome. Our results suggest a multimodal effect of aleurone, which is most likely to be caused by: (1) the effect of aleurone on feed texture and subsequent digestive processing; (2) the synergistic effect of the individual aleurone components on the glucose-insulin metabolism; and (3) the effect of aleurone and its components on the gut microbiome composition and metabolic output of the microbiome.

In conclusion, the results of this study show that aleurone blunts the postprandial glucose and insulin response and induces significant shifts in the gut microbiome. Our results suggest a multimodal effect of aleurone, which is most likely caused by the effect of aleurone on the feed texture and subsequent digestive processing, a synergistic effect of the individual aleurone components on the glucose-insulin metabolism, and the effect of aleurone and its components on the gut microbiome composition and metabolic output of the microbiome. More research is needed to further unravel the background of these findings.

The datasets presented in this study can be found in online repositories. The name of the repository and accession number can be found at: https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena. The study ID is PRJEB42805 (ERP126716).

The animal study was reviewed and approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of the Ghent University EC 2014.14. Written informed consent was obtained from the owners for the participation of their animals in this study.

BB and CD contributed to the conception, design, data acquisition, data analysis and interpretation, and drafting of the manuscript. CMo contributed to data analysis, data interpretation, and drafting of the manuscript. JO contributed to the conception, data analysis and interpretation, and reviewing of the manuscript. YG, DD, FV, and GH contributed to data analysis and reviewing of the manuscript. LD and CMe contributed to data interpretation and reviewing of the manuscript. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.

JO and GH are employed by Cargill R&D Centre Europe. Cargill has exclusivity over distribution of aleurone for feed market in Europe produced according to patents held by Buhler Company. The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

Funding. This study was partially funded by the Agentschap Innoveren en Ondernemen from the Flemish Government. Grant number: IWT.155039.

The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fvets.2021.642809/full#supplementary-material

