From taxonomy to metabolic output: what factors define gut microbiome health?

Many studies link the composition of the human gut microbiome to aberrant health states. However, our understanding of what constitutes a ‘healthy’ gut ecosystem, and how to effectively monitor and maintain it, are only now emerging. Here, we review current approaches to defining and monitoring gut microbiome health, and outline directions for developing targeted ecological therapeutics. We emphasize the importance of identifying which ecological features of the gut microbiome are most resonant with host molecular phenotypes, and highlight certain gut microbial metabolites as potential biomarkers of gut microbiome health. We further discuss how multi-omic measurements of host phenotypes, dietary information, and gut microbiome profiles can be integrated into increasingly sophisticated host-microbiome mechanistic models that can be leveraged to design personalized interventions. Overall, we summarize current progress on defining microbiome health and highlight a number of paths forward for engineering the ecology of the gut to promote wellness.

The human gut is inhabited by a diverse set of bacteria, archaea, viruses, protists and fungi, which are collectively referred to as the human gut microbiome. The large number of genes that comprise the gut metagenome surpasses that of the human genome by at least three orders of magnitude.1 Consequently, the gut microbiome contains a diverse array of biological and metabolic functions, many of which modulate host phenotypes and fitness.2 Most of the microbial biomass in the gut is bacterial, which is the primary focus of this review. Over the last decade, gut bacterial composition has been linked to a number of human diseases, extending the impact of the gut microbiome on host health beyond just gastrointestinal disorders. Gut bacteria and their metabolic products have been shown to modulate host immunity,3 regulate metabolic homeostasis,4 and influence neurocognitive function.5 Despite an emergent understanding of gut microbial influence in a number of host disease pathologies, we are only now beginning to unravel what constitutes a healthy microbiome-host relationship. Importantly, identifying a healthy gut microbiome, and how to effectively monitor it, are essential steps toward designing microbiome-based interventions for treating disease and promoting human wellness.

Recent advancements in microbiome research have enabled the identification of more translatable markers of gut microbiome function, and provide paths toward rationally engineering the functional output of the gut ecosystem to promote human health. In the following sections, we provide an overview of current approaches to defining microbiome health, focusing primarily on adults. We further characterize potential biomarkers that can be used to monitor the gut ecosystem, and discuss future directions for how the gut microbiome can be manipulated to promote human wellness. In particular, while monitoring gut microbial taxonomic and metagenomic profiles can serve as a useful marker for certain microbiome perturbations, we highlight alternative methods for quantifying microbiome health through a host lens, particularly by focusing on small molecular weight microbial products, which have the potential to result in more reproducible signals that translate readily across vastly diverse cohorts and disease states.19 Finally, we discuss how the use of sophisticated mechanistic models that integrate gut metagenomics with host physiological and lifestyle data may provide key insights into how we might engineer individual microbiomes to promote human health.

While a strict definition of a healthy gut microbiome remains elusive, several key features have been proposed. These include ecological principles of system stability that are important to a healthy gut ecosystem. For example, ecological resilience refers to the ability of an ecosystem to return to its original state following a perturbation, while ecological resistance refers to the ability of an ecosystem to resist a perturbation in the first place.20–22 Thus, a healthy gut microbiome could be defined as one that can defend itself against e.g. invasion by opportunistic pathogens (resistance), and one that can readily recover to its original state after e.g. routine antibiotic treatment (resilience). Because there are many combinations of gut commensal taxa that result in a healthy, stable ecosystem, longitudinal monitoring of individuals is likely important for tracking deleterious changes in resistance and resilience. However, host phenotypic context is also essential when defining healthy stability. For example, recurrent Clostridioides difficile (rCDI) infections can be highly resilient to antibiotic treatment, but this resilience works counter to host health.23 Similarly, gut microbiome composition is highly dynamic in the first three years of human life.24 This high level of instability is likely a combination of changing dietary inputs (i.e. termination of breast feeding, transition into solid foods, etc.) and immune system maturation,25 and thus cannot be interpreted within the same health context as changes in an adult microbiome.

Thus, a healthy gut microbial composition can be thought of as one that successfully maintains long-term stability, resists invasive pathogens, supplies key nutrients (including vitamins and fermentation byproducts) to its host, and helps maintain host metabolic and immunological homeostasis. A disruption to any of these functions is consequently indicative of an unhealthy gut microbial state. In the following sections, we describe specific approaches to monitoring these key aspects of gut microbiome function.

Early efforts toward characterizing the human gut microbiome hypothesized there may be a set of ‘core’ taxa that are ubiquitously present across healthy adult individuals.28,29 With a ‘core’ phylogenetic profile as a reference point, any deviation from this composition could be considered an unhealthy perturbation. However, given the vast diversity in gut microbiome composition reported between healthy individuals over the last decade, there is little evidence for such a strict taxonomic core.8,16 Indeed, there appear to be myriad taxonomic compositions that support a healthy, functional microbiome-host relationship across diverse populations.

The third type of ‘dysbiosis’ -a complete ecosystem turnover – is often the result of a severe environmental perturbation. These perturbations include antibiotics treatment or enteric infections. In these cases, there is often both a rise in the relative abundance of facultative anaerobes and a decrease in the relative abundance of strictly anaerobic, fiber-degrading commensals.21 Such large-scale turnover in the gut ecosystem is often associated with severe gastrointestinal symptoms, like abdominal pain and diarrhea, which can be assessed without the need for microbiome sequencing.

Abstract metrics that summarize multivariate gut microbiome profiles into a single value can overcome some of the obstacles intrinsic to defining microbiome health based on abundances of individual taxa, and provide further insight into the overall structure and stability of the gut ecosystem.

The application of ß-diversity analyses to monitoring gut microbiome health shows the greatest promise when applied longitudinally. When measured across time, each individual serves as their own control (comparing their recent sample to previous samples), which allows researchers to account for high interindividual variability in gut microbiome composition, while also capturing the rate of drift from an initial starting point. Previous studies of healthy adults have shown a relatively high level of temporal stability in gut microbiome composition, with individuals harboring the same taxa for years or even decades.77–79 Perhaps unsurprisingly, temporal stability and gut microbial α-diversity tend to be related.80 Shannon diversity was positively associated with gut microbiome stability (assessed using Weighted UniFrac) in healthy adults when the microbiome was sampled weekly across the course of three months.81 Similarly, very low gut microbial α-diversity in a cohort of older individuals corresponded to higher levels of ß-diversity instability when measured up to six months apart.82 Furthermore, like with low α-diversity, a high level of ß-diversity instability can be indicative of disease states. For example, both fatty liver disease and type II diabetes were associated with higher gut ß-diversity instability (Bray-Curtis dissimilarity) in a cohort of German adults when sampled across a span of five years.80 Using 16S rRNA gene sequencing, Halfvarson et al.83 demonstrated that patients suffering from IBD (UC and CD) had higher levels of temporal instability compared to healthy controls. Interestingly, some IBD patients in that study appeared to transition readily between health and disease-associated states. Thus, if sampled at a single time point, gut microbial perturbations in an IBD patient could go unnoticed. The major advantage of longitudinal ß-diversity analysis in defining and monitoring microbiome health is that it measures holistic dynamics of the ecological system without focusing on specific taxa. Hence, thresholds for within-host gut microbial ß-diversity stability may provide a more consistent measure of ecosystem health across a wider variety of human populations. However, host phenotypic context is required when interpreting stability, as some gut microbiome drifts in response to changing dietary habits and host physiology may be favorable, indicative of an adaptation of the gut microbiome to its changing environment. For example, a recent study from our research group has demonstrated that gut microbiomes become increasingly divergent, or unique, to each individual with age. This adaptation of the gut ecosystem with aging may be favorable, as it was associated with increased survival in the latest decades of human life.84

While there is considerable inter-individual heterogeneity in gut microbiome composition, the collective functional capacity of the gut microbiome, inferred from its metagenomic content, tends to show greater similarity across individuals85 (Figure 1). By some estimates, individuals share twice the number of metabolic pathways (82%) than they do species (43%) in the gut, as measured by metagenomic shotgun sequencing.86 Understanding this common functional capacity, and defining a minimal set of essential metabolic and signaling functions, could prove to be a more robust approach to defining microbiome health.

Despite its promise, there are several challenges to relying on functional capacity for defining gut health. Even with a greater proportion of gut microbiome function being shared between individuals, there is still considerable variability in gut metagenomic capacity between individuals and across cohorts.88,91 These differences are likely a result of selective pressures from variable dietary and environmental factors across populations,92 and highlight a degree of personalization of the microbiome to its individual host. Furthermore, metagenomic capacity is not equivalent to ecosystem function, as the presence of a gene does not necessarily mean it is actively being transcribed and translated into a functional protein. Some of these limitations will be overcome by gut microbiome transcriptomic and proteomic profiling approaches, with growing data from large and diverse cohorts utilizing these types of platforms. However, even when proteins are quantified directly, the stoichiometric and thermodynamic context of the ecosystem defines the permissibility of certain chemical reactions. Thus, the integration of host physiological, dietary, and lifestyle data will be necessary to gain more detailed insight into in situ gut microbial functional dynamics.

An alternative to focusing on the gut microbiome’s genetic capacity when monitoring microbiome health is focusing on the gut microbiome’s ultimate functional output: the diverse pool of metabolites and signaling molecules synthesized by the gut microbiota that directly influence host physiological processes26 (Figure 1). Bioactive, microbially-derived compounds enter host circulation, are often metabolized by the liver into human-microbial co-metabolites, and exert direct effects on a variety of host organs.93 To date, these effects have been shown to be both beneficial and detrimental to human health.

Fecal metabolites may provide additional insight into gut microbiome health, with recent evidence indicating a high level of correspondence between gut microbiome function and fecal metabolite profiles.86,139 Some studies have also shown diagnostic value in measuring fecal metabolites for several diseases including IBD89 and early colorectal cancer detection,140 which correlated with changes in gut microbial composition across the same disease states. While there is considerable overlap between blood and fecal metabolites,139 many of the compounds measured in feces are not absorbed by the host and do not enter circulation. For example, the poorly absorbed fecal microbial metabolite coprostanol was recently shown to reflect the gut microbiota’s capacity for cholesterol metabolism. Higher fecal coprostanol concentrations reflected greater microbial metabolism of cholesterol by microbial cholesterol dehydrogenases, thereby lowering cholesterol availability to the host and improving blood lipid profiles.96 Hence, combined metabolomics approaches analyzing both feces and blood may yield more specific and detailed insight into exactly how the gut microbiome contributes to modulating host phenotypes.

While metabolomics provides a window into the functional output of the gut microbiome, it is limited in its measurement of important metabolites that are rapidly transformed or excreted from the system. Locally produced and consumed metabolites that impact host physiology cannot be captured by measuring standing concentrations of blood and fecal metabolites alone (e.g. SCFAs are rapidly consumed/transformed by both host and microbial cells within the gut). To this end, other analytical methods may be particularly useful. Genome-scale metabolic modeling is an established method successfully implemented to address biological, microbiological, and bioengineering questions.141,142 It relies on detailed stoichiometric reconstructions of metabolic networks and calculates the flux of metabolites through those networks given a set of environmental constraints, providing insight into metabolic production, consumption and overall growth.143

Metagenome-scale metabolic models are of particular interest to many researchers as they allow for true “n-of-1” studies, where dietary inputs or the microbial composition of a single sample can be altered in silico and the effect on the production of metabolites of interest can be tracked and potentially optimized. Together with the incorporation of personalized dietary estimates, this approach can be used to rationally design personalized interventions that leverage the gut microbiota to achieve a specific functional output aimed at improving host health (e.g. higher butyrate production). However, these approaches still require extensive empirical validation in order to understand which metabolic objectives are predicted accurately by metabolic modeling and which are not.

While the various health markers discussed in this review provide a set of measurable targets for potentially optimizing gut microbiome function, finding paths toward rationally engineering the gut microbiome to modify these markers is a far more challenging task. Each person’s gut microbial composition, genotype, physiology, environmental exposures, and dietary habits can dictate the efficacy of any given microbiome-based intervention. Thus, building sophisticated mechanistic models that help integrate this complexity and provide actionable possibilities will play a critical role in harnessing the power of the gut microbiome to influence human health.

However, predictions generated by metagenome-scale metabolic models are only as good as the model itself. Thus, large-scale quantitative validation experiments are necessary for testing these models, where in vivo microbial growth rates and metabolite fluxes are measured to identify which metabolic processes are captured well by the model and which ones are not. Ex vivo growth experiments, where fecal samples are incubated under anaerobic conditions with a wide array of dietary metabolites, represent a promising high-throughput approach to observing gut microbial community metabolic output in the absence of the host161,162 . Similarly, humanized gnotobiotic mice may prove to be a key tool in improving metagenome-scale metabolic models, by providing a well-controlled in vivo experimental model to optimize metabolic predictions.163 Ultimately, these predictions will need to be tested in human intervention trials, as the final stage of clinical translation.

Rapid progress in human gut microbiome research over the last decade has greatly expanded our understanding of what constitutes a healthy gut ecosystem. With a growing focus on the functional potential of the gut microbiome, and the measurement of microbial metabolic products, establishing quantifiable and translatable metrics for monitoring the gut ecosystem seems within reach. However, deepening our collective understanding of gut microbiome health is only the first step toward treating microbiome-related illnesses. Effective engineering of the gut ecosystem toward a desirable healthy state is the ultimate goal for researchers and clinicians alike, and continues to be a major challenge in the field. Integrative methods that can accurately model complex gut microbiome-diet-host interactions may help expand our understanding of the human gut microbiome, and open new possibilities for designing personalized therapeutic interventions.

