A comparative study of the gut microbiota in immune-mediated inflammatory diseases—does a common dysbiosis exist?



Immune-mediated inflammatory disease (IMID) represents a substantial health concern. It is widely recognized that IMID patients are at a higher risk for developing secondary inflammation-related conditions. While an ambiguous etiology is common to all IMIDs, in recent years, considerable knowledge has emerged regarding the plausible role of the gut microbiome in IMIDs. This study used 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing to compare the gut microbiota of patients with Crohn’s disease (CD; N = 20), ulcerative colitis (UC; N = 19), multiple sclerosis (MS; N = 19), and rheumatoid arthritis (RA; N = 21) versus healthy controls (HC; N = 23). Biological replicates were collected from participants within a 2-month interval. This study aimed to identify common (or unique) taxonomic biomarkers of IMIDs using both differential abundance testing and a machine learning approach.

Significant microbial community differences between cohorts were observed (pseudo F = 4.56; p = 0.01). Richness and diversity were significantly different between cohorts (pFDR < 0.001) and were lowest in CD while highest in HC. Abundances of Actinomyces, Eggerthella, Clostridium III, Faecalicoccus, and Streptococcus (pFDR < 0.001) were significantly higher in all disease cohorts relative to HC, whereas significantly lower abundances were observed for Gemmiger, Lachnospira, and Sporobacter (pFDR < 0.001). Several taxa were found to be differentially abundant in IMIDs versus HC including significantly higher abundances of Intestinibacter in CD, Bifidobacterium in UC, and unclassified Erysipelotrichaceae in MS and significantly lower abundances of Coprococcus in CD, Dialister in MS, and Roseburia in RA. A machine learning approach to classify disease versus HC was highest for CD (AUC = 0.93 and AUC = 0.95 for OTU and genus features, respectively) followed by MS, RA, and UC. Gemmiger and Faecalicoccus were identified as important features for classification of subjects to CD and HC. In general, features identified by differential abundance testing were consistent with machine learning feature importance.

This study identified several gut microbial taxa with differential abundance patterns common to IMIDs. We also found differentially abundant taxa between IMIDs. These taxa may serve as biomarkers for the detection and diagnosis of IMIDs and suggest there may be a common component to IMID etiology.

The online version of this article (10.1186/s40168-018-0603-4) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

Immune-mediated inflammatory diseases (IMIDs) are clinically heterogeneous diseases that share common pathogenic mechanisms and suspected etiologies. More than one hundred different diseases are described as immune-mediated and inflammatory; notable examples include inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), multiple sclerosis (MS), rheumatoid arthritis (RA), psoriasis, ankylosing spondylitis, and systemic lupus erythematosus. Globally, IMIDs affect 2 – 5% of the population; in Western populations, the prevalence of IMIDs ranges from approximately 5 – 8% [1]. The global incidence of many IMIDs is on the rise [2], though the reason for this increase is unclear.

We performed a pilot study to investigate the association of the gut microbiota with IMIDs including Crohn’s disease (CD), ulcerative colitis (UC), MS, and RA. To characterize the gut microbiota, we used 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene amplicon sequencing to assess the abundance of taxonomic groups in IMID and healthy controls (HC). Differential abundance testing and a supervised machine learning approach using a random forest algorithm were conducted and results compared to identify taxonomic biomarkers common among or specific to IMIDs.

The study cohort is described in Table 1. For our disease cohorts, we chose patients with CD, UC, MS, and RA, since these diseases are all T cell-mediated yet preferentially target distinct organs. Moreover, previous studies have reported significantly increased odds of developing MS or RA in the presence of IBD [10] suggestive of a common etiological component. Research and ethics approval was obtained from the University of Manitoba’s Research Ethics Board. Patients with an IMID were recruited between 2010 and 2012 from the IBD Clinical and Research Centre and the Rheumatology ambulatory care clinic, both located at the Health Sciences Centre, Winnipeg, Canada. IMID patients were included if they met the standard criteria for case definition, i.e., Montreal Classification for IBD [17], 2010 McDonald criteria for MS [18], and 2010 American College of Rheumatology classification criteria for RA [19]; were over 18 years of age; and had not taken antibiotics in the previous 8 weeks. HC were recruited at the University of Manitoba Health Sciences Centre. For our HC cohort, we enrolled adults who had not taken antibiotics in the previous 8 weeks and had no medical history of gastrointestinal, neurological, or joint disease. Each participant self-collected two stool specimens approximately 2 months apart. The stool samples were kept refrigerated at 4 °C until transport. The stool was transported to the laboratory on ice and stored at − 80 °C until processing.

Stool specimens were thawed at 4 °C and were diluted 1:3 with milliQ water to create a stool slurry. DNA was isolated using the ZR-96 Fecal DNA Kit (Zymo Research, Irvine, CA) following a validated protocol [20]. The Illumina MiSeq sequencing library preparation protocol for 16S rRNA gene amplicons was followed with modifications [20]. Briefly, the 16S rRNA V4 region was amplified using primers 515fXT (GTGBCAGCMGCCGCGGTAA) and 806rXT (GGACTACHVGGGTWTCTAAT). Quality control, quantification, normalization, pooling, and sequencing of the library was performed as previously described [20]. Approximately 11 pM of the pooled, multiplexed samples were mixed with 37.5% PhiX spike-in control DNA and sequenced on an Illumina MiSeq instrument to generate 2 × 300 bp reads. Four MiSeq runs were performed with 56 multiplexed samples per run. In total, 224 samples were sequenced including technical replicates, mock communities of known composition (HM-782D; BEI Resources, Manassas, VA) and no-template controls.

The mothur software suite (v. 1.39.5) was used to analyze 16S rRNA gene amplicon data. The specific analytical method is available as a Jupyter notebook (https://github.com/phac-nml/imid_microbiome). Paired-end reads were assembled into contigs using Needleman-Wunsch pairwise alignments. Only contigs containing both the forward and reverse V4 amplicon primer sequences with two or less nucleotide differences were retained. Primer sequences were trimmed from the resulting contigs. Contigs were discarded if they exceeded 275 bp in length, contained homopolymers exceeding 8 nucleotides in length, or contained ambiguous bases. A custom reference alignment specific to the 16S rRNA V4 region was created by trimming the curated 16S rDNA SILVA reference alignment (v. 128) to the region of interest [21]. Contigs were aligned to the aforementioned reference database. Briefly, the kmer search method (k = 8) was applied to identify the best (de-gapped) reference database sequence match followed by a pairwise alignment using the Needleman-Wunsch pairwise alignment method. Gaps not inserted in the pairwise alignment step were re-inserted into the query sequence using the NAST algorithm to mirror the aligned (gapped) reference database. Contigs aligning outside of the 16S rRNA amplified V4 region were removed. Aligned contigs that differed by a maximum of 2 bp were merged together to reduce the number of erroneous operational taxonomic units (OTUs) generated due to sequencing errors. In addition, chimeric artifacts (identified by UCHIME) [22] were also removed.

Taxonomic classification of sequences was performed using the naïve Bayesian classification method [23] and training set (v. 16) from RDP [24]. A minimum threshold bootstrap value of 60% was applied. Sequences identified as likely contaminants such as chloroplast and mitochondria or unwanted lineages such as archaea, eukaryota, or unknown (at the domain level) were removed. Sequences were clustered into OTUs based on a sequence similarity (≥ 97%) using the average neighbor algorithm and consensus taxonomy for each OTU was determined.

Gram-negative microorganisms (i.e., Bacteroidetes, Proteobacteria, and Verrucomicrobia) were detected in a lower than expected abundance (discussed below). Accordingly, for differential abundance testing and machine learning classifications, the use of Gram-positive-only data was compared to the full (i.e., Gram-positive and Gram-negative) dataset.

Following quality control and filtering, a total of 7943 OTUs, corresponding to 426 genera, was obtained. For analyses based on all phyla, the OTU count table was filtered to keep only taxa with non-zero OTU counts in at least 40 samples (the minimum number of samples for each cohort). This resulted in 426 OTUs corresponding to 118 genera. For analyses based on Gram-positive phyla, only OTUs within the phyla Firmicutes, Actinobacteria, and Tenericutes were used, and the same filtering criteria resulted in 383 OTUs and 90 genera. The OTU counts were then normalized at the 75th percentile using the cumulative-sum scaling approach from the R “metagenomeSeq” [25] package. We refer to the normalized OTU counts as “abundance.” Genus-level taxonomic classifications of OTUs were extracted and abundances summarized. Genus abundance was calculated as the sum of OTU abundances belonging to the same genus. Downstream analyses included the analysis of both genus and OTU abundances. This approach was chosen to avoid the compositional nature of “relative abundance” (sum to one per sample) and the potential bias that can be created by highly abundant taxa [26]. A Kruskal-Wallis test and post hoc Dunn’s test with false discovery rate (FDR) correction for multiple comparisons were performed to compare median similarities of genus data among cohorts. Adjusted p values were considered significant at p < 0.05. Genus abundances were also analyzed using LEfSe [27] with an LDA score > 3 and a one-against-all multi-class analysis.

Random forest machine learning classification was conducted using the “randomForest” R package [28] with 500 trees and the number of randomly sampled variables as the square root of the variable counts. Classifiers were built based on samples from the first time point and excluded technical replicates to avoid inflation of performance evaluation. We evaluated both OTU and genus OTU abundances as training data features to assess the performance at different levels of taxonomic specificity. In addition, we also evaluated all detected phyla versus Gram-positive phyla only to assess the relative ability of Gram-positive phyla data to classify the cohorts. When classifying diseased samples versus HC, a stratified sampling approach was used with the minimum number of samples of the classes (23 from HC). This technique, known as under-sampling [29], is employed when building decision trees with unbalanced sample counts. As each tree in the classifier is fit from a bootstrap sample set from the training data, samples that were not used to fit the corresponding tree were used to calculate the out-of-bag (OOB) error to assess model performance. For each pairwise comparison, the average OOB performance from ten models with different seeds was reported as balanced accuracy (BA) and area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC). Feature importance averaged from the ten runs was reported as a measure of the mean decrease in Gini index (the impurity function) and visualized using the “ComplexHeatmap” R package [30]. All OTU post-processing (filtering and normalization) and machine learning analyses were conducted using R (v. 3.3.2, 3.3.3; R Development Core Team) and Bioconductor 3.4 [31].

Alpha diversity estimates including richness (ACE, Chao1) and diversity (Shannon, Simpson) were calculated using raw count data in mothur and visualized in phyloseq [32]. Alpha diversity measures were compared between disease cohorts using non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis tests and post hoc Dunn’s test with FDR correction for multiple comparisons. Microbiota community structures were visualized using principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) and tested using permutational analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) [33] implemented using the adonis function from the R “vegan” [34] package with the Bray-Curtis method [35] to calculate pairwise distances and 999 permutations.

The average base-calling error rate assessed by the co-sequenced mock communities was 0.01%, equivalent to six errors per 2 × 300 bp paired-end reads. A total of 31,315,771 raw sequences were assembled. Filtering out low quality, chimeric, and non-bacterial sequences generated 26,494,139 high-quality contigs. Sequences were clustered into 7943 OTUs based on their shared sequence similarity at a 97% threshold. The average number of sequences per sample was 120,621 ± 37,472 (range 20,165–296,780). Following the removal of Gram-negative phyla and normalization, the average number of sequences per sample was 86,865 ± 61,806 (range 14,671–438,203).

The microbiota community structure of our cohorts was examined by principal coordinates analysis (PCoA; Fig. 1). The CD cohort had the most variability, whereas the HC cohort showed the least variability. Varying degrees of overlap (or separation) were observed for the cohort clusters. PERMANOVA analysis (Additional file 1: Table S1) showed significant microbial community differences for disease (pseudo F = 4.562, R2 = 0.0876, p = 0.001) and sex (pseudo F = 2.9913, R2 = 0.01915, p = 0.004), whereas age and sequencing run did not significantly affect the community structure. Biological replicates (from the same individual sampled at different time points) were highly similar (Additional file 1: Figure S1) suggesting that the gut microbiota is stably maintained within individuals. In addition, we calculated the Bray-Curtis dissimilarities of technical and biological replicates, from the same cohort or from different cohorts (Additional file 1: Figure S1). The dissimilarities between sample pairs of different relations are, in increasing order, technical replicates (median = 0.14; IQR = 0.08), biological replicates (median = 0.22; IQR = 0.08), intra-cohort samples (median = 0.45; IQR = 0.10), and inter-cohort samples (median = 0.47; IQR = 0.11). Overall, the dissimilarities were small; however, dissimilarities in specimens from different cohorts were significantly higher compared to those from the same cohort (Wilcoxon p < 0.001).

Significant differences in community richness were observed across all cohorts, as estimated by Chao1 (pFDR < 0.001) and ACE (pFDR < 0.001) (Fig. 2). Richness was lowest in CD according to both estimators and was significantly different from all other cohorts with the exception of UC (via ACE). Conversely, HC had the highest richness though differences were only statistically significant compared to CD (Chao1/ACE pFDR < 0.001) and UC (Chao1 pFDR = 0.006; ACE pFDR = 0.01). Significant differences in diversity (Shannon, Simpson) were similarly significant across both disease cohorts and HC (pFDR < 0.001). Consistent with trends observed for richness, diversity was lowest in CD and highest in HC. Most cohorts demonstrated significantly different diversity with the exception of MS–UC (Shannon) and CD–RA (Simpson).

Numerous taxonomic differences were observed between each disease cohort versus HC (Fig. 3 and Table 2). At the phylum level, the Firmicutes were significantly highest in CD and lowest in HC (overall pFDR < 0.001). Actinomyces, Eggerthella, Clostridium III, Faecalicoccus, and Streptococcus were significantly higher in all disease cohorts relative to HC, whereas the opposite was observed with Gemmiger, Lachnospira, and Sporobacter. Numerous other taxa also differed significantly in only one IMID compared to HC. In particular, taxa higher in disease include Blautia and Intestinibacter in CD, Bifidobacterium in UC, and unclassified Clostridiales incertae sedis XIII and Erysipelotrichaceae in MS. Asaccharobacter, Clostridium IV, Coprococcus, Ruminococcus (Lachnospiraceae), and Oscillibacter were lower in CD, Dialister was lower in MS, and Roseburia was lower in RA. Significant differences in taxon abundances were also observed in two (e.g., Rothia; CD and RA) or three (e.g., Gemella; CD, UC, and RA) diseases relative to HC. Interestingly, certain specific taxa were significantly higher in some diseases and lower in others relative to HC. For example, Anaerofustis was higher in UC and MS and lower in RA.

Many taxonomic differences were also apparent between disease cohorts (Additional file 1: Table S2). Analogous to trends observed via PCoA, many taxa were significantly higher or lower in CD relative to other diseases. Fewer taxonomic differences were observed between MS and UC or RA, and even less between UC and RA. The abundance of Faecalibacterium spp. for example was statistically different among most disease comparisons with the exception of MS versus RA. The abundance of other genera such as Collinsella, Lactobacillus, and Subdoligranulum were highly similar across diseases. Taxonomic biomarkers of each cohort were identified by LEfSe analysis (Additional file 1: Figure S2). While several taxonomic biomarkers were identified, those with the largest effect size include Blautia (CD), Bifidobacterium (UC), Ruminococcus (Ruminococcaceae and Lachnospiraceae; MS), Streptococcus (RA), and (HC).

To evaluate the ability of the microbiota to classify subjects to their cohort, we trained classifiers for each pair of cohorts using a supervised random forest machine learning approach. Due to reduced Gram-negative phyla in the study population, we focused on presenting data from Gram-positive phyla in the main text. For the feature classifiers, we chose to evaluate both OTUs and genera since multiple OTUs may be assigned to the same genus but have different classification abilities. Model assessments were reported as BA and AUC values (Table 3). The OTU and genus classifiers performed comparably, with 7 and 4 classifiers performing better with genus and OTU features, respectively. To further evaluate the capacity of Gram-positive phyla to classify the cohorts, we repeated the same analyses using data with all detected phyla. The overall classifier performance of the Gram-positive dataset was highly similar to that of classifiers that included both Gram-positive and Gram-negative data (Additional file 1: Table S3). Given the lower dissimilarity between the two-month same-subject biological replicates, we also evaluated the performance of predicting the cohort of samples from the second time point as a baseline. The performance was high with AUCs ranging between 0.93 and 0.99 (Additional file 1: Table S4). Similar results in classification were reported using data from all phyla (Additional file 1: Table S3).

The classification performance for each disease cohort versus HC in decreasing order was CD, MS, RA, and UC. The classifiers for CD versus HC had the best performance with an AUC = 0.93 and 0.95 for OTU and genus features, respectively. For UC versus HC, our classifiers reported an AUC = 0.87 and 0.90 for OTU and genus, respectively. Multi-class classification of all cohorts did not result in a satisfactory performance (BA = 0.69 and 0.67 for OTU and genus, respectively). In contrast, classification of each disease cohort versus HC had good and comparable performances with balanced sampling (AUC = 0.90 and 0.93 for OTU and genus classifiers, respectively).

We also evaluated feature importance of all pairwise classifiers for Gram-negative phyla and all phyla (Additional file 1: Figures S3 and S4, respectively). The OTU and genus-level classifiers for CD versus HC are shown in Fig. 4. As previously mentioned, classifiers from different taxonomic levels (i.e., OTU, genus) can have different amounts of information content. Only one of the three Roseburia-associated OTUs (Otu0135) was a top feature for classifying CD versus HC, with higher abundance in HC. Conversely, the genus Roseburia was not found to be a top feature when using the genus-level information. The genera consistently ranking in the top three for feature importance for both classifiers included Gemmiger and Faecalicoccus, having higher abundance in HC and CD, respectively. The classifier for all disease cohorts combined versus the HC cohort identified Faecalicoccus as the most important feature. When examining feature importance across all binary classifiers, a common subset of features frequently ranked in the top five (Additional file 1: Tables S5 and S6). The important genera consistently found in both OTU-based and genus-based classifiers included Anaerofustis, Faecalicoccus, Gemmiger, Eggerthella, and Faecalibacterium whereas unclassified Lachnospiraceae and Roseburia were only of top importance based on OTU classifiers.

To our knowledge, this work represents the first characterization of the gut microbiota across several IMID that preferentially affect different body systems (i.e., the gastrointestinal tract, central nervous system, and synovium). This study aimed to determine patterns of gut microbiota dysbiosis relative to health and to other IMID. The results of this study are twofold. First, we found important differences in the stool microbial profile in IMID relative to health using differential abundance analyses and machine learning using the random forest algorithm. In doing so, we were able to identify consistent patterns of dysbiosis between multiple IMID in addition to dysbiosis characteristics, including taxonomic biomarkers that associate with a particular disease or group of diseases. Second, we showed how microbial populations vary between different IMIDs.

The interplay between the gut microbiota and the systemic immune responses will be a very important area for study in contrasting different IMIDs. Aberrant host immune responses are well recognized in IMID yet incompletely understood. The role of the microbiota in the involvement with the development of several immune cells including Th1, Th2, Th17, and Treg cells is well recognized [75]. There is much interest in linking gut microbiota changes to the host immune response in IMID. Organisms such as F. prausnitzii [76] and Clostridium spp. [77] have a role in directing Treg cells and their response. Since Treg cells are well recognized to be involved in all IMIDs, the importance of these microorganisms may be in their impact on Treg cell abnormalities. Our results showed differential abundance among IMID for these microorganisms, though more experiments are required to evaluate the potential links to differences in pathogenesis among IMID reported previously [78]. As more studies like ours emerge that describe gut microbiota changes across various IMID, further research will be necessary to determine the interactions between the taxa that are altered in IMID and their specific immune responses.

In summary, this study presents a comprehensive analysis of the stool microbiota composition in several IMIDs. We conclude that the composition of the gut microbiota is altered in CD, UC, MS, and RA, especially relating to varying degrees of gut dysbiosis that were evident. Moreover, we also show that within IMIDs, several microorganisms demonstrated significant compositional differences. For example, the gut microbial communities in UC and RA were most similar among IMIDs; whereas the gut microbiota of CD was most different from other IMIDs as well as HC. We have uncovered several microorganisms that are consistently higher (or lower) in IMID relative to HC using differential abundance testing and machine learning, suggesting that there may be common microbial taxonomic biomarkers for IMID. Further research into these microorganisms and their associated functions within the host are needed in order to establish any causality in disease pathogenesis and future therapeutic potential.



This research was conducted in the absence of funding.

The datasets supporting the conclusions of this article are available in the NCBI’s Sequence Read Archive repository, [PRJNA450340; https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/PRJNA450340]. Custom scripts for the data processing and analyses are available at https://github.com/phac-nml/imid_microbiome.

Written informed consent was obtained from patients and healthy controls prior to sample collection. The University of Manitoba’s Research Ethics Board approved this study.

Not applicable.

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

