Considerations for the design and conduct of human gut microbiota intervention studies relating to foods

With the growing appreciation for the influence of the intestinal microbiota on human health, there is increasing motivation to design and refine interventions to promote favorable shifts in the microbiota and their interactions with the host. Technological advances have improved our understanding and ability to measure this indigenous population and the impact of such interventions. However, the rapid growth and evolution of the field, as well as the diversity of methods used, parameters measured and populations studied, make it difficult to interpret the significance of the findings and translate their outcomes to the wider population. This can prevent comparisons across studies and hinder the drawing of appropriate conclusions. This review outlines considerations to facilitate the design, implementation and interpretation of human gut microbiota intervention studies relating to foods based upon our current understanding of the intestinal microbiota, its functionality and interactions with the human host. This includes parameters associated with study design, eligibility criteria, statistical considerations, characterization of products and the measurement of compliance. Methodologies and markers to assess compositional and functional changes in the microbiota, following interventions are discussed in addition to approaches to assess changes in microbiota–host interactions and host responses. Last, EU legislative aspects in relation to foods and health claims are presented. While it is appreciated that the field of gastrointestinal microbiology is rapidly evolving, such guidance will assist in the design and interpretation of human gut microbiota interventional studies relating to foods.

It is well established that the gut microbiota is a significant variable in defining host health. Aberrant microbial compositions and/or functions have also been implicated in various disease states. As such, there is an increasing drive to design and develop novel interventions to modulate this intestinal community to promote beneficial microbial–host interactions and/or attenuate adverse outcomes. Attempting to shape the microbiota to enhance host health is not a novel concept. However, advancements in science and technology have enabled the multiple components of this expansive microbial–host relationship to be studied at high resolution [1]. This has significantly advanced our understanding of its influence on host health and our ability to evaluate the impact of interventions on this pan-organismal system. Different strengths and limitations accompany the various methodological approaches and caution must be exercised when drawing conclusions from study findings and comparing across studies and interventions [2]. Another issue is the predominance of case–control studies, which by their nature generate correlations but do not provide evidence of biological relatedness. An increased focus on intervention studies using diet to mediate specific changes within the microbiota or metabolite production linked to host physiology is needed to advance the field. Given the large inter-individual variation that exists across the gut microbiota and the numerous selection pressures on these microbes, care must also be taken when selecting target populations for intervention studies and when extrapolating the relevance of research findings to the wider population [3]. This review seeks to provide guidance to facilitate the design, implementation and interpretation of human gut microbiota intervention studies relating to foods. The focus is exclusively on human studies.

General guidelines focusing on the design, conduct and reporting of human intervention studies to evaluate health benefits of foods [4] or for the scientific substantiation of health claims in relation to foods and food constituents are provided elsewhere [5]. Here, we focus on specific elements of study design for human gut microbiota studies relating to foods.

RCTs share key features such as randomization, blinding, homogenization of procedures across the study groups except for the test and control products, intention-to-treat analysis and analysis of the magnitude of difference in pre-defined endpoints [8]. Double-blind, placebo-controlled RCTs are considered as the gold standard and are preferred as the most rigorous approach [5, 8]. In general, for RCTs either parallel or crossover designs can be considered suitable for human gut microbiota studies [7, 9, 10]. Cross-over studies have an advantage of using each subject as their own control ensuring that there are no inherent differences in microbial composition and other parameters between treatment groups at baseline [9, 10]. As a result, sample sizes can be smaller. This design also enables factors contributing to responder/non-responder status to be investigated including whether it is specific to a diet or a general feature of an individual’s microbiota. This was well illustrated in a study by Salonen et al. [11] exploring microbial responses to three fully controlled test diets. Diet-induced changes were observed in the microbiota of some individuals (responders), while the microbiota remained stable in others (non-responders) following a dietary switch [11]. Although parallel design studies require larger sample sizes to overcome this issue of inter-individual variation in the gut microbiota, they benefit from shorter study durations requiring less commitment from study participants [5]. Furthermore, data analysis can be less complex for parallel-arm studies compared to those with a cross-over design.

Eligibility (inclusion/exclusion) criteria are physiological or clinical characteristics, or demographic variables used to define the study population [12]. Specific attention should be given to the following criteria known to impact on the gut microbiota.

Certain discrete age ranges should be considered for human gut intervention studies (e.g. infants, adults or elderly) as known differences in the composition of the gut microbiota are present at different ages. The infant gut microbiota is characterized by a degree of instability with diet being one of the main drivers shaping the microbiota during infancy (e.g. breast-fed vs formula-fed) [13]. Delivery mode (vaginal birth, caesarean delivery) and gestational age are also important factors determining gut microbial composition in early-life [14, 15]. Another major event that causes dramatic diversification of the infant microbiota is weaning, i.e. the introduction of a varied solid food diet. There is still no general agreement as to when the microbiota becomes fully adult-like. Some authors report that this occurs at three years of age [16] while others have shown variation in the microbiota persists between adolescents and adults [17]. It has also been shown that the microbiota of older individuals (those above the age of 65 years) is distinct from younger adults in both composition and function [18]. The impact of interventions on microbial–host interactions and their downstream effects on health may, therefore, differ between different age groups [19, 20].

Exercise level is another lifestyle factor known to impact on gut microbial composition [37] and participants planning on changing their exercise levels or intensity should be excluded. Long-distance travel and its associated jet lag have also been identified to lead to aberrant microbiota diurnal fluctuations [38, 39].

Health status and drug/medication use are important parameters to record to aid interpretation of results. Despite an accurate a priori definition of the study population based on specific eligibility criteria, significant variation of the microbiota across study participants cannot be avoided [40]. In the future, inclusion and exclusion criteria may incorporate the baseline microbiota profile to ensure that study groups are comparable and eventually for optimizing intervention efficacy. This may include, for example, measuring microbiota richness or diversity, clustering within specific enterotypes or targeting a specific bacterial group if it is expected to be involved in the mechanism of action. Multiple measurements within the same individual may be necessary to provide an accurate understanding of the individual’s microbiota, e.g., by including microbiota analysis before and after a 2-week run-in period [7]; however, this may not always be practically feasible.

While it may not be feasible to incorporate truly environmental factors into the inclusion/exclusion criteria it may be beneficial to record such information to assist the interpretation of results.

The microbiota of healthy adults is thought to be relatively stable and resistant to colonization by both pathogens and commensal microbes, as confirmed by metagenomic analyses showing that ca. 70% of the strain-level signature of the adult microbiota is constant in time [41]. In contrast, in early life, during age-driven microbiota succession there is a high turnover in species [14]. Due to the adaptation of the intestinal microbes to gut environment, social-environmental conditions, such as crowding, family composition and family size are likely to influence the gut microbiota, especially in early life. Family members share bacterial strains, implying transmission among family members has a strong influence on shaping gut microbiota [42]. For example, Sjogren et al. showed that the number of family members is positively correlated with the number of bifidobacteria species [43]. Household pets can be a particularly rich source of microorganisms, especially for children [44], where it has been reported that infants raised in households with dogs harbored more Ruminococcus and Oscillospira [45]. Hygiene practices within households and the use of anti-microbial products is also likely to influence microbial exposure and transmission. However, capturing such information in an objective manner that can inform participant inclusion/exclusion is likely to be difficult.

Calculating the number of participants required for microbiota intervention studies is challenging for several reasons. In many cases it is not possible to select beforehand, which specific bacterial taxa are expected to be modulated by the particular dietary intervention in a given population. Another issue is that it is still not possible to define a normal (eubiosis) or abnormal microbiota (dysbiosis). Hence, it is difficult to interpret an increase or decrease of specific microbiota groups as an indication of any specific health effect. Unsurprisingly, the extent of changes in microbiome composition and structure that could be considered biologically relevant is difficult to determine. The current EFSA guidance document [46] does not specify any biologically relevant effect sizes (after public consultation of the earlier 2011 version [47], the suggestion of at least 1 log decrease of detrimental organisms was dropped from the final document) [48]. Some inferences regarding relevant effect sizes could possibly be made from studies comparing microbiota in subjects with different health status. For example, it could be argued that an increase of approximately 0.5 units of Shannon diversity index may be biologically beneficial, as this is the difference observed between obese and lean individuals [49]. Consequently, it is more likely that study group size is defined based on other measured parameters, such as biochemical and clinical traits.

The outcome measure used to calculate the necessary sample size will depend on the hypothesis being tested. If measurement of bifidogenesis upon ingestion of a test fiber is sufficient to establish selective fermentation in vivo and possible prebiotic status, then sample size calculations could be performed using effect sizes and standard deviations for fecal bifidobacteria measured quantitatively using quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) or fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) for example. If, on the other hand, a trial is designed to test whether ingestion of a particular probiotic strain impacts on blood cholesterol levels, then cholesterol lowering should be selected as primary objective and data from existing similar studies should be used to design a trial with sufficient statistical power to demonstrate a cause and effect relationship between ingestion of the test probiotic and this recognized health effect.

The product evaluated in microbiota intervention studies must be well characterized. In addition to the macronutrient composition (fat, protein, carbohydrates), focus should be on components that possibly act as microbial modulators including fibers, certain micronutrients as well as non-nutritive compounds such as certain polyphenols or probiotic cultures. The following describes the specific characterization requirements of known microbial modulators such as probiotics, prebiotic fibers and polyphenols, which can be provided in purified form.

In addition to the general requirements for a suitable control (e.g., matched to the test product in terms of sensory characteristics, appearance, energy content, nutrient composition and route of administration), the placebo/control product should be selected on the basis of having a minimal effect on microbiota composition and/or activity. Maltodextrin is frequently used as control product in prebiotic interventions, but there is some evidence that maltodextrin can alter microbiota composition and increase colonic volume when used at high doses [64]. Microcrystalline cellulose could be used as a control in interventions where isolated dietary fibers are studied, as it contains minimal energy and is less fermented by gut microbes compared to alternative control fibers [65].

The validity and relevance of any intervention study depends on a high level of participant compliance, i.e., the degree with which a study subject adheres to the experimental protocol. Hence, factors affecting compliance should be considered when designing the study to maximize protocol-related compliance. Assessment of compliance with dietary interventions is necessary to understand the observed magnitude of effect of the intervention. Hence, methods for measuring and improving compliance should be implemented. Factors affecting compliance in intervention studies have been covered extensively previously [4].

Defining acceptable levels of compliance should be done a priori and a major deviation should result in the exclusion of non-compliant subjects.

To demonstrate an intervention can confer health benefits to the host via interactions with the microbiota, both microbiota- and host-specific assessments should be made. A number of parameters can be measured, and the metric studied is dependent on the type of intervention used and its intended effect. Such assessments can evaluate the microbial landscape (typically bacterial cell populations, composition/abundance or its genetic content/metabolic potential) and/or the biochemical output of the microbiome and its metabolic exchange with the host. Health benefits can occur not only through immunological and biochemical mechanisms but also through more complex interactions along gut-brain axis. Understanding microbiota composition is particularly important from an immunological perspective while characterizing microbial function is important to understand the metabolic capacity of the microbiota and the downstream impact of its metabolites on host physiology and biochemistry. Host-specific measures should also be assessed providing a functional endpoint related to health. Such measurements can be diverse and are directed by the anticipated outcome of the intervention. Below is a summary of endpoints or markers that have been used to demonstrate a microbial effect on host health (summarized in Table
1).

Molecular approaches are typically used to study the microbiota primarily based on the sequence of the phylogenetic marker—small subunit ribosomal RNA (SSU rRNA) sequence (16S in prokaryotes and 18S ribosomal RNA in eukaryotes) [71]. Currently, the most commonly used method for the assessment of gut microbiota composition and diversity is sequencing of SSU rRNA gene coding fragments. This approach is typically referred to as 16S rRNA gene sequencing, while next generation sequencing (NGS) is a general term that in microbiota studies can refer either to targeted amplicon sequencing or shotgun sequencing [72]. NGS enables the comprehensive analysis of the microbiota and generates an output that can be interpreted at various levels. Sequencing data are typically summarized into bins of highly similar sequences, operational taxonomic units (OTUs). Based on the number of reads of OTUs various analyses can be performed including calculation of diversity indices (α and β), semi-quantitative analysis, multivariate statistical analysis and correlation with host or environmental factors. NGS is by far the most applied approach in microbiota studies. However, it has some disadvantages, particularly for intervention studies. One major drawback is that the read length for NGS is short (typically 2 × 250–300 bp for Illumina) and only a portion of the SSU rRNA gene can be read, causing a loss of sensitivity (most taxa cannot be reliably defined at the species level, although high confidence identification of higher taxonomic rank is possible) [73]. Even when performed at significant sequencing depth, NGS provides information only about predominant taxa in the ecosystem, while species of interest in an intervention study might be subdominant and therefore, below the detection threshold of sequencing. Alternatively, targeted methods that use optimized regions of the SSU rRNA gene or other genomic regions that provide higher resolution for the taxon of interest can be used to quantify specific groups of organisms (typically genus or species members) in complex samples. These methods include fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis and quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). FISH is the only method that allows direct visualization of histological localization of microbes in the tissue and thus gives an insight into correlation between microbial presence and any observed histopathological changes. The usefulness of this technique was demonstrated in one animal study showing that certain dietary emulsifiers could alter mucus structures allowing gut bacteria to penetrate deeper into the mucus layer and closer to the epithelial cells, which

Metagenomics is a powerful integrative approach that enables analysis of microbiome functional potential and diversity based on sequencing of the total genomic material of intestinal samples [80]. This can yield information about specific functional shifts in addition to species- and even up to strain-level variation, which is particularly relevant given the high functional redundancy of the gut microbiome [81], whereby different microbes can perform the same function [82]. Due to the high analytical costs and computational needs, metagenomics has not yet been widely applied in dietary intervention studies. However, it has been applied for predicting personalized postprandial glycemic responses [83], for studying the effects of probiotic versus flaxseed mucilage on the gut microbiota and metabolic risk markers [84], and for providing mechanistic insights into diet-microbiota–health interactions in diabetic individuals [85]. Most computational profiling tools for metagenomics are reference-based [86–88], but the lack of genomes for a large fraction of intestinal inhabitants limits their performance. Improvements of these reference databases are essential for the progress of the field, and recent work using cultivation and metagenomics assembly is supporting this. For example, the annotation of over 1500 cultured gut microbes enabled the annotation of metagenomic reads to increase from 50 to > 70% and the large-scale metagenomic reconstruction of over 150,000 microbial genomes (77% of which were from previously uncharacterized species) from a large set of metagenomic samples. This increased the median annotation rate to 95% [89], altogether facilitating higher-resolution descriptions of the human gut microbiome [90]. Finally, it should be noted that interaction between humans and their microbes is complex and that expression of particular genes does not depend solely on the available genetic portfolio, which can be assessed via metagenomic analysis.

Several comprehensive reviews on the essentials of conducting a microbiota study have been published [66, 80, 91–94]. These articles provide practical recommendations that are briefly summarized here for fecal samples, the most common sample source for intestinal microbiota in dietary intervention studies. In most clinical studies home sampling with immediate freezing is the recommended and most attainable choice for sample collection. Special care must be taken to maintain the cold chain during the transport to study center, as freeze–thaw cycles increase the risk of altering the community composition. This is especially relevant for protocols that include sample fractionation, e.g., to pellet cells before DNA extraction, as this leads to loss of cell-free DNA from bacteria that lyzed during freeze–thawing. Use of mechanical cell lysis prior to DNA isolation ensures that the more recalcitrant microbes are correctly represented in the community DNA [95]. Use of mock communities, either in th form of a bacterial cell mixture or community DNA, is highly recommended for identification of potential sources of bias, especially when setting up the analytical pipeline [95]. Although the sequencing platform used and the choice of bioinformatic tools and parameters can considerably influence the microbial profiles measured, their discussion is outside the scope of this article. For literature on this topic, please see the following articles: [92, 93, 96, 97]. While the current literature is partly inconclusive to suggest best practices for all decisions on sample handling and analysis when conducting a microbiota study, it is essential to maintain the same methodology throughout the study.

Large, population-level microbiota studies indicate that at best, ca. 20% of the overall microbiota variation can be explained with the commonly collected metadata, including diet, anthropometry and medication [35]. Previously ignored factors such as stool consistency, transit time [98] and timing of fecal sampling [99] are now known to influence the microbial signature of samples and hence emerge as novel sources of variation in microbiota studies. It can be argued whether these variables are more biological or technical in nature, but consideration of these factors will assist researchers in de-noising the identification of microbiota treatment effects in intervention studies.

The general data analysis pipeline for microbiota studies, which should be documented prior to initiation of the study, aims at interpreting data matrices in which measures of microbial features including taxa abundance, presence of functional markers, immunological markers and metabolites’ abundance are cross referenced with the samples in the study and its associated metadata. In several cases (e.g., 16S rRNA gene sequencing) the data matrix contains count rather than continuous data with many zero values, which cannot be log-transformed to gain more normal distribution. Hence, statistical models based on negative binomial or poisson distribution should be used for reliable identification of taxa that differ in abundance between study groups [100, 101]. Typically, uneven sequencing across samples further introduces biases that should be partially tackled, e.g., by using rarefaction approaches or using read count as offset in statistical models. Sequencing-derived microbiota measurements also suffer for compositionality issues (i.e., the values are fractional, not absolute) that can generate false correlation and differential features. Different approaches, such as flow cytometry [102] and qPCR [103] have been introduced to enable quantitative microbiota profiling to complement the current practices and to specifically overcome the issues related to compositionality of relative abundance data.

Even in adults high diversity alone does not always reflect “health”. For example, an increase in species richness [117] has been reported in colorectal cancer patients. Rather, this should be considered along with other ecological parameters, such as structural stability over time [11, 79, 118, 119]. Diet, especially the diversity and quantities of chemically distinct substrates reaching the colon is likely to play an important role in driving and maintaining species richness and metabolic diversity within the gut microbiota. However, a reduction in fecal microbiota alpha-diversity may not necessarily reflect a deleterious impact on host health or indeed reduced microbial health service provided to the host.

It is important to understand the functions performed by the microbiota. Metabolic profiling (metabolomics/metabonomics) aims to simultaneously measure several to thousands of low molecular weight metabolites present in a biological sample. These metabolites reflect the biochemical events occurring within the system from which the sample were obtained. In terms of human samples, these compounds can arise from host endogenous metabolic processes but also those of the gut microbiota, as well as the diet, and interactions between all three. Using metabolic phenotyping, the biochemical output (functionality) of the gut microbiome can be determined as well as how these outputs impact on host biochemistry. This is a powerful technique to assess the functional impact of dietary interventions on the microbiota and subsequently the host.

Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy and mass spectrometry coupled to either gas chromatography (GC–MS) or liquid chromatography (LC–MS) are typically used to measure the metabolic profiles. A range of sample types can be studied from the host including urine, blood (plasma/sera), feces, and saliva. Some studies have used intestinal biopsies and aspirate samples collected from the small intestine, but the invasiveness of their collection means that these samples are rare for intervention studies. Given their relative ease of collection urine, fecal and blood samples are typically analyzed in human studies. The fecal metabolome is thought to reflect the metabolic interplay between the diet, host and microbiota. A recent study including 786 individuals, found ~ 68% of the total variance in the fecal metabolome (based on 1116 fecal metabolites) was explained by the fecal microbial composition [120]. However, it can be argued that as fecal metabolites remain unabsorbed from the GI tract they are ‘unseen’ by the host metabolic system. As such, urine and plasma/serum samples may be more informative regarding the biochemical interactions between the microbiota and host.

Microbes in the gut can transform intestinal substrates into a spectrum of metabolites that can exert local effects in the gut or be absorbed from the GI environment, pass through the liver and enter the systemic circulation where they can have systemic effects. It is now well established that metabolites from the gut microbiota, as well as their structural components (e.g., bacterial lipopolysaccharide), can influence human health. It is also important to consider the kinetics of metabolite production, absorption and clearance from different tissues during nutritional metabolomics studies. Most metabolites produced by the gut microbiota from ingested foods appear in blood after only 5–7 h of ingestion, and most will be cleared from the blood rapidly, with only low levels persisting after 12–18 h. This has important implications when trying to link microbial metabolites with physiological parameters in chronic dietary interventions. In the majority of cases health parameters are measured in overnight fasted plasma/serum samples, while most microbial metabolites might be cleared from the blood in these same samples. Similarly, analytes in 24-h urine samples more accurately reflect dietary intake over the previous days than spot urine samples. Microbial metabolite kinetics is further complicated by the enterohepatic circulation. Such considerations are important when designing experimental schemes to measure microbiota metabolite production from particular foods [121] (Table
1).

Bile acids are another major class of metabolites strongly influenced by the gut microbiota. These compounds hold a key role in the digestion and absorption of lipids, nutrients and lipid-soluble vitamins. Bile acids are continually circulated between the host liver and intestinal microbes, which contribute significantly to the diversity of the bile acid pool. Microbially produced secondary bile acids are potentially more cytotoxic for the host than the primary bile acids and have been linked with cholesterol gallstone formation and colon cancer [131, 132]. However, the production of deoxycholic acid has been associated with protection against C. difficile infection, where patients with C. difficile excrete lower amounts of secondary bile acids in their feces [133]. Restoration of 7α-dehydroxylation activity, via fecal microbial transplantation, has been shown to enhance resistance to C. difficile [134, 135].

The gut microbiota contributes significantly to immune effector cell activity and maturation [136, 137] and its dysbiosis has been associated with autoimmune diseases including inflammatory bowel disease, food allergies and asthma [138]. The gut microbiota affects both innate and adaptive immunity through multiple mechanisms including direct contact with immune cells (i.e., dendritic cells, natural killer cells, macrophages), induction of epigenetic modifications via histone acetylation/methylation in tissues [139] and through the production of signaling molecules including SCFA and bile acids. For example, the anti-inflammatory and immuno-modulatory effects of SCFAs are mediated through the differential activation of G protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) including GPR109a, GPR41 and GPR43 [140]. While bile acids differentially activate FXR and TGR5, which attenuate pro-inflammatory innate immune response in several autoimmune diseases including IBD [141].

Regardless of the approach taken to investigate microbiota–host immunological interactions, the type(s) of sample collected are crucial. Peripheral blood samples are reflective of systemic immune effects but less so the colon. In contrast, fecal samples are more representative of the colonic environment but do not fully reflect the events within the mucosal tissue. From a microbiota perspective, there are two distinct ecosystems in the colon both with different metabolic and immunological functions. This includes the luminal microbiota, accessible from fecal samples and representing the ‘critical mass’ for dietary and other metabolic conversions, and the mucosal-associated microbiota, directly interacting with the intestinal immune system and accessible from tissue biopsies [153]. To date, most gut microbiota studies have assessed microbial diversity through analysis of the luminal microbiota which poorly reflects microbial diversity at the mucosal surface [154, 155]. Mucosal biopsies exhibit more microbial diversity and pronounced differences in the dominant bacterial populations than fecal samples [154]. They are considered the “gold standard” for studying the crosstalk between mucosal associated microbes, the intestinal epithelium and tissue-specific immune responses. However, mucosal biopsies are surgically invasive, requiring specialist facilities for collection, and provide limited quantities of tissue restricting multi-omics based analysis of gut microbiota function [59]. Additionally, the bowel cleansing preparation used prior to colonoscopy (and biopsy collection) alters the composition of both the luminal and mucosal gut microbiota [156–158] and molecular targets in tissue [159, 160]. As such, biopsies are rarely collected in studies focused on dietary interventions in healthy humans. Although fecal samples appropriately collected [66, 161] are less reflective of the mucosal microbiota–host interaction, they have an advantage in terms of quantity of material available, convenience of sampling and arguably a wider applicability. Multiple sampling points are recommended in studies including baseline, early, middle and late time points, if possible [145]. Careful selection of sample collection (preservatives, additives used), preparation methods for processing tissue, sample storage and the number of freeze/thaw cycles (preferably a single cycle) is required as these can directly impact on the measured outcomes [162–165].

The parameters measured are determined by the central research question and over-arching hypothesis. This can include measures such as body weight, BMI, fat mass and fat percentage or physiological measures, such as, blood pressure (BP), cognitive function and appetite.

There are numerous metrics proposed to reflect different aspects of gut health such as transit time, and stool volume and frequency. However, many measures are indicative of poor or impaired gut health rather than gut health per se such as bloating, abdominal cramps and diarrhea [166]. Measures of gut permeability are promoted as markers of gut health. Sugar tests (mannitol, lactulose, rhamnose) are commonly used but their accuracy is questionable and their potential to act as substrate for the gut microbiota raises questions over their validity. Other markers of barrier function include fecal A1 anti-trypsin and Reg-1 and plasma lipopolysaccharide. Plasma concentrations of intestinal-fatty acid binding protein provide information on gut damage while fecal myeloperoxidase and neopterin can be used as markers for intestinal inflammation.

Except for exploratory trials, the statistical hypothesis and principal features of data analysis of the primary variable(s) should be specified at the stage of study preparation and before submission of the protocol to ethics and/or authorities. This should be in the form of a statistical section of the protocol. Also, a Statistical Analysis Plan (SAP) describing the detailed procedures for executing the statistical analysis of the primary and secondary variables may be written after finalizing the protocol. The SAP should be reviewed and possibly updated as a result of the blind review of the data and agreed between parties (Sponsor and Principal Investigator) before breaking the blind with formal records of SAP finalization date and unblinding date. If a microbial-related variable(s) has been selected as a primary or secondary endpoint(s) of the clinical study, the methodology for analysis cannot be changed after breaking the blind. Further analysis could be done as exploratory only. All these procedures ensure validity of the data. Failing to specify in the study protocol the information on who performs the analysis and where it is to be performed may greatly restrict options for ethical reasons. High-quality journals will also likely require proof that the SAP was conceived before study analysis in addition to the requirement of the study protocol deposition. Most high-quality journals require deposition of raw sequencing data and access to all relevant data. Code relating to the statistical tools used in the analysis should also be publicly available where possible. The above requirements may sometimes clash with the need to protect personal data. In this regard, it is important to note that all microbiota-related studies must be compliant with the new GDPR in Europe (see section on legislative aspects).

In all clinical trials adverse effects are systematically monitored as part of good clinical practice (GCP). The safety profiles of nutritional interventions are generally considered very good when approved ingredients are used in the intervention.

One common objective of conducting human microbiota food interventions is in support of food related health claims. From a regulatory perspective in the European Union (EU), ‘Food’ is defined as any substance or product, whether processed, partially processed or unprocessed, intended to be, or reasonably expected to be ingested by humans. Thus ‘Food’ includes drink, chewing gum and any substance, including water, intentionally incorporated into food during its manufacture, preparation or treatment. There are many different classifications of foods/food ingredients in EU (for example, conventional food, food supplements, novel foods, foods for special medical purposes, food additives) and each of these serves a specific intended purpose and is regulated accordingly. The key general principles and requirements of food law and the general provisions relating to the labelling, presentation and advertising of foodstuffs are outlined in legislation [167, 168].

The Nutrition and Health claims Regulation was the first piece of harmonized EU legislation to lay down specific rules governing the use of nutrition and health claims made on food. It lays down the types of claims, the rules on scientific substantiation and the routes for authorization of new health claims for foods [175]. It should be noted that specific rules apply to certain food classifications, for example, infant formula which is considered the only processed foodstuff fully satisfying the nutritional requirements of infants during the first month of life. Given this special status of infant formula, the use of health claims is prohibited ([176] applies Feb 2020). For follow-on formula (food for infants when appropriate complementary feeding is introduced), nutrition and health claims are allowed [176]. Also, in future there may be a possibility, following an EFSA assessment, where it is demonstrated that a specific formula manufactured from protein hydrolysates reduces the risk of developing allergy to milk proteins, that consideration will be given to how to adequately inform consumers about that property of the product. Evaluation of health claims is carried-out by the EFSA and to date more than 3000 health claims have been evaluated, the majority of which were not considered to be scientifically substantiated [177]. A large number of probiotic-related health claims were among these rejections reflecting short-comings in the quality of submissions in the main. Key areas where issues were raised in relation to probiotic-related health claims were insufficient characterization of the ingredients, lack of demonstration that the claimed effect was beneficial to health and demonstration that a cause and effect relationship existed and was supported by high quality pertinent studies. For the substantiation of a health claim, the choice of an appropriate outcome variable(s) and method of measurement(s) are critical. EFSA scientific guides and published opinions are a valuable source of such information, highlighting beneficial physiological effects and outcome variables which could be acceptable for claim substantiation, or to address potential health relationships. For example, EFSA guidance indicates that GI discomfort may be measured using validated subjective global symptom questionnaires and changes in one or more of the individual symptoms as well as changes in defecation habits may be used as supportive evidence for the mechanisms by which the food could exert the claimed effect. However, these cannot be used alone for the substantiation of a claim on the reduction of GI discomfort. Some of the effects not considered beneficial per se by EFSA were, increasing the number of any group of microorganisms, changes in short-chain fatty acid production or pH and stimulation of various immunological responses [178]. Thus, particular care should be taken at the study design phase to ensure that the outcome variables chosen to substantiate an effect is indeed considered valid. In EU, the statement “contains probiotics/prebiotics” is of itself considered as a health claim [179] though noteworthy, Italy allows, ‘able to support the balance of intestinal flora’, ‘probiotics’ and ‘prebiotics’, to be used on labels as in their assessment these are not health claims [180]. Claims in advertising regarding bacteria which are not nutrition or health claims may be dealt with under the general rules against misleading advertising. Thus, if a statement regarding bacteria does not refer to a nutritional benefit or a relationship between a food or ingredient and health, the FBO should still hold evidence to substantiate the claim. While authorization of health claims related to the benefits of the intake of specific microorganisms remains challenging, updated EFSA guidance and opinions provide valuable guide rails in relation to study design and required documentation. Arguably, pre-submission dialogue with EFSA to address the design of trials and submission requirements would be invaluable to alter the status quo on probiotic health claim authorization in EU. A key recommendation is to consider/determine the regulatory classification of the proposed intervention in the planning phase, in advance of human trials to ensure regulatory compliance.

As the influence of the intestinal microbiota on human health becomes more apparent, there is an increasing motivation to develop and evaluate nutritional interventions to manipulate this microbial-human relationship to improve health. In this review we outline important considerations when designing and interpreting human studies to reliably establish such links. This includes appropriate study design, intervention and control selection, participant criteria and the appropriate outcome measures to demonstrate tangible effects of the intervention of host health. With the rapid and continuing evolution of the field, both in terms of understanding and the tools available to measure microbial–host interactions, the list of outcome measures presented is not exhaustive nor static. Care must be taken to avoid bias at all levels of the study and negative as well as positive outcomes should be reported for transparency and confidence.

