A combination of Lactobacillus mali APS1 and dieting improved the efficacy of obesity treatment via manipulating gut microbiome in mice

The difficulty of long-term management has produced a high rate of failure for obesity patients. Therefore, improving the efficacy of current obesity treatment is a significant goal. We hypothesized that combining a probiotic Lactobacillus mali APS1 intervention with dieting could improve the efficacy of obesity and hepatic steatosis treatment compared to dieting alone. Mice were fed a high-fat diet for 6 weeks and then treated with: saline + normal diet and APS1 + normal diet (NDAPS1) for 3 weeks. NDAPS1 accelerated body weight loss and reduced caloric intake and fat accumulation. The fecal microbiome showed that accelerating weight loss by NDAPS1 resulted in restoring intestinal microbiota toward a pre-obese state, with alteration of specific changes in the obesity-associated bacteria. APS1 manipulated the gut microbiome’s obesity-associated metabolites, followed by regulation of lipid metabolism, enhancement of energy expenditure and inhibition of appetite. The specific hepatic metabolites induced by the APS1-manipulated gut microbiome also contributed to the amelioration of hepatic steatosis. Our results highlighted a possible microbiome and metabolome that contributed to accelerating weight loss following treatment with a combination of APS1 and dieting and suggested that probiotics could serve as a potential therapy for modulating physiological function and downstream of the microbiota.

An alarming increase in the prevalence of overweight and obesity worldwide has occurred in the past decade1. Obesity usually accompanies a high risk of metabolic disorder and several complications, such as multiple disabilities, diabetes, heart disease and cancers. Physical exercise and dieting have been considered the first-line therapeutic treatment of obesity and obesity-associated metabolic disorders2. Recent studies have focused on dietary modifications, such as calorie restriction3 or antioxidant intervention4, to limit and protect against high fat diet (HFD)-induced weight gain and lipogenesis in vivo. Nevertheless, on a spectrum of medical and scientific supports, long-term management intending to attenuate or reverse the prevalence of obesity still fails to fulfill expectations. Therefore, it is urgent to investigate effective treatment that could enhance the effects of current management protocols for obesity.

In our previous study, we demonstrated that administration of Lactobacillus mali APS1 (APS1), which was isolated from sugary kefir grain, reduced body weight gain and inflammatory activity and changed body composition in HFD-induced obese mice17. Thus, based on our previsions findings, we hypothesized that combining APS1 intervention and dieting could accelerate body weight loss and improve obesity-related pathologies comparing with dieting along. To test the hypothesis, we evaluated the impact of a combination of APS1 and dieting on body weight control and obesity-related metabolome and structure of the gut microbiota in vivo and gained an understanding of the mechanisms of obesity treatment. The mechanisms underlying the probiotic-induced weight-loss with dieting were also evaluated through analysis of the microbiome and metabolome. Our findings indicated that the combination of probiotic APS1 and dieting might be a potential alternative to enhance the efficacy of obesity management.

To examine the effect of APS1 intervention on physiological features of preexisting obesity after dieting, test mice were exposed to an HFD first and then subsequently fed an ND. Our results indicated that body weight gain and metabolic disorder syndromes developed during primary exposure to an HFD followed by weight reduction during exposure to an ND in all test mice (Fig. 1a). APS1 intervention (NDAPS1 group) produced significantly higher weight loss (7.89 ± 1.69 g) when compared with saline treatment (NDS) (5.09 ± 1.45 g) after exposure to an ND (P < 0.01) (Fig. 1b). Acceleration of weight loss during the dieting stage in the NDAPS1 group was associated with a decrease in cumulative caloric intake. The cumulative caloric intake of the NDAPS1 group was significantly reduced compared to that of the NDS group (P < 0.05) (Fig. 1c,d). Moreover, compared to the NDS group, the NDAPS1 group showed decreases in the serum TG concentration (by 25.83%, P < 0.05) (Fig. 1e), weights of eWAT (by 37.93%, P < 0.01), rpWAT (by 41.24%, P < 0.05) and iWAT (by 52.53%, P < 0.001) (Fig. 2a), adipocyte diameters of eWAT (by 26.07%, P < 0.05), rpWAT (by 30.70%, P < 0.001) and iWAT (by 45.71%, P < 0.001) (Fig. 2b), and cross-sectional areas of adipocytes in eWAT (by 44.24%, P < 0.05), rpWAT (by 52.21%, P < 0.001) and iWAT (by 69.77%, P < 0.001) (Fig. 2c,d), but not the serum total cholesterol concentration (P > 0.05) (Fig. 1f). The level of fasting glucose showed no difference between the NDS and NDAPS1 groups (P > 0.05) (Fig. 1g). A tendency to decrease the levels of fasting insulin and HOMA-IR in the NDAPS1 group was observed in this study but there was no significant difference between two groups (P > 0.05) (Fig. 1h,i). Overall, these results indicated that APS1 intervention accelerated body weight loss and reduced fat mass in preexisting obese mice on a diet.

We further evaluated the effect of APS1 intervention on the improvement of hepatic steatosis in preexisting obese mice after dieting. The NDAPS1 group had significantly lower liver tissue weight (P < 0.01) (Fig. 3a) and liver TG level (P < 0.05) (Fig. 3b) compared with the NDS group. Reducing the incidence of hepatocyte vacuolation and suppressing accumulation of lipid droplets in liver tissue was also observed in the NDAPS1 group by histological H&E staining and Oil Red O staining (Fig. 3c).

The molecular mechanism involving APS1-ameliorated hepatic steatosis including sirtuin (SIRT) 1, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1 (PGC1), lipid synthesis factors (ACC, FAS) and fatty acid transporter FABP4 was investigated by immunoblot assay (Fig. 3d–f). The results indicated that the NDAPS1 group showed significantly higher expression of SIRT1 (P < 0.05) and lower ACC (P < 0.05) in the liver tissue of mice compared with the NDS group. The mice that received the APS1 intervention also showed a trend of increasing expression of PGC1 and decreasing expression of FAS and FABP4 in liver tissue. These results suggested that the preexisting obese mice in the APS1 intervention not only showed accelerated weight loss after dieting but also showed enhanced amelioration of hepatic steatosis through regulation of expression of lipogenesis molecules.

We next investigated whether APS1 intervention affected the composition of the gut microbiota in the feces of the test mice, as the gut microbiota might be involved in the metabolic complications of obesity and associated with the acceleration of weight loss after dieting. The chao1 index (Fig. 4a) showed that the bacterial richness was no difference among the groups. Whereas, Shannon’s diversity index (Fig. 4b), indicating the bacterial α-diversity, showed a tendency to increase in the HFW4 group compared with the HFW0 group. Both NDS and NDAPS1 groups also have a significantly lower Shannon diversity than the HFW0 and HFW4 groups.

We further used green fluorescent protein (GFP) to trace APS1 in the gastrointestinal tract of test mice (Supplemental Fig. S3a). After gavage for three hours, the results of immunofluorescence staining of cryostat sections confirmed that GFP-expressing APS1 was detectable in the terminal of the ileum of the mice, which is the region that Lactobacillus species frequently colonize18 (Supplemental Fig. S3b). These finding might indicate that accelerating weight loss by APS1 intervention in mice results in manipulating the intestinal microbiota with alteration of specific bacterial taxa.

Given the above causal connection between microbiota configuration and weight loss after dieting, we asked whether APS1 intervention could affect fecal SCFAs through alteration of gut microorganisms and further regulate the expression of satiety hormones to accelerate weight loss and ameliorate hepatic steatosis. The results indicated that the mice in the APS1 intervention significantly excreted higher fecal propionic acid and butyric acid levels compared to the NDS group at week 9 (P < 0.05) (Fig. 6a). We then investigated satiety hormones, PP, PYY and resistin, which are associated with appetite regulation. The results showed that in the mice that received the APS1 intervention, the production of serum PP (P < 0.05) and PYY (P < 0.01) were significantly induced and the production of resistin was significantly decreased (P < 0.05) compared with the NDS group after dieting (Fig. 6b).

To further gain insight into how the APS1 intervention accelerated weight loss and ameliorated hepatic steatosis, we compared the serum metabolomics profiles of the NDS and NDAPS1 groups. The PCA plot showed that PC 1 and PC2 explained 26.78% and 19.54% of variation, respectively, with a significant difference in PC2 between NDS and NDAPS1 (P < 0.001) (Fig. 7a). Among the metabolites, 11 compounds showed significant differences between the NDS and NDAPS1 groups (P < 0.05) (Table 1). These metabolites were carnitine, hexadecanoyl-L-carnitine, L-gulono-1,4-lactone, L-acetylcarnitine, D-glucurono-6,3-lactone, hydroxykynurenine, pyruvic acid, taurocholate, D-glutamine, β-aminoisobutyric acid and glycerol 3-phosphate. After analyzing the possible metabolic pathways analysis using the KEGG database (Table 1), the APS1 intervention increased metabolites predominantly related to fatty acid degradation, ascorbate biosynthesis, conjugated bile acid biosynthesis and branched-chain amino acid degradation and reduced the triacylglycerol biosynthesis-associated metabolites in preexisting obese mice.

Moreover, to explore the functional correlation between the NDAPS1-mediated gut microbiome and metabolites, the correlations among 20 predominant bacterial taxa at the genus level and 10 metabolites were calculated using Pearson’s correlation tests in Fig. 7b. Ruminococcus, Bifidobacterium, Enterococcus and Candidatus Arthromitus were positively correlated with fatty acid oxidation-related metabolites (including carnitine, hexadecanoyl-L-carnitine and L-acetylcarnitine), whereas Mucispirillum and Butyricicoccus were negatively correlated. Both Lactobacillus and SMB53 were negatively correlated with L-gulono-1,4-lactone. Clostridium (from Clostridiaceae) was positively correlated with D-glucurono-6,3-lactone. Oscillospira, Parabacteroides, rc4–4, Anaerotruncus, Roseburia and Rhodobaca were positively correlated with hydroxykynurenine. Ruminococcus, Coprococcus, Dorea and Clostridium (from Clostridiaceae) were positively correlated with pyruvic acid. Akkermansia and Dehalobacterium were positively correlated with taurocholate. β-Aminoisobutyric acid was positively correlated with Lactobacillus and was negatively correlated with Oscillospira. Glycerol 3-phosphate was positively correlated with Dorea and Eggerthella.

In the present study, we demonstrated that administration of Lb. mali APS1, isolated from sugary kefir grain, could accelerate weight loss, improve the features of obesity and ameliorate hepatic steatosis in preexisting obese mice after dieting. Few similar papers have shown the effects of different probiotic interventions on weight loss during the dieting stage in rodent models and human pilot studies19–23. Among these studies, most results did not show significant effects, and only one study using Lb. plantarum showed a positive impact on weight loss20.

Finally, our study provides an example of how probiotics could serve as a potential therapy for modulating physiological function downstream of the microbiota. We found that APS1-induced modulation of SCFAs and circulating metabolites enhanced susceptibility to accelerated weight loss and ameliorated hepatic steatosis, potentially through improvement of energy expenditure and inhibition of appetite. Future studies are warranted that examine the potential clinical use of APS1 as a novel therapeutic in the quest for effective long-term weight management solutions.

Lactobacillus mali APS1 was isolated and identified from sugary kefir59. The preparation of APS1 followed the procedure previously described17.

Male C57BL/6 J mice at 7 weeks of age were used (BioLASCO Taiwan Co., Ltd, Yi-Lan, Taiwan). Test mice were housed in cages (one mouse per cage) at a controlled room temperature and under a 12 h light–dark cycle and provided food and filtered water ad libitum. After one week for acclimatization, all test mice were fed 60% calorie fat HFD (D12492, Research Diets, Inc., NJ, USA) for 6 weeks, at which point mice showed obesity phenotype characteristics60. After HFD feeding, test mice were then treated for the following three weeks and were randomized into two groups: control group (NDS) received 10% calorie fat normal diet (D12450B, Research Diets, Inc.) administered with saline by gavage daily, and the APS1 intervention group (NDAPS1) received a normal diet and APS1 at 5 × 108 CFU in saline by gavage daily. The body weight and food intake of the test mice were recorded once a week. The cumulative caloric intake was calculated by the total gram weight of diet taken multiplied by the caloric content of the diet (ND: 16.11 kJ/g; HFD2:1.92 kJ/g). At the end of the experiment, all test mice were fasted for 8 hours, anesthetized with isoflurane and sacrificed for serum and tissue collection. All experiments were performed in accordance with relevant guidelines, the animal experimental protocol was approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the National Taiwan University (Approval No: NTU103-EL-00096).

The serum samples were collected from test mice and stored at −80 °C until analysis. Serum glucose, triglyceride (TG) and total cholesterol (T-Chol) levels were measured using a Fuji DRI-CHEM Clinical Chemistry Analyzer FDC 3500 (Fujifilm, Tokyo, Japan) at the National Laboratory Animal Center (Taipei, Taiwan). Serum insulin level was measured using a mouse insulin assay kit following the manufacturer’s protocol (Mercodia, Uppsala, Sweden). Homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) index was calculated according to the formula: HOMA-IR = insulin (μU/mL) × glucose (mg/dL)/405. Serum peptide YY (PYY), pancreatic polypeptide (PP) and resistin levels were measured using the Milliplex® MAP Kit and Mouse Metabolic Hormone 96-Well Plate Assay (Merck Millipore, MA, USA).

Fecal samples were collected from test mice at 6 weeks and 9 weeks. SCFAs in feces were extracted with 70% ethanol solution and analyzed using published methods61. Briefly, the samples were processed to fatty acid derivatization and then extracted twice with ether. Each ether layer was collected and concentrated under nitrogen gas. The obtained fatty acid hydrazides were analyzed by HPLC.

Liver and white adipose tissues (epididymal, retroperitoneal and inguinal white adipose tissue; namely, eWAT, rpWAT and iWAT) were obtained from test mice and fixed with 4% formalin overnight and then embedded within paraffin or optimal cutting temperature (OCT) compound for frozen section procedures. Tissue sections (5-μm thickness) were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) or Oil Red O (O0625, Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA) staining. Histological images were obtained under a microscope (AxioObserver Z1, Göttingen, Germany). The mean adipocyte size was measured using ImageJ software (NIH, MD, USA).

Total protein from the liver tissues of mice was extracted with RIPA buffer containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors. The procedures for electrophoresis and blotting were conducted following described methods62 with some modifications. The primary antibodies, including anti-SIRT1 (D1D7, Cell Signaling, MA, USA), anti-acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC) (C83B10, Cell Signaling), anti- peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1 (PGC1) (ab54481, Abcam, Cambridge, UK), anti-fatty acid synthase (FAS) (C20G5, Cell Signaling), anti-fatty acid binding protein 4 (FABP4) (D25B3, Cell Signaling) and anti-β-actin (13E5, Cell Signaling) antibodies, were used for identification of each protein. Quantification of protein levels in luminescent bands was performed using ImageJ software.

Hepatic triglyceride levels were measured using a triglyceride colorimetric assay kit (Cayman Chemical, MI, USA). Briefly, weighed liver tissues were homogenized in cold buffer on ice. The homogenates were centrifuged at 10,000 g for 15 minutes at 4 °C. Supernatants were harvested and stored at −80 °C for further assay following the manufacturer’s protocol.

Fecal samples were collected from test mice at 0 weeks (HFW0) and 4 weeks (HFW4) during HFD feeding, and at 3 weeks after switching to an ND (NDS and NDAPS1, respectively). Bacteria total genomic DNA from fecal samples was extracted using published methods63 with modifications. The next-generation sequencing results of bacterial 16 S ribosomal DNA genes were then analyzed following procedures described previously64. Although, different variable regions of 16 s rRNA have been targeted for distinguishing the bacteria65,66, the V3-V4 region has been identified as the most useful for distinguishing among species of the intestinal bacteria67,68. This region is generally used for intestinal microbiome studies with accumulation of information and database. Therefore, the V3–V4 regions of 16S rRNA genes were amplified using a specific primer with a barcode. Barcoded PCR amplicons were sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq. 2500 platform. Operational taxonomic unit (OTU) clustering and species annotation were performed from representative sequences using UPARSE software (Version 7.0.1001) and the Greengenes Database based on Ribosomal Database Project classifier (Version 2.2), respectively. For reads assembly and quality control, paired-end reads was assigned and based on their unique barcode and truncated by cutting off the barcode and primer sequence. Paired-end reads were merged using FLASH (V1.2.7)69. Quality filtering on the raw tags was performed under specific filtering conditions according to the Qiime (V1.7.0)70,71. The tags were compared with the reference database (Gold database) using UCHIME algorithm72 to detect and remove chimera sequences73. For OTU cluster and species annotation, sequences analysis were performed by Uparse software (Uparse v7.0.1001)74. OTUs were assigned at sequences ≥97% similarity threshold. The GreenGene Database75 was used based on RDP classifier (Version 2.2)76 algorithm to annotate taxonomic information. OTUs abundance information was normalized using a standard of sequence number corresponding to the sample with the least sequences. Prior to various analyses, each sample was rarefied to an even sequence depth of 31,315 to control the various sequencing depth. Subsequent analysis of alpha diversity and beta diversity were all performed according to this output normalized data. The alpha diversity (Chao 1 and Shannon index) and PLS-DA were calculated with QIIME (Version 1.7.0) using R software (Version 2.15.3).

The metabolomic profile experiments were conducted by the commission service of the Metabolomics Core Laboratory at Center of Genomic Medicine, National Taiwan University (Taipei, Taiwan). Briefly, serum samples were collected from test mice and stored at −80 °C until analysis. Then, 100 μL of each serum sample was extracted for 2 minutes in 400 μL of ice-cold methanol, followed by vaporization. The vaporized serum residues were reconstituted with 200 μL of 50% methanol and then subjected to UHPLC-QTOF-MS analysis. The untargeted metabolic profile was analyzed using an Agilent 1290 UHPLC system (Agilent Technologies, CA, USA) coupled with an Agilent 6540 quadrupole-time of flight mass spectrometer (Agilent Technologies, CA, US) with electrospray ionization. The Acquity HSS T3 column (2.1 × 100 mm, 1.8 μm, MA, USA) was used and maintained at 40 °C. For analysis of metabolomics mass spectra, the mass spectra data were analyzed using TIPick77, XCMS278 and Batch Normalizer79 methods.

The correlation relationships between the relative abundance of the gut microbiota at the genus level and 10 specific metabolites were evaluated by Pearson’s correlation test using SAS version 9.4 software (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA) following a previously described method with modifications80. All metabolite data were mean-centered and scaled to unit variance prior to the test.

All values are given as the mean ± standard deviation (SD). The data were proved to be normally distribution by using a Shapiro-Wilk test for normality (P > 0.05). Statistical analysis for animal experiments comparing two groups used paired and unpaired, two-tailed Student’s t-test. P < 0.05 was indicative of a significant difference. To perform and compare the statistical significant difference between two groups without a normal distribution assumption in NGS analysis, NGS data were normalized and the nonparametric Wilcoxon signed rank test for paired data and Mann-Whitney U test for unpaired data were used. LEfSe analysis with LDA scores greater than 4 and significance at α < 0.05 was determined by Kruskal–Wallis test. For All statistical analyses were performed using Statistical Analysis System software 9.4.



The authors declare no competing interests.

Yung-Tsung Chen and Ning-Sun Yang contributed equally to this work.

Electronic supplementary material

Supplementary information accompanies this paper at 10.1038/s41598-018-23844-y.

Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

