Helicobacter pylori Infection Aggravates Dysbiosis of Gut Microbiome in Children With Gastritis



Introduction: Helicobacter pylori infection consistently leads to chronic and low degree of inflammatory response in gastric mucosa and is closely related with gastrointestinal and extra-gastric diseases. Effects of local microbiome in the stomach have been studied in adults and children with H. pylori infection. It is, however, not known whether the intestinal microbial community differs in children with varying H. pylori infection. The aim of this study is to characterize the altered composition of microbiome induced by H. pylori infection and in gastritis.

Conclusions: Gastritis can cause changes in composition of fecal microbiome, which is exacerbated by H. pylori infection. These changes in gut microbiome may be related to drug resistance and development of chronic gastrointestinal diseases.

Helicobacter pylori is a well-known pathogen in chronic gastritis, peptic ulcer, and gastric cancer (Marshall and Warren, 1984), usually acquired in early childhood, mostly before the age of 5 (Weyermann et al., 2009; O'Ryan et al., 2015). This infection causes a persistently chronic and low degree of inflammatory response in gastric and duodenal mucosa, which may persist lifelong without treatment. H. pylori infection is strain dependent and determined by its association with cytotoxic gene A (cag A) (Wang et al., 2016), bacterial characteristics, inflammatory response, host conditions, and environmental factors. China has a high prevalence of H. pylori infection. The infection rate is currently 40–60%, reaching as high as 37.1% before 20 years of infection stage. Early diagnosis and treatment can, therefore, prevent H. pylori-related complications (Sugano et al., 2015; Malfertheiner et al., 2017). The European and North American Societies for Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition recommends the use of triple therapy, including proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) in combination with amoxicillin and either imidazole or clarithromycin, as the first line of treatment for H. pylori eradication in children (Koletzko et al., 2011). However, successful eradication is lower in children owing to poor drug compliance and antibiotic resistance displayed by H. pylori (Oderda et al., 2007; Okuda et al., 2017). Meta-analyses from previous studies have revealed that triple therapy supplemented with probiotics increased the eradication rate while decreasing the adverse reactions of triple therapy in H. pylori infection, especially in children (Szajewska et al., 2010; Li et al., 2014). An understanding of how the gastrointestinal microbiome interacts with H. pylori during infection might provide novel targets for its prevention and treatment in children.

For resident microorganisms, the host is a unique entity along the gastrointestinal tract, and any change in these factors would modify homeostasis. As mentioned above, the role of H. pylori infection on the gastric microbiome and the interaction in associated gastric diseases has been highlighted in recent studies. The interaction between H. pylori and gut microbiota has also been analyzed, although the exact underlying mechanism still remains unclear. Hypochlorhydria and hypergastrinemia caused by H. pylori infection were some of the causes in the interaction between H. pylori infection and gut microbiota (Beasley et al., 2015; He et al., 2016). Leptin and ghrelin secretion decreased in H. pylori-positive patients and indirectly also influenced the gastrointestinal microenvironment by modulating gastric acid secretion and immune response (La Cava and Matarese, 2004; Baatar et al., 2011; Francois et al., 2011; Muhsen et al., 2015; He et al., 2016). The plasma ghrelin level also significantly correlated with several kinds of bacteria, including Bifidobacterium and Bacteroides. Additionally, increased immune reaction caused by H. pylori infection is related to the genes in gastric and pulmonary tissues (Kienesberger et al., 2016). Animal studies have indicated that H. pylori results in distinct shifts in gut microbiota in distal, uninflamed parts of the gastrointestinal tract (Heimesaat et al., 2014). Similarly, several researches of human fecal samples on the relationship between H. pylori and intestinal flora also suggested a different composition of gut microbioma (Buhling et al., 2001; Myllyluoma et al., 2007; Chen et al., 2018; Gao et al., 2018; Iino et al., 2018). Some of the literatures we referred to focused on the changes of gut microbiome before and after treatment (Buhling et al., 2001; Myllyluoma et al., 2007; Chen et al., 2018). Myllyluoma et al. concluded that the concentration of clostridia and the total numbers of anaerobes significantly decreased in H. pylori-positive ones, compared with H. pylori-negative ones (Myllyluoma et al., 2007). Chen et al.'s study mainly focused on the impact of H. pylori eradication treatment using triple therapy. They also first compared the two groups on day 0 and observed significant increase in alpha diversity of H. pylori-positive fecal samples compared with H. pylori-negative subjects (Chen et al., 2018). Additionally, a Japanese study of 1,123 adult subjects, using 16S rRNA amplification from fecal samples, also confirmed higher abundance of Lactobacillus in H. pylori-infected subjects with severe atrophic gastritis (Iino et al., 2018). However, there has been only one study related to fecal microbiota and H. pylori infection in children, which included 18 fecal samples from five Japanese families (Osaki et al., 2018). These indicated a similar composition of intestinal microbiota between members of the same family, but the sample size was small. The relationship between H. pylori, gastritis, and gut microbiome variation has scarcely been analyzed (Chen et al., 2018; Gao et al., 2018), especially in children. In this study, fecal microbiome in children with H. pylori-positive gastritis group (HPG), H. pylori-negative gastritis group (HNG), and healthy control group (HCG) were compared before treatment using 16S rRNA gene sequence to confirm the impact of H. pylori infection and gastritis on gut microbiome. The results from this study may be useful in further evaluation of H. pylori infection, prevention, and treatment in children.

This prospective pilot study, which was approved by the Institutional Review Boards at Qilu Children's Hospital of Shandong University (IRB# QLCH-ET-2017-06), collected samples from January 2017 to August 2017. Written informed consent and questionnaires were obtained from all subjects (children and legal guardians) visiting the outpatient gastroenterology unit at the Qilu Children's Hospital. They agreed to serve as fecal donors, in compliance with national legislation and the Code of Ethical Principles for Medical Research Involving Human Subjects of the World Medical Association (Declaration of Helsinki). For this study, children with symptoms of dyspepsia, aged 4 to 14 years, were recruited. All children were from the same geographical area. All symptomatic cases underwent 13C-urease breath test, abdominal ultrasonography, rapid urease test (RUT), endoscopy, and histopathological examination of gastric biopsy samples. Patients with gastritis indicating positive histopathology and RUT were diagnosed with Helicobacter pylori infection for the first time and were then divided into HPG, whereas those with negative histopathology and RUT results were divided into the HNG (Koletzko et al., 2011; Jones et al., 2017). When one of the histopathology and RUT results is negative, it can be combined with other test results, such as 13C-urease breath test. The exclusion criteria screened out patients with duodenal or gastric ulcers; active gastrointestinal bleeding; previous eradiation failure; or history of gastric surgery or drug therapy with antibiotics, probiotics, or gastric acid-suppressing drugs in the preceding 4 weeks. Also, healthy children (volunteers) from the same geographical area with matching age and sex composition as the other groups constituted the control group. They were all healthy with no known family history of digestive disease and medication for gastric disorders. Their 13C-urease breath test results were negative (Figure 1). Data were collected by using a standardized questionnaire including basic information, medical history, family history, and examination results.

Fecal specimens were collected with sterilized 2-ml tubes containing pure ethanol on ice, immediately frozen (within 30 min), and stored at −80°C until analysis. Genomic DNA was extracted using cetyl trimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) method (Wang X. et al., 2018). An equivalent of 1 μl of each sample was used for DNA quantification using NanoDrop 2000 (Thermo Scientific). To analyze the bacterial population and amplification of the variable region, V1–V2 of the 16S rRNA gene was performed. PCR was conducted using bacterial universal primers 27F (5′AGAGTTTGATCMTGGCTCAG3′) 355R (5′GCTGCCTCCCG TAGGAGT 3′). The PCR products were checked using electrophoresis in 1% (w/v) agarose gels in TBE buffer (Tris, boric acid, and EDTA) stained with Genecolour I™ (Gene-bio) and visualized under UV light. Amplicons were first purified using the QIA quick PCR Purification Kit (Qiagen, Barcelona, Spain), quantified using a NanoDrop 2000 (Thermo Scientific), and then pooled in equal concentration. Pooled amplicons (2 nM) were then subjected to sequencing, using Illumina HiSeq 2500, following standard Illumina platform protocols.

The 16S rRNA gene sequence paired-end data set was joined and quality filtered using the FLASH method. All sequence analyses were conducted in the Quantitative Insights Into Microbial Ecology (QIIME, version 1.9.1) software suite (Caporaso et al., 2010), as per the QIIME tutorial (http://qiime.org/). Chimeric sequences were removed using usearch61 with de novo models. Sequences were clustered against the 2013 Green genes (13_8 release) ribosomal database, 97% reference data set. Sequences that did not match any entries in this reference were subsequently clustered into de novo operational taxonomic units (OTUs) at 97% similarity with UCLUST. Taxonomy was assigned to all OTUs using the RDP classifier within QIIME and the Greengenes reference data set (Cole et al., 2009).

The questionnaires were analyzed using SPSS version 15.0 (SPSS Inc, Illinois, USA). There was no significant difference in age, sex, and indication for endoscopy between the groups (Table 1). To account for any bias caused by uneven sequencing depth, the least number of sequences present in any given sample was selected randomly from a sample category, prior to calculating community-wide dissimilarity measures (alpha diversity and beta diversity). The OTU table was then rarified to a sequencing depth of 22,000 per sample, for both diversity analyses. All principal coordinate analyses (PCoAs) were based on unweighted and weighted UniFrac distances, using evenly sampled OTU abundances. Linear discriminant effect size (LEfSe) analysis was performed to find features (taxa) differentially represented between patients and healthy controls. LEfSe combines Kruskal–Wallis test or pairwise Wilcoxon rank-sum test with linear discriminant analysis (LDA). It ranks features by effective size, which explains most of the biological differences at the top. LEfSe analysis was performed on the basis of the threshold of logarithmic LDA score for discriminative features, which is equal to 2.0. The effects of each of the two factors, that is, age and gender on the validated biomarkers, were examined within each of the two clinical categories by SPSS, in one-way ANOVA test. The effects were considered significant if P-value was < 0.05. The prediction of the functional composition of a metagenome, using marker gene data and a database of reference genomes, was done with Phylogenetic Investigation of Communities by Reconstruction of Unobserved States (PICRUSt) (Langille et al., 2013). The graphical representation of the results was done with R (McMurdie and Holmes, 2013) and STAMP. The calculation of P-values was done with Kruskal–Wallis H-test and Welch's t-test. Differences were considered significant when P < 0.05.

210 children with dyspeptic symptoms and 64 matched healthy children were initially screened for the study. One hundred individuals refused to participate, and 19 children were ruled out, and one fecal specimen was missing. Around 154 individuals were involved (Figure 1 and Table 1), comprising 50 children in HPG (mean age at 8.27 ± 2.8 years, 22 girls and 28 boys). Forty-two children with gastritis, excluding Helicobacter pylori infection, were included in HNG (mean age at 8.64 ± 2.35 years, 12 girls and 30 boys), whereas 62 healthy children (mean age at 8.41 ± 1.17 years, 26 girls and 36 boys) were included in HCG. Fecal specimen and questionnaires were collected from all subjects.

We compared the richness (abundance-based coverage estimator [ACE]) and diversity (Shannon) of bacterial community among HNG, HPG, and HCG (Figure 2). There were no significant differences in Shannon and ACE index in the comparison of three groups, except for ACE index in comparing HNG and HCG (P = 0.0042, Figure 2A).

We also evaluated beta diversity among the three groups using PCoA, on the basis of the unweighted UniFrac distances. The PCoA demonstrated clustering of microbial communities between HNG and HPG (Figure 3A), HCG and HNG (Figure 3B), and HCG and HPG (Figure 3C). We used analysis of similarities (ANOSIM) to test whether two groups are significantly different in PCoA. Results indicated that there was a significant difference in gut microbiome structure between HNG and HPG (P = 0.002, R = 0.055, ANOSIM), HCG and HNG (P = 0.001, R = 0.178, ANOSIM), and HCG and HPG (P = 0.001, R = 0.187, ANOSIM).

In the relative taxon abundance of groups, using 97% as the similarity cutoff, 605 qualified taxa were identified. At the phylum level, the gut microbiome profiles in the three groups of subjects were dominated by Bacteroidetes (HPG 51.37 ± 16.15%, HNG 50.71 ± 18.34%, and HCG 44.07 ± 14.68%), Firmicutes (HPG 35.65 ± 11.92%, HNG 35.16 ± 14%, and HCG 46.54 ± 13.78%), Proteobacteria (HPG 11.53 ± 12.13%, HNG 12.32 ± 9.49%, and HCG 8.09 ± 5.62%) (Figure 4A) (Caporaso et al., 2010; Langille et al., 2013; McMurdie and Holmes, 2013). Phylum level analysis also demonstrated the ratios of Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes (F:B), which had dramatically decreased in HPG (P = 0.012) and HNG (P = 0.0039), as compared with HCG. However, there was no difference between HPG and HNG in F:B ratio, implying that the bacterial community in fecal microbiome may alter in the disease state. At the genus level, Bacteroides (HPG 38.03 ± 17.47%, HNG 37.47 ± 17.81%, and HCG 30.18 ± 15.26%) and Prevotella (HPG 9.41 ± 14.96%, HNG 9.17 ± 15.1%, and HCG 11.45 ± 16.58%) were the major genus. There was also increased abundance of Bacteroides and Parabacteroides, decreased abundance of Roseburia and Faecalibacterium in HPG and HNG, compared with HCG (Figure 4B). Additionally, the Venn diagram shows 104 common OUTs of bacteria among the three groups (Figure 4C). There are four, three, and one unique OTUs for HNG, HPG, and HCG, respectively.

We applied LEfSe analysis to further identify the significantly different abundance between HNG and HPG, HCG and HNG, and HCG and HPG. Results revealed 13 taxa, distinguishing the gut microbiome communities with HNG and HPG, using an LDA score of above 2 (Figure 5A). There were 59 taxa each, distinguishing the gut microbiome communities with HCG and HNG (Figure 5C) and HCG and HPG (Figure 5D), respectively. A cladogram (Figures 5B,E,F) was used to represent predominant bacteria and the structure of the microbiota in each group. To assess the impact of H. pylori on the gut microbiome in children, the fecal microbiome in HPG and HNG was analyzed (Figure 5A). There was a higher abundance of Betaproteobacteria and Lactobacillales and lower abundance of Alphaproteobacteria in HPG. At the family and genus levels, higher abundance of Streptococcus and Collinsella and lower abundance of Pseudomonadaceae, Erysipelotrichaceae, and Megasphaera were found in HPG, as compared with HNG. Additionally, the compositions of gut microbiome between HNG and HCG were compared to analyze the altered gut microbiome in gastritis. An abundance of Bacteroidaceae, Enterobacteriaceae, Porphyromonadaceae, Fusobacteriaceae, and Megasphaera was seen in HNG. However, a higher abundance of Ruminococcaceae, Lachnospiraceae, Bifidobacteriaceae, Roseburia, Lactobacillus, Sutterella, and Bifidobacterium were found in the HCG (Figure 5C). The compositions of gut microbiome in children, HPG, and HCG were also compared and analyzed. Significant differences in taxa from phylum to genus level were represented in LDA. At the family and genus levels, Bacteroidaceae, Enterobacteriaceae, Porphyromonadaceae, Bacteroides, Parabacteroides, Streptococcus, and Lactococcus numbers increased significantly in HPG (Figure 5D). Lastly, the compositions of gut microbiome in HNG and HCG, and HPG and HCG were compared at five significant bacterial levels. There was significantly higher abundance of Bacteroidaceae and Enterobacteriaceae and lower abundance of Bifidobacteriaceae, Lactobacillaceae, and Lachnospiraceae in HPG and HNG, compared with HCG (Figures 5G–K). Thus, these results imply that gastric inflammation significantly changes the composition of gut microbiome, especially in children with H. pylori-induced gastritis.

We also explored microbiota function on the basis of inferred metagenomes using the PICRUSt algorithm. We compared the differences between HNG and HPG, HCG and HNG, and HCG and HPG in the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) orthology (KO). Among the 328 affiliated KEGG pathways, 19 had statistically significant and different P < 0.05 in HNG and HPG (Figure 6A). Interestingly, pathways related to genetic information (basal transcription factors) and environmental information processing (calcium signaling pathway) were enriched in HPG. Pathways related to human diseases (toxoplasmosis, small-cell lung cancer, and colorectal cancer), cellular processes (p53 signaling pathway), and metabolism (carbohydrate metabolism) were depleted in HPG. And there were 23 KEGG pathways showing significant differences in HCG and HNG (Figure 6B). Pathways related to metabolism (amino acid, fatty acid, carbohydrate, and drug metabolism—cytochrome P450 and beta-lactam resistance) and human disease (bacterial invasion of epithelial cells) were enriched in HNG. However, cellular processes, signaling (other ion-coupled transporters) and other metabolism (pantothenate and CoA biosynthesis, phenylalanine, tyrosine and tryptophan biosynthesis, and lysine biosynthesis) were depleted in HNG. Seventeen KEGG pathways showed significant differences in HCG and HPG (Figure 6C). Pathways related to metabolism (lipopolysaccharide [LPS] biosynthesis proteins, beta-lactam resistance, LPS biosynthesis, fatty acid metabolism, glycosphingolipid biosynthesis–ganglio series, glycosaminoglycan degradation, metabolism of xenobiotics by cytochrome P450, N-glycan biosynthesis, glycosphingolipid biosynthesis–globo series, and other glycan degradation) and human disease (pertussis, primary immunodeficiency, bladder cancer, Chagas disease, African trypanosomiasis, and bacterial invasion of epithelial cells) were enriched in HPG, but peptidoglycan biosynthesis was found depleted in HPG. These findings show that gut microbiome affected by H. pylori infection and gastritis also causes some changes in the body's basal metabolic function, disease susceptibility, and drug metabolism. It can also be said that gut microbiome influences gastric inflammation. These results thus indicate that in children, H. pylori infection, gastritis, and altered intestinal microbiome interact with each other.

Microbiome dysbiosis has been linked to gastrointestinal disease including gastritis, in which Helicobacter pylori plays an important role (He et al., 2016; Minalyan et al., 2017; Sgambato et al., 2017; Gorkiewicz and Moschen, 2018). Although there are several studies addressing bacterial biodiversity in upper GI tract, the role of H. pylori infection and gastritis in the gut bacterial community, especially in children, is unknown. A preliminary study evaluated the influence of H. pylori infection and gastritis on fecal microbiome by comparing three pediatric groups, using 16S rRNA gene sequence analysis. This study revealed (i) significant differences in beta diversity analysis in the three groups, especially in HPG, HNG, and HCG; (ii) F:B ratio dramatically decreased in both HPG and HNG, with higher abundance of Bacteroidaceae and Enterobacteriaceae and lower abundance of Lachnospiraceae, Bifidobacteriaceae, and Lactobacillaceae also found in HPG and HNG; and (iii) HPG had higher abundance of Betaproteobacteria, Lactobacillales and Streptococcus, lower abundance of Alphaproteobacteria, Megasphaera, than HNG. The results indicate that H. pylori infection and gastritis could alter gut microbiome.

In conclusion, this study first demonstrated the structural, compositional, and functional dysbiosis of fecal microbiome in gastritis caused by H. pylori. It indicated that the current treatments combined with strategies that modulate the gut microbiome could improve the clinical outcome of H. pylori-induced gastritis. The findings may pave the way for initiating larger-cohort clinical validations and developing guidance for therapeutic strategies with probiotics. However, the study also has some shortcomings; for example, the technology is accurate for only a few species, and the corresponding specimen of gastric mucosa and blood samples of individuals were not collected to compare with the same fecal specimen. In addition, the number of involved children was less. In future, a larger study is required, and detailed clinical data need to be collected to confirm these results.

All sequencing data associated with this study were uploaded to the NCBI SRA database (accession number: PRJNA544571). The webpage of the SRA database is https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra.

The studies involving human participants were reviewed and approved by Medical Ethics Committee of Qilu Children's Hospital of Shandong University. Written informed consent to participate in this study was provided by the participants' legal guardian/next of kin.

LZ and ZG designed the study. LY, JZ, CZ, and JY performed the measurements and data analysis. JX, XW, YL, HL, and YW obtained the samples and clinical details. LY and JZ wrote the manuscript. All authors have read and critically revised the manuscript.

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

