Early-Life Adversity Leaves Its Imprint on the Oral Microbiome for More Than 20 Years and Is Associated with Long-Term Immune Changes

The early-life microbiome (ELM) interacts with the psychosocial environment, in particular during early-life adversity (ELA), defining life-long health trajectories. The ELM also plays a significant role in the maturation of the immune system. We hypothesised that, in this context, the resilience of the oral microbiomes, despite being composed of diverse and distinct communities, allows them to retain an imprint of the early environment. Using 16S amplicon sequencing on the EpiPath cohort, we demonstrate that ELA leaves an imprint on both the salivary and buccal oral microbiome 24 years after exposure to adversity. Furthermore, the changes in both communities were associated with increased activation, maturation, and senescence of both innate and adaptive immune cells, although the interaction was partly dependent on prior herpesviridae exposure and current smoking. Our data suggest the presence of multiple links between ELA, Immunosenescence, and cytotoxicity that occur through long-term changes in the microbiome.

Early-life adversity (ELA) is defined by a poor environment and conditions in early life that induce intense psychophysiological stress [1]. It is mostly observed together with low socioeconomic status and is pathophysiologically correlated with a lifelong imbalance of health and disease [2]. The first 1000 days from conception to 2 years is the most vulnerable life period [3]. At birth, the body is almost fully formed; however, many biological systems continue to mature over the following years. Research on the lifelong health and disease balance has shown the significance of the environment during this period on multiple disease phenotypes [4], including cardiovascular, allergic, and autoimmune disorders, as well as mental disorders [5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17]. There has been a focus on the molecular mechanisms and the cellular phenotype behind the effect of stress and adversity on immune and endocrine systems as well as epigenetic modifications [5,6,18,19].

We previously reported higher virally mediated activation and senescence of the immune system in association with ELA in the EpiPath cohort [22,51]. This cohort consists of young adults exposed to ELA by either institutionalisation or separation from their parents at birth, and were subsequently adopted into Luxembourg, while controls were raised by their biological parents. With the growing evidence of a microbiome–immune–system interaction, we attempted to identify if institutionalisation left a mark on the OM of the adoptees. In this study, we sequenced the 16s-rRNA from the buccal and salivary bacterial communities from our cohort. Integrating this with the full immunophenotype, we identified associations with various taxa and analysed how the microbiome interacts with the immune system.

The V4 region of the bacterial 16S gene was successfully amplified from both buccal swabs and salimetrics oral swabs for the 115 members of the EpiPath cohort, and a total of 45 Gbp sequencing data were obtained. All samples were successfully processed using mothur and a total of 288 and 371 genera from 24 phyla were identified for buccal and salivary samples respectively. The saliva and buccal swabs from the EpiPath cohort were examined independently as they are two distinct oral communities from the same participants.

We identified sequences from all of the 24 principal bacterial phyla in the overall salivary microbial community. Within these 24 phyla, the most abundant in both control and ELA groups were Actinobacteria, Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, and Fusobacteriota (Figure 1A). The most abundant genera of the salivary composition were Acinetobacter, Micrococcaceae, Actinobacillus, Rothia, Corynebacterium, Micrococcus, Actinomyces, Alloprevotela, Porphymonas, Fusobacterium, Weeksellaceae, Flavobacterium, Bradyrhizobium, Porphyromonas, _ Comamonas, Olsenella, Fluviicola, Fusobacterium, Absconditabacteriales _(SR1)_ge, Streptobacillus, Fretibacterium, JGI_0000069-P22_ge, Capnocytophaga, Pseudarcicella, Tannerella, Prevotella, and Campylobacter (Figure 1B). There was no difference in α-diversity between the controls and the adoptees in terms of diversity (controls: mean = 13.87872, SD = 7.127721, adoptees: mean = 14.14869, SD = 6.601899, Wilcoxon rank sum test p = 0.7579) and evenness (controls: mean = 0.5619667, SD = 0.06864806, adoptees: mean = 0.5646776, SD = 0.06172601, Wilcoxon rank sum test p = 0.9461). Plotting the Shannon evenness index against the inverse Simpson diversity index confirmed that there analogous diversity and evenness between the controls and adoptees (Supplementary Figure S1). Principal coordinate analysis could not detect systematic differences either (Supplementary Figure S1).

As for the salivary microbiome, we identified sequences from all the 24 principal bacterial phyla in the buccal microbial community. The most abundant phyla were the same as in the salivary microbiome: Actinobacteria, Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, and Fusobacteriota (Figure 2A). The most abundant genera were Actinomyces, Corynebacterium, Micrococcaceae, Rothia, Alloprevotela, Porphymonas, Fusobacterium, Actinobacillus, Bradyrhizobium, Haemophilus, Methylobacterium-Methylorubrum, Oxalobacteracea, Actinomyces, Neisseria, Paucibacter, Lautropia Cardiobacterium, Brucella, Alysiella, and Campylobacter, therefore revealing a substantial overlap in the detected genera between the saliva and the buccal microbiome (Figure 2B).

As for the salivary microbiome, we observed a very similar diversity and evenness between controls and adoptees as measured by the inverse Simpson index (controls: mean = 12.85828, SD = 10.117292, adoptees: mean = 14.72315, SD = 8.991065, Wilcoxon rank sum test p = 0.08803). The Shannon evenness index was similar between adoptees and controls, and, in both, it was higher than in the salivary microbiome (controls: mean = 0.5137724, SD = 0.10141122, adoptees: mean = 0.465861, SD = 0.08482336, Wilcoxon rank sum test p = 0.09024). α-diversity was again similar in the controls and the adoptees in terms of evenness (Wilcoxon rank sum test p = 0.08803) and diversity (Wilcoxon rank sum test p = 0.09024). Plotting the Shannon evenness index against the inverse Simpson diversity index revealed no systematic differences in diversity or evenness between the controls and adoptees (Supplementary Figure S1). Similarly, principal coordinate analysis indicated no differences between adoptees and control (Supplementary Figure S1).

To ensure that sample collection was performed correctly and that we had two distinct communities, we compared the diversity and evenness of the salivary and buccal samples. We found a low correlation between the salivary and buccal communities in both the inverse Simpson diversity index (Figure 3A, p = 0.47, rho = −0.07372058, Spearman’s rank correlation test) and Shannon evenness index (Figure 3B, p = 0.8759, rho = 0.01595802, Spearman’s rank correlation test), giving evidence in favour of the hypothesis that, despite their close physical proximity, they can be seen as distinct communities. Comparing the salivary and buccal microbiomes by group, the diversity ratios of the salivary against buccal communities were similar between the controls and adoptees (Figure 3A, controls: p = 0.3311, rho = −0.1222465; adoptees: p = 0.7898, rho = 0.04812834; Spearman’s rank correlation test, Figure 3B; controls: p = 0.9578, rho = 0.009692513; adoptees: p = 0.7898, rho = −0.04812834; Spearman’s rank correlation test). This suggests that the overall composition between the controls and adoptees may be similar, but differences would be seen at the phyla level.

Investigating the abundance levels of phyla and genera highlighted differences in the community composition across the ELA group and healthy controls (Table 1). While there were no differences in the phyla level in the buccal data, Proteobacteria and Verrucomicrobiota were significantly lower (FDR < 0.05 for both) in the adoptees in comparison to the controls (Supplementary Table S1A, Figure 4A,B) in the saliva microbiome as detected in fractional regression analyses. Analyses of deeper taxonomy revealed two of the most abundant genera of the Proteobacteria phylum, Comamonas and Acinetobacter, to be significantly lower in the saliva of adoptees compared to controls alongside Aquabacterium and unclassified Comamonadaceae (Table S1B, Figure 4C–F). In conclusion, while we could not detect systematic differences in the buccal microbiome between the ELA group and the controls, the saliva microbiome was structurally different in its composition, with a prominent role for Proteobacteria genera (Figure 4A).

1 unc = unclassified.

Next, we investigated the impact of environmental factors on the OM to potentially explain the effects of ELA described above (Table 1).

As lifestyle has a pivotal role in the development of the microbiome, we assessed the effect of smoking on the OM by including smoking status (binary: smokers vs. non-smokers) into the regression modelling (Table 1). No significant genera were detected for the salivary community, whereas from the buccal community, we exposed five genera negatively associated with smoking: three from the Proteobacteria phylum, Neisseria, Neisseriaceae_unclassified, and Pasteurellaceae_unclassified; 1 from the Bacteroidetes phylum and Capnocytophaga genus; as well as one from the Firmicutes phylum and Planococcaceae_unclassified genus (FDR < 0.05, Figure 5A–E). In sensitivity analyses, we removed smoking as a covariate from the regression equations for the FDR-corrected significant genera to explore potential effect mediation through smoking, but the results remained virtually unchanged. The full results for the buccal and saliva microbiomes can be found in Supplementary Table S2.

We previously reported that viral infections may mediate the early-life immunophenotype [22]. Consequently, we tested whether prior viral infection, measured as anti- HSV, EBV, and CMV seropositivity, affected the oral bacterial communities. We achieved this via fractional regressions with the antibody titre (binary: positive vs. negative) as the predictor of interest and the genus abundance as the response variable (Table 1). Due to low case numbers of positive titre results for CMV, we could not adjust for basic covariates without inducing numerical instability in the fitting procedure. While HSV titres did not show any association, a positive EBV titre was positively associated with the abundance of the Neisseria genus in the buccal microbiome (FDR < 0.05, Figure 6A). However, anti-CMV antibody titres showed a very strong association with the OM. In total, 10 genera had a significant association with CMV titres. Nine genera from the Buccal community, eight derived from the Proteobacteria phylum (Acinetobacter, Bradyrhizobium, Comamonadaceae_unclassified, Methylobacterium-Methylorubrum, Oxalobacteraceae_unclassified, and Sphingomonas genera) unveiled a negative association, whereas the genera of Alysiella and Neisseria demonstrated a positive association. One genus from Bacteroidetes phylum, Flavobacterium, also appeared to be negatively associated with positive CMV titres (FDR < 0.05, Figure 6B–J). Two genera of the Salivary community from the Proteobacteria phylum, Pseudomonas and Oxalobaceraceae_unclassified, exhibited a negative association (FDR < 0.05, Figure 7A,B). The full results for the buccal and the saliva microbiome antibody titre associations can be found in Supplementary Table S3. In a further step of sensitivity analysis, we included a positive antibody titre as a covariate into the regression models to investigate the differences in the genus abundances between ELA and controls. However, the results virtually remained the same, indicating either insufficient statistical power to detect potential mediation or that CMV exposure does not mediate ELA-related changes in the OM. This suggests that, unlike increased immunosenescence, the changes we saw in the oral bacterial community are independent of prior exposure to Herpesviridae.

In the next step, we fitted a series of fractional regression models integrating the relative abundance of the taxonomic levels in the salivary and buccal compositions with our previously published immune-system profiling. Among the full dataset of 48 immune cell populations, we identified 11 significant associations with genera, most importantly for T cells and NK cells (Table 1).

Immunosenescence is a common result of adversity. Thus, we decided to look for possible associations between adversity, microbiome, and accelerated ageing of immune cells (Table 1). For screening the OM associations with the share of CD57 -positive CD4 and CD8 cells, we used multivariable fractional regressions including the genus abundance as the response variable, and the share of CD57-positive CD4 and CD8 cells as a predictor of interest and the basic set of covariates. Additionally, we included the study-group variable as a covariate to control for potential confounding factors related to ELA status. CD8 T cells were previously reported to be significantly associated with CMV [22], but we found no associated taxonomic markers from the OM. From CD4 T-cells tests, we identified six strong taxonomic associations. Two genera from the salivary microbiome, Selenomonas from the Firmicutes phylum showed a positive association and Oxalobacteraceae_unclassified from the Proteobacteria phylum showed a negative association. Four genera from the buccal community: Selenomonas from Firmicutes, Capnocytophaga from the Bacteroidetes phylum, and Campylobacter and Lautropia from the Proteobacteria phylum, displayed a positive association (FDR < 0.05, Figure 8A–F). For further exploration, we fit additional fractional regressions using the number of T-helper cells and T-killer cells as predictors of interest using the same set of covariates as before, finding no additionally significant associations after correction for multiple testing. Summary statistics for the buccal and saliva microbiomes are given in Supplementary Table S4.

Innate immune cells such as natural killer (NK) cells are the first line of defence and often interact with commensal bacteria. Adoptees of this cohort showed increased cytotoxicity on their NK cells [52]; hence, we thought to assess for a potential link with the microbiome. Through screening the OM for associations with various types of NK cells, we found three genera associated with cell counts with an FDR < 0.05, while seven additional associations reached an FDR < 0.1 (Supplementary Table S4), hinting that a better-powered study may find a broader association pattern. In the buccal community, the Oribacterium genus showed a negative association with the total number of NK cells and the total number of mid-maturation NK cells (FDR < 0.05, Figure 9A,B). In parallel, within the salivary community, several genera were significantly associated with different stages of NK maturation. Pseudomonas was found to be positively associated with the total number of CD25 expressing NK cells, which reflects an association with the global activation of NK cells (FDR < 0.05, Figure 9C). The abundance of Alloprevotella was positively associated with the abundance of activated immature CD25CD56hi expressing NK cells (FDR < 0.05, Figure 9D).

Summary statistics for the buccal and saliva microbiome are given in Supplementary Table S4 and bacterial taxa are highlighted in Table 1.

In this study, we identified taxonomic differences in the OM 24 years after adversity that were common throughout a cohort of diverse cultural and ethnic origins. We identified genera that had a significantly reduced abundance in the adoptees, which were significantly associated with smoking; immunosenescence of CD4 T cells; circulating number and activation status of NK cells; and anti-CMV and, to a lesser degree, anti-EBV titres. Importantly, we were able to see these differences in both the salivary and buccal microbiomes, both of which are readily accessible and both are regularly and easily sampled, even if the buccal microbiome is somewhat underexplored to date. Our data highlight the distinctness of the salivary and buccal microbiomes in distinct oral niches with unique microbial signatures.

As with all investigations, our study is not without limitations. Due to the limited quantity of the biobanked samples, 16S sequencing was favoured over shotgun sequencing to ensure good-quality data, leading to a limited taxonomic resolution in comparison to metagenomics studies. Future metagenomics studies are needed to refine the herein-presented association pattern, exploring potential differences within one genus. The EpiPath cohort consists of only 115 participants. This is a considerable number for a study on ELA, in which a full psychosocial stress test was performed, together with full immune and psychological profiling. However, this sample size is considered small for a microbiome studies, where statistical screening leads to multiple testing, reducing the statistical power for detecting individual associations. Similarly, the reported mediation analyses lack statistical power, and negative results should not be interpreted as the absence of effects. Similarly, as EpiPath is an adoption cohort, metadata such as the mode of birth, if they were ever collected, were never transferred to the adoptive parents. It is also possible that our data could be interpreted as the early inoculation with different microbiomes that simply persisted until 24 years later. The invasive nature of the ELA questions meant that compromise on microbiome-specific metadata, such as dietary habits and oral health status, was unavoidable if maximum participation in the study was to be ensured. Such information would have enhanced the mechanistic potential of our dataset. Knowledge of potential oral complications such as carries or periodontitis will be necessary in future studies to ensure that mechanistic pathways can be explored [95]. As the cohort consists of observational human data, causal interpretations of the reported associations should be treated with care. However, we demonstrated that 16S sequencing, despite its known limitations, provided clear insight into the long-term effect of ELA on the microbiome. Follow-up studies using shotgun metagenomics may refine the reported associations on the species and strain level.

Participants For this study, we used our previously reported EpiPath cohort of 115 adults aged 20 to 25 years [19,22,51,96]. A total of 75 control participants were brought up by their biological parents and 40 participants were adopted in Luxembourg from institutions worldwide. The median age at adoption was 4.3 months (IQR 0–15 months) [51]. Basic immunoprofiling was available for all cohort members [22,51]. Furthermore, detailed NK cell profiling was available for 76 participants (19 cases and 57 controls), and immunosenescence profiles were available for 79 participants (19 ELA and 60 controls) [22,52]. Biobanked oral swabs were available for 98 participants (33 ELA and 65 controls) and buccal swabs for all 115 participants (40 ELA and 75 controls). For one participant without immunosenescence profiling, the body mass index and sex were missing. This individual was excluded from statistical analyses, where the BMI and/or sex were used as covariates.

Statistical analyses For descriptive statistics, nominal variables are described by proportions, while metric variables are described by means and standard deviations. Evenness and Shannon entropy metrics were calculated for the OM as measures of alpha diversity and compared between ELA cases and controls with Wilcoxon rank sum tests. Additionally, diversity measures were compared across the OM using rank correlations. For investigating statistical associations between taxonomical units and immune-cell numbers, relative abundances for all genera were checked for outliers. Observations that were outliers both in immune-cell numbers and relative abundances (more than four standard deviations away the mean) were excluded from the analyses, when analysing genus–immune-cell associations. Only genera, or phyla, detected in more than 50% of all cases, were analysed. The microbial abundance data were analysed using fractional regressions [101,102]. Fractional regressions are semiparametric methods not relying on distributional assumptions, and are specifically designed for the analyses of relative abundance data, making them suitable for the analysis of microbiome data, as different species abundances may not be sampled from the same class of distributions. Fractional regressions can be parametrised by odds ratios, allowing for easy interpretation of the regression coefficients in terms of the chance that a certain sequence read is assigned to a taxonomic unit [102]. All fractional regression models, if not specified otherwise, included age, BMI, and sex as covariates, and were performed separately for the OM communities. The basic covariates were included mainly to reduce residual variance and thereby increase statistical power to detect associations with the predictor of interests. Using fractional regressions, we screened the microbiome for associations with the study group variable, basic covariates (age, sex, body mass index (BMI), and smoking), antibody titres for Epstein–Barr virus (EBV), cytomegalovirus (CMV), and the herpes simplex virus (HSV), immunosenescence markers, as well as immune cell counts. All p-values are reported two-tailed. Statistical analyses were performed in STATA 16/MP (College Station, TX, USA), and correction for multiple testing was performed by applying the false discovery rate (FDR) [103]. An FDR < 0.05 was considered to be significant. Summary statistics of the performed analyses are given in Supplementary Tables S1–S4.

Our data show a clear link between ELA and the OM that was visible 24 years later. The two oral communities investigated were clearly associated but distinct. We previously reported that ELA induced higher activation and senescence of the immune system. The taxonomic differences in the oral composition were not only associated with ELA but also with the immunosenescence of CD4 T cells, circulating numbers and activation status of NK cells, and anti-CMV titres. Although we do not yet have a detailed mechanistic explanation, our data suggest the presence of multiple links between ELA, immunosenescence, and cytotoxicity that persist through long-term changes in the microbiome.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

