Perilipin-2 modulates dietary fat-induced microbial global gene expression profiles in the mouse intestine



Intestinal microbiota are critical determinants of obesity and metabolic disease risk. In previous work, we showed that deletion of the cytoplasmic lipid droplet (CLD) protein perilipin-2 (Plin2) modulates gut microbial community structure and abrogates long-term deleterious effects of a high-fat (HF) diet in mice. However, the impact of Plin2 on microbiome function is unknown.

Here, we used metatranscriptomics to identify differences in microbiome transcript expression in WT and Plin2-null mice following acute exposure to high-fat/low-carbohydrate (HF) or low-fat/high-carbohydrate (LF) diets. Consistent with previous studies, dietary changes resulted in significant taxonomic shifts. Unexpectedly, when fed a HF diet, the microbiota of Plin2-null and WT mice exhibited dramatic shifts in transcript expression despite no discernible shift in community structure. For Plin2-null mice, these changes included the coordinated upregulation of metabolic enzymes directing flux towards the production of growth metabolites such as fatty acids, nucleotides, and amino acids. In contrast, the LF diet did not appear to induce the same dramatic changes in transcript or pathway expression between the two genotypes.

Our data shows that a host genotype can modulate microbiome function without impacting community structure and identify Plin2 as a specific host determinant of diet effects on microbial function. Along with uncovering potential mechanisms for integrating how diet modulates host and microbial metabolism, our findings demonstrate the limits of 16S rRNA surveys to inform on community functional activities and the need to prioritize metatranscriptomic studies to gain more meaningful insights into microbiome function.

The online version of this article (10.1186/s40168-017-0327-x) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

Obesity is a substantial public health concern with increasing prevalence worldwide [1]. Since 1980, worldwide obesity has more than doubled and in 2014, 13% of adults were considered obese [2]. A critical determinant of obesity risk is the intestinal microbiota [3–5], which has been linked to a wide range of co-morbidities, including metabolic syndrome [4], gastrointestinal disease [6], type-2 diabetes (T2D), [7] and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) [8, 9]. Metabolic functions encoded by the intestinal microbiome have a significant impact on the host [10]. In addition to the extraction of key nutrients such as amino acids and vitamins, fermentation by the intestinal microbiota produces short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), such as butyrate, which are the primary energy sources for colonic epithelia and essential to the development of villus morphology within the GI tract [11, 12]. Although previous studies have shown that diet can have a dramatic impact on the composition and function of the gut microbiome [10, 13, 14], much less is known concerning the role of the host in shaping diet-microbiome interrelationships.

To date, most microbiome investigations have relied on the use of 16S rRNA surveys. Although such surveys provide details of community structure, they provide only limited functional insights. Algorithms such as PICRUSt [33] can be applied to deduce the functional capacity of a microbiome based on taxonomic abundances; however, such capacity does not directly translate to functional activity. Consequently, whole microbiome RNASeq (metatranscriptomics) has emerged as a powerful technology to interrogate microbiome function and define members of microbial communities in terms of their functional activities [34]. Here, we apply metatranscriptomics to compare the impact of two dietary regimes (high-fat/low-carbohydrate vs. low-fat/high-carbohydrate) on the structure and function of the intestinal microbiomes of Plin2-null and WT mice. Note that throughout, we define community structure on the basis of expressed transcripts rather than, for example, marker genes such as 16S rDNA genes.

In previous work, we used 16S rRNA surveys and metagenomics to show that both dietary fat content and Plin2-null genotype could significantly and independently impact gut microbiome composition, diversity, and function [32]. To derive a more mechanistic understanding of the relationship between dietary fat content, Plin2 genotype, and microbiome function, we undertook a metatranscriptiomics analysis of the colon contents of both wild type (WT) and Plin2-null (Plin2) mice shifted from chow to either a low-fat/high-carbohydrate (LF) or high-fat/low-carbohydrate (HF) diet for 4 days. Bulk RNA was prepared from colon contents and sequenced, resulting in ~ 419 million sequence reads from 16 mice (4 replicates of each diet/genotype combination) of which ~ 234 million reads (55.8%) were of putative bacterial mRNA origin (Table
1; see Additional file 1: Table S1 for additional information on sequence reads).

In summary, these broad taxonomic analyses indicate that across the four sample types (diet x genotype), only the dietary regime, and not the Plin2 genotype, had a significant impact on microbiome composition at the phylum/family level. These results corroborate our previous 16S rRNA-based analyses in which Plin2 genotype had minimal impact on microbiota composition in animals fed either HF or LF diets.

We next examined if genotype influenced the functional distribution of reads (Fig.
1b–d). Of the 200,007 unique microbial transcripts identified across all samples, a core set of 156,289 transcripts (78.1%) were identified in all four diet/genotype groups (i.e., Plin2-HF, Plin2-LF, WT-HF, WT-LF). Of the remaining 43,718 transcripts absent in at least one of the four samples, only a small proportion of transcripts were uniquely associated with either Plin2 genotype or diet (Fig.
1b). Interestingly, samples from the same genotype (i.e., Plin2-HF and Plin2-LF; WT-HF and WT-LF) shared a greater proportion of expressed transcripts (1.7 and 2.7%, respectively) than samples sharing diets (0.8% for Plin2-HF and WT-HF, and 0.9% for Plin2-LF and WT-LF), suggesting that Plin2 genotype was a factor in modifying transcript profiles between treatment groups. When only transcripts with at least moderate or high levels of expression (defined as ≥ 10 and ≥ 100 reads per kilobase of transcript per million mapped reads (RPKM), respectively) in at least one sample type were considered, the proportion of shared, core transcripts dropped to 16.4 and 10.3%, respectively, with many transcripts displaying elevated expression only in a single sample type (Fig.
1c, d). For example, across the 6121 highly expressed transcripts (≥ 100 RPKM), 16.6% were specific to Plin2-HF samples, 13.4% were specific to WT-HF samples, 16.9% were specific to Plin2-LF samples, and 11% were specific to WT-LF samples. Given that their high expression is limited to specific samples, such transcripts might reflect key responses to changes in environmental conditions imposed by different diets and/or genotypes.

Among the transcripts that were significantly differentially expressed in the HF comparison (Plin2-HF vs. WT-HF), 44 displayed fold-changes greater than 300; most of them derived from Lachnospiraceae, Bacteroidaceae, and “other Firmicutes” (Additional file 2: Table S2). These transcripts included CK5_14390, a flavoprotein from Ruminococcus obeum, which was highly expressed only in the Plin2-HF samples (RPKM = 2412 ± 2340; compared to < 2 for the other three sample types). Flavoproteins are involved in butyrate synthesis pathways, a key metabolite for maintaining gut homeostasis and epithelial integrity [49]. Conversely, RHOM_00695, a UDP-4-dehydro-6-deoxy-2-acetamido-d-glucose 4-reductase from Roseburia hominis, displayed considerably reduced expression only in the Plin2-HF samples (RPKM = 29.7 ± 35.5; compared to > 2000 for the other three sample types). RHOM_00695 belongs to the short-chain dehydrogenase/reductase family and is essential for Helicobacter pylori pathogenesis, with roles in the biosynthesis of flagella and lipopolysaccharide [50–52].

To further explore the functional consequences of changes in microbial community gene expression profiles, differentially expressed transcripts were mapped to metabolic enzymes and subsequently grouped into pathways as defined by the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG; [53]). Gene set enrichment analysis identified 42 of 144 pathways that were enriched in at least one of the four pairwise comparisons of genotype/diet groups (Fig.
3 and Additional file 6: Table S5). Twenty-three of these pathways were associated with the production and/or degradation of amino acids, energy, carbohydrates, or nucleotides (Fig.
3a). Although we note considerable overlap in enriched pathways in the pairwise comparisons of the genotype/diet groups, the comparison of Plin2-null vs. WT mice fed a LF diet exhibited the fewest number of enriched pathways (20 pathways). Consistent with the taxonomic analysis of differentially expressed transcripts (Fig.
2a), the greatest abundances of differentially expressed enzymes were observed in the comparisons of (1) Plin2-null vs. WT mice fed a HF diet (153 enzymes in 27 pathways) and (2) Plin2-null mice fed HF vs. LF diets (164 enzymes in 26 pathways).

PCA analysis of differentially expressed enzymes revealed significant differences in clustering between the Plin2-null and WT mice fed a HF diet, as well as WT mice fed HF and LF diets (q value < 0.05 for both; Additional file 3: Figure S1D). However, only the former exhibited significant differences in PCA clusters at the level of the pathway (Additional file 3: Figure S1E). Together, these results reveal that differential expression of microbial transcripts between Plin2 and WT mice extends to changes in the expression of multiple enzymes having the potential to alter metabolic activity in the microbiome.

In the previous section, we identified several metabolic pathways exhibiting differential expression across genotype/diet groups. Of particular interest were comparisons between Plin2-null and WT mice fed a HF diet, given the role of Plin2 in lipid homeostasis. Although both groups exhibited similar taxonomic distributions, 33 KEGG-defined pathways were enriched in differentially expressed genes in either WT or Plin2 groups on HF diet (Fig.
3a). Here, we further explore changes in expression in several pathways involved in energy metabolism and the production of co-factors, amino acids, and butyrate (Fig.
4 and Additional file 7: Figure S2, Additional file 8: Figure S3, Additional file 9: Figure S4, Additional file 10: Figure S5, Additional file 11: Figure S6, Additional file 12: Figure S7).

Furthermore, we note that two enzymes that help link acetyl-CoA with butyrate, butyryl dehydrogenase (EC 1.3.8.1), and 3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA dehydratase (EC:4.2.1.55) are down regulated in the HF comparison but not the LF comparison. While these expression differences suggest that Plin2 mice may produce more butyrate under a low-fat/high-carbohydrate diet, the relative impact for Plin2 and WT mice fed a HF diet are less clear. Further insights may be gained through the application of methods such as constraints-based modeling to examine changes in pathway flux as a consequence of enzyme expression [55].

Previous studies in humans and animal models have documented that diet plays a major role in driving the taxonomic structure of the intestinal microbiota and that the composition of the microbiota can have a significant impact on host health. For example, through the production of short-chain fatty acids, previous studies have shown that species of Bacteroides, Alistipes, and Parabacteroides can influence host body mass [56]. However, although different taxa within a microbiome can impart unique functionality, metagenomic studies have also revealed the capacity of diverse microbiomes to encode similar functional potential [57]. In this study, we applied metatranscriptomic sequence analysis to examine the potential of host genotype and diet to influence microbial community structure and function. Consistent with previous studies, we found that changes in dietary fat and/or carbohydrates had a dramatic impact on community structure. Crucially, however, we also demonstrated that deletion of a mouse lipid storage gene, Plin2, can significantly alter microbial gene expression, despite having minimal impact on community structure (at least in the short-term). Furthermore, although the intestinal microbiota of WT mice exhibited relatively robust and rapid transcriptional responses to changes in dietary fat/carbohydrates, the microbiota of Plin2 mice displayed even more dramatic responses, as indicated by the greater number and increased magnitude of differentially expressed pathways in this group (Fig.
3). Collectively, our results provide evidence of host gene function and diet interacting to regulate gut microbial metabolism and suggest a specific role of Plin2 host functions in integrating metabolic responses of specific bacterial taxa to HF diets.

Key outstanding questions include the mechanism by which changes in lipid uptake and/or metabolism by the host influence microbial gene expression patterns. By using metabolomics and stable isotope labeling, we expect that future studies will reveal how changes in enzyme expression affect the flux of metabolites through diverse metabolic pathways and thereby impact microbial growth and community function. Of particular interest would be experiments that allow the delineation of metabolites produced and consumed by the microbiome from those associated with the host. Furthermore, because the two dietary regimes examined in this study differed in both fat and carbohydrate content, additional work is needed to delineate the relative contributions of these two energy sources to the phenotypes reported in this study. Finally, longitudinal follow-up studies are needed to determine the temporal relationships between diet-induced changes in microbiome function and development of metabolic disease. Conducting these studies across developmental stages (i.e., infant, juvenile, adult, and aged mice) would also be of interest to better understand inter-generational transmission of obesity and metabolic disease risk.

Obesity and its co-morbidities, such as fatty liver disease, are major global health concerns. The composition and function of the intestinal microbiome is recognized as a critical determinant of metabolic disease risk. Here, we show that under a high-fat/low-carbohydrate dietary regime, despite sharing similar microbiome community structures, the knockout of the Plin2 gene in mice can give rise to dramatic differences in microbial gene expression profiles. Many of these changes were associated with the coordinated expression of suites of enzymes mediating consecutive reactions within a pathway, directing metabolic flux towards the production of important “biomass” constituents (i.e., amino acids, nucleotides, and other molecules required for growth). To our knowledge, this is the first demonstration of how host genotype can impact microbiome function without altering community composition, emphasizing the need to prioritize metatranscriptomic studies over 16S rRNA surveys to gain more meaningful insights into microbiome function.

Eight-week-old male C57BL/6 (WT) and Plin2-null (Plin2) mice on the C57BL/6 background were used for all studies. The generation and characterization of Plin2-null mice have been described in detail previously [61]. The WT mice used in this study were obtained from a breeding colony maintained at the University of Colorado School of Medicine’s Center for Comparative Medicine and housed in the same room as Plin2-null mice. All mice were fed standard mice chow (2020X, Harlan Laboratories, 16% fat calories, 24% protein calories and 60% carbohydrate calories) ad libitum from weaning to 8 weeks of age, at which time they were housed individually in a metabolic monitoring system at 30 °C, the thermoneutral temperature of mice [62], for measurements of energy balance (intake and expenditure), the respiratory exchange ratio (RER), and activity levels (Columbus 8 M Oxymax) [63]. Following a 3-day adjustment period, the mice were fed nutritionally balanced high-fat (HFD; 60% fat calories, 20% protein calories, 20% carbohydrate calories, D12492) or low-fat (LFD; 10% fat calories, 20% protein calories, 70% carbohydrate calories, D12450B) diets from Research Diets Inc. (New Brunswick, NJ) ad libitum for 4 days.

The RiboPure-bacteria kit (Ambion, Austin, TX, USA) was used to isolate total RNA from colon contents according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, samples were collected and suspended in RNAwiz (provided in a kit) and bead beaten with zirconia beads using the Roche MagnaLyser (Roche Applied Science, Indianapolis, Indiana). Nucleic acids were recovered from the lysate by adding chloroform, centrifugation, and removal of the aqueous layer. Following ethanol precipitation, the sample were bound to a spin filter, washed, and then eluted with 50 μl of the provided elution solution. The eluted RNA was then treated with DNAse I (provided in the kit) for removal of any contaminating DNA from RNA. The final product RNA was stored in −80 °C and shipped on dry ice to the Donnelly Sequencing Centre of the University of Toronto, Canada. Ribosomal RNA depletion was performed using the Ribo-Zero™ Epidemiology kit (Epicentre Inc, Madison, WI, USA). Sequencing was performed on an Illumina NextSeq500 platform using a single high-output cartridge to generate ~ 419 million 1 × 150 bp reads. With ~ 20–30 million reads generated per sample (Table
1), rarefaction analysis revealed sufficient depth of coverage to identify the vast majority of species and enzymes present in the samples (Additional file 14: Figure S8). Sequence data is available at the NCBI Sequence Read Archive (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra/) with the BioProject identifier: PRJNA379425.

Sequence reads were processed as described previously [34, 35]. In brief, we processed sequence reads by removing adaptor-contaminated and low-quality reads using Cross_Match v0.990319 (www.phrap.org) and USEARCH v7.0.1001 [64], respectively. Next, rRNA and tRNA reads were filtered using Infernal v1.1.1 [65] and host reads identified through BWA v0.7.5a [66] and BLAT v35 [67] sequence similarity searches against a database of mouse transcripts (ENSEMBL release 78 [68]). Putative mRNA reads were then assembled using the Trinity v2.1.1 de novo assembler [69], and resultant contigs, as well as unassembled reads, were assigned to microbial transcripts using a tiered set of sequence similarity searches against a database of sequenced microbial genomes (downloaded from NCBI June 2015) using BWA and BLAT, as well as the protein non-redundant database (downloaded from NCBI July 2015) using DIAMOND v0.7.5a [38]. The expression level of a microbial transcript is then based on the number of sequence reads mapped to that transcript. Consistent with previous studies [70], we first filtered for transcripts expressed at low levels, defined here as those with < 5 mapped reads (representing ~ 6.5% of all mapped reads), and then normalized expression levels of transcripts as reads per kilobase per million mapped reads (RPKM; [71]). Where no expression was observed, RPKM values were set to 0.

For each dietary/genotype comparison, in addition to examining differences in the overall distribution of microbiome composition, we also investigated changes in the abundance of each taxon, defined as the sum of RPKM values of transcripts assigned to that taxon. For the former, the influence of only a single factor was investigated in the analysis, i.e., genotype (Plin2 vs. WT) or diet (HF vs. LF). For each taxon, we estimated the influence of two independent factors, genotype and diet, on one dependent variable, i.e., relative expression as defined by RPKM values. Comparisons were performed using the non-parametric permutational multivariate analysis of variance test (PERMANOVA; [72]) to assess the difference in microbiome composition between different genotypes or diets. PERMANOVA was implemented through the f_npManov function of MATLAB (R2015a, The MathWorks Inc., Natick, MA, USA) toolbox Fathom [73], using 100,000 replicate label permutations and adjusting p values with the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure [74]. The cutoff of the adjusted p value was set as 0.05.

To reveal the correlation of the overall expression distributions relating to taxa, transcripts, differentially expressed transcripts, enzymes, and pathways across the 16 samples, we applied principal component analysis (PCA) using the pca function from MATLAB (R2015a, The MathWorks Inc., Natick, MA, USA). In addition, we used PERMANOVA to test how well the first and the second principle components separate sample types (e.g., Plin2-HF vs. WT-HF).

We used four biodiversity indices, i.e., Shannon entropy index (Shannon), Fisher’s alpha index (F-alpha), Chao1 index (Chao1), and Simpson index (Simpson) to examine biodiversity distributions of our data. Chao1 values were calculated using EstimateS v 9.1.0 [75] with 100 bootstrap replicates. Other indices were calculated using the vegan package v2.4.3 [76] in R v3.4.0 [77].

To test if taxonomic categories and KEGG-defined pathways were enriched with either significantly differentially expressed transcripts or enzymes, gene set enrichment analyses were performed using a hypergeometric test with a minimum of two genes per gene set. In these analyses, to ensure consistency across sample comparison, we examined enrichment relative to the total pool of all transcripts identified across all 16 samples. We used a false discovery rate (FDR) adjustment with the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure to correct p values. Hypergeometric tests were performed using the hygecdf and mafdr functions from MATLAB (R2015a, The MathWorks Inc., Natick, MA, USA) with a FDR cutoff of 0.05.

Given a transcript or enzyme g, its expression fold change (eFC), for a pairwise comparison between sample 1 and 2, was calculated as:

Where n is the total number of transcripts mapped to this enzyme in that sample. Pathway visualizations of enzyme eFCs were performed using Cytoscape v3.4.0 [78] with pathways downloaded in KGML format from KEGG [79].

Differential expression analysis of mapped transcripts for different sample-wise comparisons was performed using DESeq [39]. Since our interest is focused on comparisons between different genotypes or diets, only four combinations were explored, i.e., Plin2-HF vs. WT-HF (Geno-HF), Plin2-LF vs. WT-LF (Geno-LF), Plin2-HF vs. Plin2-LF (Diet-Plin2), and WT-HF vs. WT-LF (Diet-WT). For each pairwise comparison, we defined significantly differentially expressed transcripts (sig. transcripts) as those with q values < 0.05 (using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure to correct p values) and Log2 (eFC) > 2. Across all comparisons, 3777 unique sig. transcripts were identified. Enzymes are defined as significantly differentially expressed if at least one sig. transcript is mapped to that enzyme.



This work was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health to JLM (2RO1-HD045962 and R01-HD075285). JP and XX were supported through funding from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (THC-135233), the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (RGPIN-2014-06664), and the University of Toronto’s Medicine by Design initiative which receives funding from the Canada First Research Excellence Fund. Computing resources were provided by the SciNet HPC Consortium. SciNet is funded by the Canada Foundation for Innovation under the auspices of Compute Canada, the Government of Ontario, Ontario Research Fund—Research Excellence, and the University of Toronto. The funders had no role in the study design, data collection, and analysis; decision to publish; or preparation of the manuscript. All authors had access to all the data.

Sequence data is available at the NCBI Sequence Read Archive (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra/) with the BioProject identifier: PRJNA379425.

All animal protocols adhered to the University of Colorado Denver Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) guidelines.

Not applicable.

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (10.1186/s40168-017-0327-x) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

