Dysbiosis of skin microbiome and gut microbiome in melanoma progression

The microbiome alterations are associated with cancer growth and may influence the immune system and response to therapy. Particularly, the gut microbiome has been recently shown to modulate response to melanoma immunotherapy. However, the role of the skin microbiome has not been well explored in the skin tumour microenvironment and the link between the gut microbiome and skin microbiome has not been investigated in melanoma progression. Therefore, the aim of the present study was to examine associations between dysbiosis in the skin and gut microbiome and the melanoma growth using MeLiM porcine model of melanoma progression and spontaneous regression.

Parallel analysis of cutaneous microbiota and faecal microbiota of the same individuals was performed in 8 to 12 weeks old MeLiM piglets. The bacterial composition of samples was analysed by high throughput sequencing of the V4-V5 region of the 16S rRNA gene. A significant difference in microbiome diversity and richness between melanoma tissue and healthy skin and between the faecal microbiome of MeLiM piglets and control piglets were observed. Both Principal Coordinate Analysis and Non-metric multidimensional scaling revealed dissimilarities between different bacterial communities. Linear discriminant analysis effect size at the genus level determined different potential biomarkers in multiple bacterial communities. Lactobacillus, Clostridium sensu stricto 1 and Corynebacterium 1 were the most discriminately higher genera in the healthy skin microbiome, while Fusobacterium, Trueperella, Staphylococcus, Streptococcus and Bacteroides were discriminately abundant in melanoma tissue microbiome. Bacteroides, Fusobacterium and Escherichia-Shigella were associated with the faecal microbiota of MeLiM piglets. Potential functional pathways analysis based on the KEGG database indicated significant differences in the predicted profile metabolisms between the healthy skin microbiome and melanoma tissue microbiome. The faecal microbiome of MeLiM piglets was enriched by genes related to membrane transports pathways allowing for the increase of intestinal permeability and alteration of the intestinal mucosal barrier.

The associations between melanoma progression and dysbiosis in the skin microbiome as well as dysbiosis in the gut microbiome were identified. Results provide promising information for further studies on the local skin and gut microbiome involvement in melanoma progression and may support the development of new therapeutic approaches.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12866-022-02458-5.

Cutaneous Melanoma (CM) is a malignant skin cancer originating from epidermal melanocytes [1, 2]. Even though it is less common than other skin cancers, CM is more lethal due to its high metastatic potential [2–4]. Considering the aggressiveness of this disease, it is important to identify the risk factors associated with melanoma development to improve diagnosis and treatment methods of this serious skin cancer. Different risk factors are associated with melanoma development: besides the genetic predisposition, such as the familial history of melanoma or other skin cancers and type of melanocytic nevi, other environmental factors, particularly the sun and UV radiation exposure, increase the risk of melanoma development [4–6].

The aim of the present study was to assess the association between the diversity, composition and function of the skin and faecal microbiome and melanoma development and to compare the bacterial composition in such entities using high throughput sequencing. The samples were collected from multiple sites (inner melanoma tissue, melanoma surface, healthy skin and stool) of experimental piglets at different ages throughout melanoma progression and melanoma spontaneous regression (experimental scheme is presented in Fig. S1). Findings could contribute to the characterization of skin and gut microbiome composition and modification, as well as functional mechanisms following melanoma progression.

Skin and stool microbiome samples were collected from MeLiM piglets with melanoma progression (n = 10) and spontaneous regression (n = 10), as well as from crossbreds of MeLiM and white strain with black skin and several melanomas with regressive disease course (n = 4) and were compared to control MeLiM x white crossbreds with melanoma-free white skin (n = 10).

A total of 13,747,282 sequences were obtained from different samples. The mean sequence length was 275 bp. The metagenomic analysis of each microbiota (faecal and cutaneous) was performed separately.

Alpha diversity of samples collected from different sites (melanoma tissue, melanoma surface, healthy skin and stool) was evaluated to determine the bacterial diversity of each animal phenotype (progression, spontaneous regression and white control) using Chao1, ACE, observed species, Fisher, Shannon, Simpson and Inverse Simpson indexes. The results are represented in the boxplot graph (Fig. 1, S2, S3). The obtained values after comparison between different groups are reported in (Table S1, S2). A highly significant difference in the skin microbiota diversity was markedly noticed between different sites of sampling (melanoma tissue, melanoma surface and healthy skin) and between different animal groups (MeLiM, white control, and black crossbred) (Kruskal–Wallis test; p < 0.05). The highest bacterial diversity was observed in the healthy skin microbiome of white control pigs (Fig. 1a,
1b, S2a, S2b). The diversity of melanoma surface and melanoma tissue in the MeLiM progressive group was lower than in the MeLiM with spontaneous regression but the differences were not significant (Fig. S3a). However, through the animal age, the diversity of the skin microbiome significantly increased in melanoma regression group while no distinct difference was observed in the skin microbiome of melanoma progression group between the analysed ages (Fig. S3b).

In addition, beta diversity was used to analyse the dissimilarities between bacterial communities in skin and stool samples separately. Principal Coordinate Analysis (PCoA) and Non-metric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) plots based on Bray Curtis distance were performed to reveal disparately separated microbial communities (Fig. 2, S4). In the skin microbiome, three major clusters were distinguished according to the nature of samples (melanoma tissue, melanoma surface and healthy skin) (Fig. 2a, S4a). Clusters of the progressive melanoma group and the control healthy skin group were distinctly separated showing the higher significant differences between those two bacterial communities (Fig. 2b, S4b). The cluster of regressive melanoma is the largest one which reflects the bacterial diversity dissimilarities between samples of this categorical group, which were heterogeneous because they belong to two different animal groups (MeLiM and Crossbred) and due to the changes in microbial composition throughout the ages. The bacterial diversity of faecal samples in crossbred with melanoma regression was more similar to that in white crossbred animals (control) and MeLiM progressive and regressive groups were clustered together indicating that no distinct difference was observed in faecal bacterial structures between the progressive and regressive melanoma (Fig. 2c, S4c).

The relative abundance composition of cutaneous skin microbiome at the phylum level showed that the higher abundance of Firmicutes and Proteobacteria were associated with skin devoid of melanoma and white control pigs, while the relative abundance of Fusobacteria was associated with melanoma tissue and melanoma surface in MeLiM piglets with melanoma progression and spontaneous regression (Fig. 3a), (Table S3). The Firmicutes and Proteobacteria ratios were lower in those last groups. Actinobacteria and Bacteroidetes abundances were relatively similar in all samples. The relative abundances of Fusobacteria were decreased dramatically in the regressive melanoma tissue microbiome from 20.9% at the age of 8 weeks to 5.0% at the age of 12 weeks, while no significant changes were observed in the bacterial composition of progressive melanoma skin microbiome throughout the ages (Fig. 3b), (Table S3).

These differences in relative abundances of certain genera reflect the dissimilarities in the skin and faecal microbiome between multiple experimental categories (melanoma tissue vs healthy skin, melanoma regression vs melanoma progression and MeLiM piglets vs crossbred piglets).

To predict the potential function profiles of the skin and gut microbiota in piglets with melanoma progression or melanoma regression, the relative abundances of KEGG pathways were explored based on PICRUSt analysis. A total of 248 and 130 unique KEGG Orthology (KO) pathways at level 3 were predicted in the skin microbiome and faecal microbiome respectively (Table S5, S6).

In the faecal microbiome, twenty-eight KEGG pathways at level 2 revealed significant differences in potential functions between MeLiM and crossbred piglets (Fig. S6c, S7c). Membrane transport, Carbohydrate metabolism and Xenobiotics biodegradation and metabolism were the principal significant abundant functions associated with MeLiM faecal microbiota. Replication and repair, Translation, Cell motility, Amino acid metabolism, Nucleotide metabolism and Energy metabolism were the most significant pathways associated with the faecal microbiota of crossbred piglets. In the faecal microbiota of MeLiM piglets, five KEGG pathways at level 3 detected a significant difference in predicted functional profiles between regressive melanoma and progressive melanoma. Fatty acids biosynthesis and Lipid biosynthesis metabolism were significantly associated with progressive melanoma, while Selenocompound metabolism, Cell division (unclassified function) and General function prediction (unclassified) were the significant abundant pathways related to regressive melanoma (Fig. S6d, S7d). The results have shown that in addition to community differences, there may be differences in the functionalities of the microbiome between MeLiM piglets and healthy controls.

Several studies have reported the association of commensal microbiota of human or animal models with cancers, mostly focused on colorectal cancer [48–51], in addition to gastric [52, 53], liver [54], pancreatic [55, 56], lung [57–59], breast [60, 61] and bladder [62, 63] cancers. Generally, many reports suggested that microbiota induces carcinogenesis and other ones supported that microbiota play protective roles against cancer [64–67]. Recent reviews focused on the importance of the microbiome in skin cancer research and explored the crosstalk between the immune system and the skin microbiota in health and diseases (including cancer) [6, 11, 12, 68]. The profound reliance of the skin immune system on its resident microbiota for both host defence and tissue repair led to the integration of the skin microbiota and its metabolites as an intrinsic regulator of immune responses in the tissue microenvironments [13, 69–71]. The interactions between skin immune cells and microbiota are not only within the local microenvironment but also the skin immune system was stimulated by metabolites of microbes from other body sites (e.g. gastrointestinal tract) [9]. The gut microbiota is involved in cancer and is associated with anticancer therapy efficacy. Recently, several studies illustrated that the gut microbiota and the treatment with faecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) promoted the responses to anti-PD-1 immunotherapy and restored the tumour microenvironment in patients with advanced melanoma [28–30, 32, 34, 35, 72, 73].

Depth studies suggested that gut F. nucleatum originated from the oral cavity [168, 169]. Several reports have demonstrated that Fusobacteria can migrate from the oral cavity to other districts of the body via blood circulation or lymphatic circulation systems to cause serious infections in various organs of humans including the head, neck, respiratory tract, brain, colon, liver and lymph nodes to cause metastatic abscess formation [170–175]. Also, recent studies suggested the translocation of Fusobacteria from colorectal cancer cells to metastatic sites attached with the primary tumour cells via Fap2, as part of metastatic tissue colonization [170, 175]. These observations indicate the importance of tumour microbiota as essential components of the tumour microenvironment.

According to our knowledge, this is the first study exploring the association between gut and skin microbiome changes and melanoma progression. The implementation of MeLiM piglets as an animal model in melanoma progression might be a promising approach. Significant differences were observed in bacterial composition, relative abundances, richness and diversity indexes, and potential functional pathways in skin and gut microbiome of MeLiM piglets with melanoma progression compared to healthy piglets (controls). Fusobacterium and Bacteroides were the common potential biomarkers identified in both gut and skin microbiome in MeLiM piglets with melanoma progression.

The comprehensive analysis of the gut-skin axis is essential to understand the bidirectional cross-talk between the gut and skin tumour microbiome and is regarded as an exciting field of research, with promising therapeutic, dermatologic and cosmetic applications. Moreover, the evaluation of the functions of distinct bacteria (biomarker) and their metabolites in host physiology and cancer progression can provide novel insights into the underlying mechanisms and pathways to enhance the efficacy of both anticancer therapy and cancer prevention. Furthermore, a meta-analysis might be potentially expanded to include fungi and viruses in order to fully exploit the interaction network and potential functional between the gut and skin microbiome and melanoma development.

All animals used in the study are owned by the Institute of Animal Physiology and Genetics, Czech Academy of Sciences. The study was conducted under the Authorization for the use of experimental animals (No. 71922/2016-MZE-17214) and Authorization for breeding of experimental animals and delivery of experimental animals (No. 9322/2015 MZE-17214) issued by the Ministry of Agriculture of the Czech Republic and approved by the Resort Professional Commission of the Czech Academy of Sciences for Approval of Projects of Experiments on Animals (Projects of Experiments No. 82–2017 and No. 96–2015).

The melanoma development (the position, size and shape of tumours, as well as animal body weight) was macroscopically monitored at the 6, 8, 10 and 12 weeks of piglet age to assess the progressive or regressive disease development. At the 8, 10, and 12 weeks of age, the scrapings from the melanoma surface and surrounding healthy skin surface (4 cm2 area, approximately 5 cm from melanoma) were collected using a sterile scalpel blade to a sterile tube. Before the skin surface scraping, the bristles were removed by a different sterile scalpel blade. In these time intervals, the piglet faeces were collected from the rectum into sterile tubes. The scrapings and stool samples were immediately frozen to -80 °C. In addition, at 8 and 12 weeks of piglet age, the melanomas were collected from animals under Isoflurane and nitric oxide general anaesthesia. After collection, the tumour edges and surface were aseptically removed and the melanoma inner tissue was immediately frozen to liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C until analysis.

The DNA was extracted from stool samples using QIAamp PowerFecal DNA Kit (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany) and from tissue samples using DNeasy PowerBiofilm Kit (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany) as per the manufacturer’s protocols. The disintegration step was performed with a FastPrep-24 Classic instrument (MP Biologicals) device for 1 min at a maximum speed of 6.5 m/s. The elution was done with 60 μL of elution buffer. The eluted DNA was stored at − 20 °C until further use.

The V4-V5 region of the 16S rRNA gene was amplified to prepare amplicons from the extracted DNA using the primer pair: BactB-F (GGATTAGATACCCTGGTAGT) and BactB-R (CACGACACGAGCTGACG) [176]. mixed with EliZyme HS FAST MIX Red (Elisabeth Pharmacon, Brno, Czech Republic). The PCR conditions were: denaturation for 5 min at 95 °C, followed by 25 cycles of 30 s at 95 °C, 30 s at 57 °C and 30 s at 72 °C, ending by final elongation for 5 min at 72 °C. The quality of PCR amplicons was checked by 1.5% agarose gel electrophoresis (30 min at 100 V), then the amplicons were purified using QIAquick PCR Purification Kit (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s protocol and the concentration of the purified amplicons was determined by Nanodrop OneC Microvolume UV–Vis Spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific, Wilmington, USA).

For diversity analyses, libraries were prepared from purified amplicons of V4-V5 region of the 16Sr RNA gene (300 bp) by NEBNext®Fast DNA Library Prep Set kit (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA, USA). The adaptor-ligated libraries were purified using AMPure XP beads sizing (Beckman Coulter, Brea, CA, USA). The quality of purified libraries was controlled by High Sensitivity DNA electrophoresis with Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer instrument (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) using the Agilent High Sensitivity DNA Reagents and chips (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). The purified libraries were quantified using the KAPA Library Quantification Kit for Ion Torrent Platforms (Roche, Pleasanton, CA, USA) in QuantStudio™ 3 Real-Time PCR System (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The pool of equimolar concentration of barcoded libraries was used to prepare a sequencing template with Ion Sphere Particles (ISPs) using Ion PGM™ Hi-Q™ View OT2 400 Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) in Ion OneTouchTM 2 instrument. The enrichment of the template positive ISPs was performed on the Ion OneTouchTM ES instrument. The enriched template positive ISPs were loaded in Ion 316TM Chip v2 BC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The sequencing was then performed on an Ion Torrent PGM sequencer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) using Ion PGM™ Hi-Q™ View Sequencing solutions kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions.

Bacterial 16S rRNA gene sequences were obtained in FASTQ format and analyzed by QIIME 2 version 2020.2 pipeline [177]. Quality filtering and chimaera excluding were performed using the DADA2 plugin in QIIME2 [178] (via q2‐dada2) to extract sequence variants (ASVs). Mafft was used to align the sequences [179] (via q2‐alignment) and fasttree was used to construct a phylogenetic tree [180] (via q2‐phylogeny). Then, clustering and taxonomy classification was generated using the qiime feature-classifier with VSEARCH based on SILVA database (version 132) with 99% threshold [181]. The rarefaction was conducted to normalize the data based on reads depth in all samples. Alpha diversity indexes were determined using q2‐diversity plugin based on the Kruskal–Wallis test and visualized using the qiime2R (https://github.com/jbisanz/qiime2R) and ggplot2 packages in R-Studio (version 3.6.3) [182–184]. Principal Coordinate Analysis (PCoA) based on Bray Curtis distance diversity metrics (beta diversity) were generated by qiime2 core-metrics phylogenetic pipeline after rarefaction. The 2-dimensional PCoA plots were generated by qiime2R and ggplot2. Non-metric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) plot was performed using phyloseq and ggplot2 and the dissimilarity was based on Bray Curtis distance [184, 185]. The confidence ellipse represents 95% of the confidence level. The linear discriminant analysis (LDA) with effect size (LefSe) algorithm [186] in Galaxy module http://huttenhower.sph.harvard.edu/galaxy/ was used to detect features with significant differential abundance between different biological categories of samples based on the factorial Kruskal–Wallis test and the pairwise Wilcoxon test to identify taxa with significant differential relative abundances at genus level with alpha values of 0.05 and a threshold value of 3.0 on the logarithmic LDA scores for discriminative features (p < 0.05 and LDA score/effect-size threshold = 3). Phylogenetic investigation of communities by reconstruction of unobserved states algorithm (PICRUSt v 2.3.0-b) [187] was applied to compare the potential function capacities of the cutaneous microbiome and faecal microbiome among different categories of samples. The functional genes were categorized into KEGG pathways at different subclasses levels 1, 2 and 3 and the resulting abundance table was imported in STAMP v2.1.3 program (Statistical Analysis of Metagenomic Profiles) for statistical analysis [188] by using Non-corrected Welch's t-test type two-sided, with the confidence interval (CI) method of Welch's inverted adjustment of 0.95 (p < 0.05). The relationships among functional capacities were analysed by principal component analysis (PCA).



Publisher’s Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

