Liver Steatosis, Gut-Liver Axis, Microbiome and Environmental Factors. A Never-Ending Bidirectional Cross-Talk

The prevalence of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is increasing worldwide and parallels comorbidities such as obesity, metabolic syndrome, dyslipidemia, and diabetes. Recent studies describe the presence of NAFLD in non-obese individuals, with mechanisms partially independent from excessive caloric intake. Increasing evidences, in particular, point towards a close interaction between dietary and environmental factors (including food contaminants), gut, blood flow, and liver metabolism, with pathways involving intestinal permeability, the composition of gut microbiota, bacterial products, immunity, local, and systemic inflammation. These factors play a critical role in the maintenance of intestinal, liver, and metabolic homeostasis. An anomalous or imbalanced gut microbial composition may favor an increased intestinal permeability, predisposing to portal translocation of microorganisms, microbial products, and cell wall components. These components form microbial-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs) or pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), with potentials to interact in the intestine lamina propria enriched in immune cells, and in the liver at the level of the immune cells, i.e., Kupffer cells and stellate cells. The resulting inflammatory environment ultimately leads to liver fibrosis with potentials to progression towards necrotic and fibrotic changes, cirrhosis. and hepatocellular carcinoma. By contrast, measures able to modulate the composition of gut microbiota and to preserve gut vascular barrier might prevent or reverse NAFLD.

Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the most common cause of chronic liver disease worldwide [1].

The liver secretes primary bile acids and antimicrobial molecules (immunoglobulin A (IgA) and angiogenin) into the biliary tract. Molecules reach the intestinal lumen and contribute to maintenance of gut eubiosis (while inhibiting intestinal bacterial overgrowth). During the enterohepatic circulation of bile, bile acids (BAs) act as signaling molecules by interacting with the nuclear receptor farnesoid X receptor (FXR) and the G protein-coupled bile acid receptor (GPBAR1). This interaction contributes to modulate hepatic bile acid synthesis, glucose metabolism, lipid metabolism, and dietary energy utilization. Gut products include host and/or microbial metabolites and microbial-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs). The systemic circulation also plays a role, since products are translocated to the liver via the portal vein and can influence liver functions. The systemic circulation extends the gut–liver axis since liver metabolites from dietary, endogenous, or xenobiotic substances (i.e., free fatty acids, choline metabolites, and ethanol metabolites) are transported to the intestine through the capillary system. This mechanism of continuous recirculation of molecules across blood capillaries can distinctively affect the intestinal barrier. Butyrate, the short chain fatty acid, is protective (i.e., improves the colonic defensive border), while acetaldehyde can activate a barrier damage.

The term NAFLD comprises a wide spectrum of conditions [13,14], ranging from simple non-alcoholic fatty liver (NAFL) without significant inflammation (the majority of cases), to non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) (affecting about 5% of the population). In NASH, hepatic steatosis is associated with pericellular fibrosis, ballooning degeneration of hepatocytes, lobular inflammation, and apoptosis [15]. NASH has potential to progress to (cryptogenic) cirrhosis in 20% of cases. Furthermore, hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) can originate from cirrhosis [6,16,17,18] but also from NASH [19].

NAFLD can be considered as the hepatic expression of gluco-lipid metabolic disturbances that includes insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes mellitus, expansion of visceral fat/frank obesity, dyslipidemia (involving hypertriglyceridemia and low HDL-cholesterol), and ultimately metabolic syndrome (MetS). In particular, triglyceride/HDL-cholesterol ratio [20] and total cholesterol/HDL-cholesterol ratio [21] are independently linked with the presence of NAFLD, being considered reliable predictors of liver disease.

Several lean individuals in the United States suffer from NAFLD, possibly due to the coexistence of diabetes and/or hypertension [31]. In a large cross-sectional Asian study, the presence of NAFLD or AFLD was associated in non-obese subjects (BMI < 25 kg/m2) with the score of coronary artery calcification, an expression of subclinical atherosclerosis [32]. Additionally, NAFLD prevalence and liver fibrosis has been found to increase with age [33].

While most subjects with NAFLD remain asymptomatic, some patients, especially those developing NASH, may complain of vague symptoms (i.e., fatigue, malaise, and right upper abdominal discomfort). NAFLD subjects could ask for medical advice because of mildly elevated liver alanine aminotransferases or incidental increased echogenicity (“bright liver”) at ultrasound (or eventually decreased hepatic attenuation by computed tomography, as well as increased fat signal by magnetic resonance imaging). NAFLD, however, may develop with normal aminotransferase levels. The ultimate diagnosis of NAFLD requires the confirmation of steatosis by liver histology or imaging, no relevant alcohol consumption. or other causes of liver steatosis, and exclusion of a coexisting other chronic liver disease.

The early fat storage in the liver could drive subclinical liver abnormalities, leading to NAFLD development and progression, that can increase risk for advanced liver disease and liver-related mortality [33]. NAFLD also increases the risk of non-liver-related complications, such as cardiovascular disease and malignancy [2,9,10,34,35,36]. In addition, patients with NAFLD suffer from poor quality of life as compared to healthy individuals. A marked worsening occurs with advanced liver diseases, such as liver cirrhosis [37,38]. No specific therapy exists for NAFLD, apart from healthy lifestyles [28,39]. The utility of systematic screening of the population is still debated because of unclear cost-effectiveness [40]. Specific research protocols can target subgroups of patients with symptomatic or asymptomatic NAFLD [41].

The pathophysiology of NAFLD is complex, multifactorial, and partly unknown [28,42,43].

Ultimately, the activation of several transcription factors promotes the release of inflammatory cytokines and chemokines, and stimulates hepatic stellate cells with propensity to collagen deposition, and further aggravation of the insulin resistance status, both potential harmful features in the progression of NASH [68]. In addition, the adipose tissue, skeletal muscle, the heart, the pancreatic islets, certain areas of the brain (mainly hippocampus, cerebellum, hypothalamus), and the intestinal microbiota represent additional organs potential targets of lipotoxicity [41,69,70,71].

NAFLD develops because of the interaction of genes (epistasis) and environmental factors (exposome) [74,75]. The environmental factors act through intestinal, microbial, and dietary modifications [11,76], and can be linked with exposure to food contaminants, contaminated consumer products or air pollution [77,78,79,80,81,82,83,84].

The term gut-liver axis refers to the bidirectional relationship between the intestinal microbiome, the gut, and the liver [88]. There is a close communication between the liver and the intestine, which also involves the biliary tract, the portal vein, the systemic circulation, and a series of systemic mediators [11]. The interaction is bidirectional since gut-derived products permeate the intestine going through the portal vein to the liver, while liver-secreted bile and antibodies are flowing from the liver through the intestine. Moreover, BAs are markedly influenced by the intestinal microbiome but also control the intestinal microbiome, besides their classical physiologic functions that allow food digestion and absorption, as well as stimulation of nuclear receptors and specific receptors at the intestinal level [12,89,90]. The gut barrier integrity results from a balanced cross-talk between microbiome, mucus, intestinal cells, immunological system and gut-vascular barrier. The stability of this equilibrium is essential in maintaining intestinal homeostasis [91,92,93] (Figure 5).

A first level of the gut barrier is the resident microbiota, which is composed by hundred trillions of microorganisms [94], with more than 10 times the genes of the human genome and a weight of about 1–2 kg [95]. The gut microbiota plays a key role in nutrient and vitamin processing, and biotransformation of intestinal primary BAs to secondary BAs [12,89,96].

A second level of gut barrier is the intestinal mucus, i.e., heavily glycosylated proteins secreted by the intestinal goblet cells [97]. This barrier represents an extracellular layer. The thickness of the mucus increases from the stomach towards the colon [98,99]. An important function of the mucus is the prevention of direct contact between harmful/toxic substances/microbiome with the enterocyte. The microbiota in health is physically separated from the intestinal epithelium by the mucus. The microbiota colonizes the outer layer of the mucus and microorganisms use nutrients from the mucus itself.

In summary, the mucus is a dynamic structure conferring protection to the host [98,120]. Changes of mucus and diet have consequences on microbiota distribution and composition. In ulcerative colitis microorganism come in contact with the epithelium and can perpetuate the local inflammation [121]. If the mucus function fails and qualitative/quantitative changes of mucus occur, inflammation is possible with absorption of toxic substances, as seen in cystic inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and cystic fibrosis. Mice models show that a high MUC2 mucin production increases the susceptibility of goblet cells to apoptosis and endoplasmic reticulum stress, while alcohol intake and cirrhosis is associated with increased mucus thickness. In mice, abnormal MUC2 inside the epithelial cells leads to inflammatory changes, which resemble the ulcerative colitis. In addition, high-fat diets can disrupt the intrinsic structure of colonic mucin, as evident in mice developing liver steatosis [86,122].

A third level of the gut barrier is a dynamic assembly. It depends on the kinetics of gastrointestinal motility and secretions, with both events influencing the outer part of the mucus layer. This situation prevents the proliferations of microorganism and provides clearance of luminal debris, contributing to protection against pathogens. Fundamental fluids are the gastric acid and bile containing BAs as one of the three species of biliary lipids (together with cholesterol and phospholipids) [12]. Both fluids have antimicrobial properties [91]. In the stomach and small intestine, only Helicobacter pylori and Lactobacilli respectively survive in the acidic environment [123]. Change of these conditions might lead to both qualitative and quantitative modifications of the gut microbiota composition, abnormal intestinal homeostasis, and disease [91].

In the intestine, micellization of BAs contribute to the digestion and absorption of cholesterol, triglycerides, and fat-soluble vitamins. BAs also are signaling molecules in modulating epithelial cell proliferation, gene expression, and lipid and glucose metabolism. Thus, the enterohepatic circulation of BAs as signaling molecules produces profound effects on lipid and glucose metabolism.

A fourth level of the gut barrier is the monocellular layer [150], which include enterocytes, Goblet cells (which produce mucus), Tufts cells (with chemosensory function) [151], and Paneth cells (which produce antimicrobial peptides) [152]. This cellular barrier has physical, electrical, and chemical properties. The layer is impermeable to most solutes that need a specific transporter to cross the barrier, a mechanism involving transcellular pathway. Intercellular spaces are closed by the presence of specific apical junctional complex, i.e., a tight junctions (TJs) and the adherens junctions. Over 40 proteins contribute to a TJ (i.e., claudins, peripheral membrane proteins, zonula occludens (ZO) 1 and 2, occluding, E-cadherins, and desmosomes) [153,154,155]. The cytoskeleton connects TJs and adherens junctions, and TJs contribute to active and passive transport through the gut barrier [156]. TJs regulate the passive flow of the solutes and water through the paracellular pathway, and operate as a size- and charge-selective filter [157]. The two different routes involve the leak pathway (transport of larger substances namely proteins and bacterial components) and a second claudin-mediated pathway, which limits the flow to small (<4 Å) molecules. Due to the active transport across cells sealed with TJs, the human body prevents the uncontrolled translocation of substances and allows an active transcellular transport through the enterocytes [158]. Moreover, cytokines, tumor necrosis factor-alfa (TNFα), interferon gamma (IFNγ) signaling kinases, and cytoskeleton (myosin light chain kinases (MLCK)) contribute to regulate TJ [159,160,161,162]. Such mechanisms might be impaired during liver disease [163,164,165]. The negative charge of brush border microvilli (depending on polar carbohydrates and charged transmembrane proteins) opposes the negative charge of bacterial cell wall and inhibits bacterial translocation [166].

We assessed urine recovery of orally administered sucrose, lactulose/mannitol, and sucralose by using triple quadrupole mass-spectrometry and high-performance liquid chromatography. We found that increased colonic (but not stomach and small intestinal) permeability was linked to obesity and liver steatosis, regardless dietary habits, age, and physical activity [167] (Figure 6).

A fifth level of the gut barrier is the immunological barrier, starting from the secretory ability of the Paneth cells to secrete several antimicrobial peptides (i.e., defensins, cathelicidines, resistin-like molecules, bactericidal-permeability-inducing proteins and lectins, and IgA immunoglobulins) into the gut lumen at the inner face of the mucin layer hosts [93,168]. A further barrier is the population of intraepithelial cells (conventional and unconventional αβ and δχT cells and mononuclear phagocytes [169]) and lamina propria cells.

There is a precise equilibrium between the gut and the resident microbiota because pattern-recognition receptors (Toll-like receptors, TLRs, and nucleotide binding oligomerization domain-like receptors) on the intestinal epithelial cells will recognize MAMPs and PAMPs crossing the intestinal barrier. In this scenario, recruited dendritic cells transport the given antigens to the mesenteric lymph nodes (MLNs) for antigen presentation. Following this step, priming and maturation of B and T lymphocytes occurs, as part of the adaptive immune response in the gut associated lymphoid tissue [183,184]. As mentioned earlier, the microbiome takes part in the maturation of several immune cells [116,117].

A sixth level of the gut barrier is the gut-vascular barrier [185] with similarities between blood-brain barrier and intestinal barrier [185,186]. This barrier should prevent the translocation of bacteria and/or microbial components across the extracellular and the intestinal epithelial barrier. The so-called gut-vascular unit includes the intestinal endothelium associated with pericytes and enteric glial cells, TJs, and adherens junctions (permeable to most of the small nutrients) [185,186,187]. Endothelial plasma membrane are isolated and carry active and passive transporters, while glial cells contribute to gut homeostasis intestinal permeability. The intact endothelium allows the free diffusion of 4 kD dextran, but 70 kD dextran is blocked. The gut-vascular barrier ultimately blocks a further dissemination of bacteria to liver and spleen, blocked by a second barrier [185]. Under certain circumstances (i.e., infection with Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium), the gut-vascular barrier becomes disrupted and larger substances can permeate, even in the absence of inflammation and vasodilation. This dissemination occurs through the portal circulation more than the lymphatic vessels. A marker of endothelial permeability (vesicle-associated protein-1 (PV1)) can increase during such events and bacteria can be found systemically [185]. The intestinal barrier is typically disrupted in conditions like celiac disease [185], anchylosing spondylitis [188], and NASH [87].

In the health condition, the translocation of small amounts of microorganisms and bacterial products is an ongoing process towards mesenteric lymph nodes (MLNs) [168]. Here, the immune system is continuously stimulated, modulated to achieve immune tolerance [189,190], which allows the killing of microbes without significant inflammatory modifications at a systemic level [191,192]. Minimal amounts of bacterial mRNAs and lipopolysaccharide (LPS) [88,193,194] can permeate to the liver and help detoxifying bacterial products [195,196]. Nevertheless, the liver is usually free of bacteria [195], while acting as a second firewall for microorganisms penetrated after mucosal damage and escaped from MLNs surveillance activity [88,195,196]. At the level of the hepatic sinusoids Kupffer cells account for over the 80% of all tissue macrophages and contribute to phagocytize and kill microbes that originate from the bloodstream [88,195,197,198,199]. Liver resident macrophages also participate in the clearance of microorganisms and MAMPs and PAMPs. Kupffer cells are able to process E. coli endotoxin [200]. Kupffer cells depleted mice display delayed clearance of E. coli K-12 during bacteremia [195], while Kupffer cells perform phagocytosis and killing of green fluorescent protein expressing B.burgdorferii and antigen presentation to natural killer (NK) cells [197]. Mononuclear cells, via functional Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) [201,202], are activated by the lipopolysaccharide binding. The LPS-LBP complex stimulates liver resident myeloid cells via mCD14 and TLR4 [203,204,205].

Several studies in animal models suggest that during liver damage, changes include composition of gut microbiota, quality/quantity of mucus, gastrointestinal motility, epithelial barrier, TJs, and intestinal immunity.

Disruption of the intestinal barrier increases the intestinal permeability, leading to filtration of damaging agents like MAMPs and PAMPs (LPS, microbial DNA, peptidoglycans, and lipopeptides), metabolic products, and whole bacteria to local MLNs, where clearance is defective [206,207,208,209]. The liver is then reached by these agents/bacteria via the mesenteric and portal circulation [88], and detrimental agents perpetuate the local damage in the liver but could also activate a systemic inflammatory response [210,211,212,213,214]. Activated Kupffer cells are essential in this respect [199,212,215,216,217].

Both PAMPs and TLRs interaction activate intracellular molecular pathways (MyD88-dependent or MyD88-independent) that, in turn, activate NF-κB and inflammatory cytokines including TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6, IL-12, IL-18, chemokines like CXCL1, CXCL2, CCL2, CCL5, CCL3, CCL4, vasoactive factors like nitric oxide (NO), and production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) [218]. Liver inflammation is further enhanced following the recruitment of systemic leukocytes (CD4+ T cells, neutrophils, and monocytes) [212,215], with induction of apoptosis and necrosis of the hepatocyte [219], activation and proliferation of hepatic stellate cells (HSC), and production of transforming growth factor-β (TGFβ) with activation of fibrosis [217,220]. The following upregulation of the expression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) enhance the destruction of the hepatic tissue [221,222] in tandem with increased expression of tissue inhibitors of matrix metalloproteinases (TIMPs) a step leading to inhibition of degradation of collagen fibrogenesis in the liver [221,222,223,224]. Indeed, TIMP-1 is a predictive marker for NASH [225].

Oxidative stress contributes to liver damage [226], including liver steatosis [227], since hepatocytes are sensitive to oxidative stress-related molecules [226,228,229]. ROS can deteriorate the ongoing equilibrium of the gut-liver axis and be responsible for intestinal barrier damage. Several conditions can impair the intestinal permeability and act via abnormal redox state in the gut, including diet [230], alcohol [231], infectious [232]/primary inflammatory diseases [233], and drugs [234]. An ongoing hypoperfusion-dependent hypoxia of the intestinal mucosa leads to increased activity of xanthine oxidase, more ROS release and oxidative damage [235]. A vicious circle arises from activation of TLR of Kupffer cells and ROS generation [236], as well as activation and proliferation of hepatic stellate cells (HSC) [237]. In response to ROS, Kupffer cells produce cytokines and chemokines, and stimulate HSCs [229].

Protective mechanisms include the release of macrophagic IL-10 at the intestinal mucosa (modulation of the innate immune activation, decreased tissue damage, amelioration of integrity of the gut barrier, and decreased endotoxin absorption [238,239], and in the liver (reduced inflammations and fibrosis, and decreased activation of Kupffer cells functions [240,241]. NK cells also contribute by killing early activated and senescent HSCs, a step leading to limitation of fibrogenesis [242,243].

Gut microbiota, a super-organism hosted in the human body, can be involved in the pathogenesis of NAFLD [85]. Changes in microbiota signature might exist in NAFLD patients, but findings are difficult to be comprehensively elucidated in different NAFLD phenotypes. The difficulties in interpreting the results depend on the coexistence of complex interactions between genetic and environmental factors across several metabolic abnormalities, which also involves the liver.

At the extreme of the NAFLD spectrum is the so-called “cryptogenic” cirrhosis. Of note, low gut microbiota diversity exists in NAFLD-related liver cirrhosis compared to healthy controls. At the genus level, Bacteroides, Ruminococcus, Klebsiella, Prevotella, Enterococcus, Hemophilus, Lactobacillus, Streptococcus, Pseudomonas, Phascolarctobacterium, Veillonella, Atopobium, Parabacteroides, Dialister, and Christensenella were more abundant, while Methanobrevibacter and Akkermansia decreased [275]. Changes, however, might be influenced by the advanced status of disease, portal hypertension, drugs, etc.

Changes to the aforementioned conditions might originate following impaired intestinal permeability due to disrupted of tight junctions, dysbiosis, and/or small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO). These conditions are associated with the spectrum of liver disease, i.e., alcoholic and non-alcoholic fatty liver [165,276]. Children with NAFLD showed a positive correlation between altered intestinal permeability and liver inflammation/fibrosis [256]. A metanalysis shows that patients with NAFLD more frequently exhibit altered intestinal permeability [277].

NALFD children had increased ratio between urinary excretion of orally-administered lactulose and mannitol (L/M ratio) as a marker of intestinal permeability [256,257,290]. L/M ratio further increased in NASH patients. The increased LPS pointed to bacterial translocation while the extent of hepatic inflammation and fibrosis was proportional to the degree of intestinal permeability [256].

Microbe-associated molecular patterns: the intestinal microbiome is an invaluable source of gases, metabolites, and bacterial products, namely MAMPs and PAMPs. Some of such metabolites deriving from the interaction of the microbiota with endogenous and exogenous substances might act as effectors of damage in the liver after crossing the portal circulation. Upon uptake in the liver, MAMPs activate local inflammatory changes mediated by patter-recognition receptors (PRRs) located on the hepatic stellate cells [291] and Kupffer cells [217]. In turn, endotoxins will activate TLR4, TLR9 (by methylated DNA) and TLR2 (by Gram-positive bacteria) [162], which represent the first step of immune response in liver disease. Further steps include the activation of further inflammatory events via activation of nuclear factor- χB (NF-χB) by the myeloid differentiation primary response protein (MYD88) enhanced hepatic tumor-necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha expression that drives NASH progression [255]. In hepatic stellate cells, fibrosis is promoted via TLR4 signaling that downregulates BMP and activin membrane-bound inhibitor homologue (BAMBI, a decoy receptor for transforming growth factor-β (TGFβ)) [218]. Further steps include the release of inflammatory cytokines, oxidative stress, and endoplasmic reticulum stress, all factors initiating and perpetuating liver damage [292]. Evidences in animals show that diets enriched in fat or deficient in choline drive steatogenic, inflammatory, and fibrogenic hits requiring TLR-4 or 9 [293,294,295]. In addition, inflammasome-deficiency-associated changes in the configuration of the gut microbiota parallel exacerbated hepatic steatosis and inflammation.

Other products: 3-(4-hydroxyphenyl) lactate correlated with specific bacterial species (Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, and Proteobacteria), as well as hepatic fibrosis [269]. Microbiome-derived products of branched-chain and aromatic amino acid metabolism can also play a role in NAFLD. Phenylacetic acid and 3-(4-hydroxyphenyl) lactate, both related to insulin resistance. Obese, non-diabetic patients with hepatic steatosis and inflammation had low microbial gene richness, and increased microbial genetic potential for processing dietary lipids and endotoxin biosynthesis from Proteobacteria. In addition, both aromatic and branched-chain amino acid metabolism was dysregulated [361].

The microbiome is the first interface between the environment and almost all the metabolic, biochemical, endocrine, and signaling pathways influencing the onset and progression of NAFLD.

These external agents act on the microbiota affecting the ability to maintain the integrity of the mucosal barrier [106], the healthy function of epithelial intestinal cells, the efficiency of the immune system [375], and the production of local peptides and immunoglobulins with antimicrobial function [96,376,377]. Thus, abnormalities in the gut–liver axis with the microbiome as the key player leads to abnormal regulation of intestinal and metabolic homeostasis, influencing the pathogenesis of NAFLD [85]. Conversely, protective effects and a possible reversal of liver fat accumulation and lipotoxicity could be driven by favorable environmental factors modulating composition and relative abundance of specific phylotypes.

Dietary habits can influence the microbiota, the intestinal permeability, the vascular barrier, the enhanced influx of endotoxins in the portal vein, low-grade liver inflammation, and ultimately NAFLD/NASH, insulin resistance, and metabolic disorders [378,379]. Changes are likely due to the initial modification of the microbiota, rather than the dietary pattern per se [87]. This topic, however, is still under discussion. A Western-style diet is rich in saturated fat and sugars, and might promote injury. In mice, a high-fat diet or fiber-deprived diets change the composition of intestinal microbiota and can damage the intestinal barrier through increased intestinal permeability, reduced thickness of the mucous layer, abnormalities of tight junction proteins of the epithelial barrier and low-grade intestinal inflammation [114,380,381].

A less pro-inflammatory diet could modulate also the intestinal permeability in NAFLD patients. The Mediterranean diet is enriched in fibers, mono- and polyunsaturated fatty acids, antioxidants, polyphenols, and phytochemicals. Following this diet, SCFAs-producing bacteria might increase in the intestine due to the diet-induced prebiotic effects [391]. A small group of patients with NAFLD and increased baseline intestinal permeability ((51)Cr-EDTA) underwent a trial consisting of 16 weeks of a Mediterranean diet and 16 weeks of a low-fat diet. With both diets, intestinal permeability did not improve [392]. More studies are clearly required in this field.

Under certain circumstances due to disease or use of antibiotics, the function of the microbiome can be disrupted and lead to energy storage and metabolic disorders, such as obesity, diabetes, and metabolic syndrome [255,349,365,366,367]. Treatment with antibiotics leads to qualitative/quantitative modifications of the intestinal microbiome, and therefore their potential role for liver damage. For example, administration of polymyxin B was associated with improved steatosis grades in both rats and humans on total parenteral nutrition. A similar protection was documented in alcohol-exposed rats [393,394,395]. Following the intestinal bypass surgery and the associated hepatic steatosis, metronidazole administration improved the hepatic picture [396]. In children the administration of some probiotic species caused increased levels of glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) and improvement in fatty liver [397]. Administration of probiotics during four weeks to NAFLD mice improved the steatosis, hepatomegaly, and nuclear factor kappa-beta activity [398].

In a different animal model (C57Bl/6J mice fed fat-, fructose-, and cholesterol-rich diet), protective effects were also noticed following metformin administration in terms of changed composition of gut microbiota and integrity of the intestinal barrier [369].

Several studies underscore the relationships between chemicals (in particular endocrine disrupting chemicals, persistent organic pollutants, heavy metals) introduced with contaminated food or through contaminated consumer products, and alterations in gut microbiota, metabolic pathways, and hepatic fat accumulation.

In mice, the enrichment of a standard chow diet with a mixture of six commonly used pesticides (i.e., boscalid, captan, chlorpyrifos, thiofanate, thiacloprid, and ziram) at doses corresponding to the tolerable daily intake (TDI) of each pesticide promoted for 52 weeks had significant metabolic alterations. Rodents increased body weight and adiposity, developed glucose intolerance and liver steatosis, and had perturbations of gut microbiota in terms of altered urinary concentration of microbiota–related metabolites [406]. In humans, a large survey from the NHANES III study (12,732 adults) linked urinary cadmium (Cd) concentrations secondary to environmental exposure with hepatic necroinflammation, NAFLD, NASH in men, and hepatic necroinflammation in women [407]. In mice, sub-chronic (10 weeks) exposure to low doses of Cd in drinking water increased hepatic triacylglycerol, serum free fatty acid, and triglyceride levels through altered gene expression. Changes in energy metabolism were paralleled by changes (both structure and abundance) in gut microbiome, with decreased Firmicutes and γ-proteobacteria, increased serum levels of LPS and liver inflammation [408]. Another study in mice showed that low dose Cd exposure in early life promotes an increased expression of hepatic genes involved in fatty acid and lipid metabolic processes, leading to life-long metabolic consequences. In male mice, these metabolic alterations developed together with altered microbiota composition after 8 weeks (increased Bacteroidetes, reduced Firmicutes) [409].

The molecular, anatomical, and functional link between gut functions, intestinal microbiota, and liver constitutes the gut–liver axis. This axis is exposed to environmental factors, with the microbiome being the main interface. Complex interactions involve bacteria and intestinal barrier, which comes in close contact with dietary factors, food contaminants, drugs, chemicals, and bile. These elements can modulate the pathways linking the gut with the liver, leading to both local and systemic effects. The interplay is bidirectional, since BAs produced in the liver regulate microbiome composition and intestinal barrier. By contrast, intestinal products regulate BA synthesis, hepatic glucose, and lipid metabolism. Local, short-, and long-term changes of this fine interplay due to external or intrinsic factors (e.g., altered intestinal microbiome, increased gut permeability, changes in luminal levels of BAs) at the gut–liver axis disrupts the ongoing homeostasis, paving the way to local and systemic inflammation, and to several liver diseases, including NAFLD.

According to the available evidence, the majority of environmental factors leading to abnormalities in the gut–liver axis and, in turn, to liver and metabolic dysfunction, could be managed. Future studies should therefore target the modulation of gut-liver homeostasis with both preventive and therapeutic goals.

