Evaluation of the gut microbiome in association with biological signatures of inflammation in murine polytrauma and shock

Severe injuries are frequently accompanied by hemorrhagic shock and harbor an increased risk for complications. Local or systemic inflammation after trauma/hemorrhage may lead to a leaky intestinal epithelial barrier and subsequent translocation of gut microbiota, potentially worsening outcomes. To evaluate the extent with which trauma affects the gut microbiota composition, we performed a post hoc analysis of a murine model of polytrauma and hemorrhage. Four hours after injury, organs and plasma samples were collected, and the diversity and composition of the cecal microbiome were evaluated using 16S rRNA gene sequencing. Although cecal microbial alpha diversity and microbial community composition were not found to be different between experimental groups, norepinephrine support in shock animals resulted in increased alpha diversity, as indicated by higher numbers of distinct microbial features. We observed that the concentrations of proinflammatory mediators in plasma and intestinal tissue were associated with measures of microbial alpha and beta diversity and the presence of specific microbial drivers of inflammation, suggesting that the composition of the gut microbiome at the time of trauma, or shortly after trauma exposure, may play an important role in determining physiological outcomes. In conclusion, we found associations between measures of gut microbial alpha and beta diversity and the severity of systemic and local gut inflammation. Furthermore, our data suggest that four hours following injury is too early for development of global changes in the alpha diversity or community composition of the intestinal microbiome. Future investigations with increased temporal-spatial resolution are needed in order to fully elucidate the effects of trauma and shock on the gut microbiome, biological signatures of inflammation, and proximal and distal outcomes.

Polytrauma (PT) as life-threatening multiple injuries is the most frequent cause of death for people under the age of 45. Hemorrhagic shock (HS) frequently accompanies severe tissue injuries observed in PT and the additive effects of HS on PT remain associated with high morbidity and mortality rates despite modern intensive care and surgical damage control strategies1. Clinical cohort studies note that PT frequently affects the brain, lungs, and endothelium2–4. We have recently established a mouse model of severe multiple injuries and blood loss corresponding to severe PT + HS5. PT was induced by a combination of closed blunt traumatic brain injury (TBI), blunt thorax trauma (TXT), soft tissue injury, and femur fracture5. Compared to PT alone, a combination of PT with an additional severe HS further negatively impacts the lungs by inducing histological damage, pulmonary edema, and neutrophil influx. Furthermore, HS following PT induces systemic increases in proinflammatory cytokine concentrations and increases the demand for administration of norepinephrine (NE) support to restore blood pressure5. Moreover, PT + HS negatively impacts renal function, induces intestinal damage, and reduces the intestinal expression of tight junction protein zonula occludens protein-1 (ZO-1), even in the absence of any direct trauma to either the kidneys or intestines6.

Given these findings, it is likely that changes in the composition of the gut microbiome are also part of the pathophysiological mechanisms underlying the local and systemic immune activation seen in our experimental model of PT + HS. Therefore, we hypothesize that there are measurable alterations in the composition of the intestinal microbiome of PT + HS mice as early as 4 h after injury that, together with the already described increase in gut permeability markers in these mice, act in concert to promote local and systemic inflammation5,6. To test this hypothesis, we analyzed the microbial composition of samples of cecal contents, taken from animals of our previously published studies5,6, employing 16 small subunit ribosomal RNA (16S rRNA) gene sequencing, and correlated the diversity and community structure of the microbiome with the individual immunological parameters assessed in each mouse.

This study is a subanalysis of a previously published murine study of polytrauma and hemorrhage5,6. Briefly, male C57BL/6 J mice (N = 36; Jackson Laboratories, Bar Harbor, Maine, USA) with a mean body weight of 25 g (± 2.5 g) were ordered from the animal vendor over a study period of eight months (August 2015 until March 2016) in batches to ensure equal age at the beginning of experimental procedures. Mice were acclimated to the local animal facility under the following identical housing conditions: co-housing with 5 mice/cage, light/dark cycle of 14/10 h (lights on at 6 a.m. CET), 22 °C, and 60% humidity. Animals had free access to food pellets (V1535-000, composition: 22% crude protein, 4.5% crude fat, 3.9% crude fiber, 6.7% crude ash, 1% calcium, 0.7% phosphorus; ssniff Spezialdiäten GmbH, Soest, Germany) and non-acidified autoclaved tap water. Additionally, Lignocel/Premium Scientific Bedding (Rettenmaier & Söhne, Rosenberg, Germany) was used as litter. The study protocol was approved by the University Animal Care Committee and the Federal Authorities for animal research, Tuebingen, Germany (No. 1194). Moreover, all experiments were performed in adherence to the National Institutes of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, 8th edition (2011) and were consistent with the ARRIVE 2.0 Guidelines.

The experimental timeline is illustrated in Fig. 1 and was performed as described previously5,6. After at least 10 days of acclimation at the animal facility, mice were randomly assigned to 5 different experimental groups (N = 36: polytrauma (PT, n = 8), hemorrhagic shock (HS, n = 8), polytrauma + hemorrhagic shock (PT + HS, n = 7), anaesthetized and catheterized-sham controls (Sham, n = 8) and untreated controls (Ctrl, n = 5). Mice were anaesthetized with 2.5–3% sevoflurane (Sevorane Abbott, Wiesbaden, Germany) in oxygen, which was continued during the trauma-hemorrhagic procedure and during the whole observation period. For analgesia, 0.03 mg/kg buprenorphine (Temgesic, RB Pharmaceutics, Slough, UK) was administered by subcutaneous injection 30 min before initiation of trauma. Untreated control animals were euthanized directly after induction of anesthesia by cardiac puncture. The PT procedure was performed as described elsewhere5,6. Briefly, PT was induced by application of a blunt bilateral chest trauma (TXT), closed head injury (TBI), and a distal femur fracture accompanied by soft tissue injury.

Following PT induction, the left hind limb was shaved and disinfected, an incision was made, and a catheter (Föhr Medical Instruments, Seeheim/Ober-Beerbach, Germany) was micro-surgically inserted into the femoral artery. This allowed the monitoring of blood pressure by a blood pressure analyzer (Data Sciences International, DSI, St. Paul, Minnesota, USA) and a pressure-controlled blood loss to induce HS. Another incision was made along the ventral cervical skin through which a catheter was inserted into the jugular vein, which enabled us to resuscitate animals (see below) and control the infusion of NE. The full HS procedure was also performed as described elsewhere5. Briefly, mice were bled for 5–10 min to reach a mean blood pressure of 30 mmHg (± 5 mmHg) which was kept stable for 60 min. After hemorrhage, mice were resuscitated with a sterile balanced electrolyte solution (Jonosteril, Servoprax, Wesel, Germany) via the jugular vein using fourfold the volume of drawn blood over 30 min. After termination of this procedure, animals underwent a 2 h observation period. During the 2 h observation period, animals were subjected to a preset protocol, adjusting anesthesia and catecholamine (i.e., NE) support (0.01–0.12 µg/kg/min; Sanofi, Frankfurt am Main, Germany) in a standardized manner to maintain a mean arterial pressure (MAP) of ≥ 50 mmHg. The amount of transfused fluid, NE received, as well as blood hemoglobin (Hb) concentrations, were documented for each animal.

Four hours after PT, blood was drawn by cardiac puncture into ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA)-coated tubes. Plasma was obtained by centrifugation (800 × g and 4 °C for 5 min; supernatants were centrifuged again at 13,000 × g and 4 °C for 2 min) and stored at – 80 °C until cytokines and proteins of interest could be measured via enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Cytokines and proteins of interest that were assessed included interleukin 6 (IL-6), junctional adhesion molecule A (JAM-A), mucin-2, and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1). Following final blood draw, additional tissue samples were taken during necropsy for further analysis. Mucus was removed from the jejunum and colon, and tissue homogenates were used for the assessment of complement component C3a (C3a), complement component C5a (C5a), and IL-6; jejunum and colon tissue occludin were also quantified. Finally, the cecum was opened aseptically to sample cecal contents for microbial analysis. Cecal samples were stored in sterile tubes at – 80 °C until further analysis. Some readouts assessed in these mice (plasma IL-6 concentrations and creatinine concentrations normalized to total plasma protein) have been previously reported5.

Approximately 10 cm of the jejunum and the entire colon were extracted, flushed with 10 ml ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) each, and dissected longitudinally. Mucus was removed using a glass cover slip. The jejunum and colon tissues were homogenized using a mechanical disperser (17,500 rpm, IKA, Staufen, Germany) and sonicated (5 cycles of 5 s each, Bandelin electronics, Berlin, Germany) in PBS containing a 1:1000 broad spectrum protease inhibitor (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, Missouri, USA). After centrifugation (15 min, at 16,000 × g and 4 °C), the supernatant was collected and stored at – 80 °C until further analysis.

ELISAs and sequential ELISA measurements were performed as described previously5,6,27. The following ELISA kits were used according to the manufacturer’s recommendations: BD OptEIA Mouse IL-6 ELISA Set and BD OptEIA Mouse MCP-1 ELISA Set (both BD Pharmingen, San Diego, CA, USA), Mouse JAM-A DuoSet ELISA and Mouse Complement Component C5a DuoSet ELISA (both R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA), Mouse Occludin ELISA Set (Wuxi Donglin Sci&Tech Development, Jiangsu, P.R.C.), and Mouse Mucin 2 / MUC2 (Sandwich ELISA) ELISA Kit (LSBio, Seattle, WA, USA). Activated complement component C3a was detected using an in-house sandwich ELISA employing antibodies purchased from BD Pharmingen and a protein standard purchased from R&D Systems. The measured concentrations of parameters in the jejunum and colon tissue homogenates were calculated relative to the total protein concentration in the corresponding sample.

Plasma creatinine concentrations were measured as described in Denk et al.5. Briefly, mouse plasma samples were mixed with internal standard solution, deproteinized and centrifuged at 13,000 × g for up to 5 min; supernatants were used for urea quantification on an Agilent 5890/5970 gas chromatography/ mass spectrometry system (Macherey–Nagel, Düren, Germany). Six-point calibration curves were used for quantification28.

Bacterial genomic DNA extraction, hypervariable region 4 (V4) amplicon generation from the 16S rRNA gene, and amplicon preparation for sequences were performed as described previously29 and according to protocols benchmarked for the Earth Microbiome Project (EMP) which can be found on the EMP website (http://www.earthmicrobiome.org/emp-standard-protocols/). Bacterial genomic DNA was extracted from samples using the DNeasy PowerSoil 96-well DNA isolation kit (Cat. no. 12955-4, Qiagen Laboratories, Hilden, Germany) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Marker genes in isolated DNA were PCR-amplified in duplicate from each sample, targeting V4 of the 16S rRNA gene, modified with a unique 12-bp sequence identifier for each sample and the Illumina adapter, as previously described by Caporaso et al.30.

PCR was performed as described elsewhere29. The PCR mixtures contained 13 µl Mo Bio PCR water, 10 µl 5′-HotMasterMix, 0.5 µl each of the barcoded forward and reverse primers (515-bp forward: 5′-GTGCCAGCMGCCGCGGTAA-3′; 806-bp reverse: 5′-GGACTACHVGGGTWTCTAAT-3′; 10 µM final concentration, Integrated DNA Technologies, San Diego, CA, USA), and 1.0 µl genomic DNA. Reaction mixtures were held at 94 °C for 3 min, followed by 35 cycles of amplification (94 °C for 45 s, 50 °C for 1 min, and 72 °C for 1.5 min), followed by a final extension at 72 °C for 10 min. PCR products were cleaned and normalized using the SequalPrep Normalization Kit (Cat. No. A1051001, ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA, USA).

Normalized amplicons were sequenced at the BioFrontiers Next Generation Sequencing Core Facility at the University of Colorado Boulder using the Illumina MiSeq platform. The 16S rRNA gene library concentration was measured using the HiSens Qubit dsDNA HS assay kit (Cat. No. Q32854, ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). A total of 6 pM of the 16S rRNA gene library combined with 0.9 pM (15%) PhiX sequencing library control v3 (Cat. no. FC-110, 3001, Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA, USA) was sequenced with 150-bp paired-end reads on an Illumina MiSeq sequencing system using a MiSeq reagent kit v3 (2 × 300 cycles; Cat. no. MS-102–2002, Illumina Inc.). FASTQ files for reads 1 (forward), 2 (reverse), and the index (barcode) read were generated using the BCL-to-FASTQ file converter bcl2fastq (ver. 2.17.1.14, Illumina, Inc.).

After building the feature table and removing chimeras, phylogenetic trees were built using the SaTé-enabled phylogenetic placement (SEPP) fragment-insertion classifier implemented in QIIME2 using the q2-fragment-insertion plugin36,37, trained against the SILVA_128 99% ribosomal gene reference database built on the 16S rRNA gene V4 region using the same primers as above30,38. Lastly, we filtered outgroups not present in the SEPP insertion tree from the ASV table prior to rarefaction and calculation of phylogenetic diversity metrics such as Faith’s phylogenetic diversity39 or UniFrac40.

Microbial community structure was characterized using measures of alpha diversity (within-sample diversity) and beta diversity (between-samples dissimilarity). Metrics of alpha diversity included, but were not limited to, the number of distinct features to represent species richness, Pielou’s J’ to represent species evenness41, Shannon’s diversity index H’ to represent species abundance and evenness42, and Faith’s phylogenetic diversity, which measures the total length of branches in a reference phylogenetic tree for all species in a given sample39. Beta diversity was calculated using unweighted and weighted UniFrac distances40,43,44 depicting community-wide differences in microbial composition amongst cecal samples. Output distance matrices were ordinated using principal coordinate analyses (PCoA) and visualized using EMPeror45. For a glossary of microbial ecology and microbiome analysis terms used, please refer to Table
1.

Additionally, we utilized a supervised machine-learning algorithm to predictively classify individual samples as having low or high inflammatory marker levels based on microbial features. Using a nested cross-validated (k = fivefold) strategy, the receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) area-under-the-curve (AUC) values for the ASV-based models that were used to calculate feature importances varied between 0.65 and 0.70. All analyzed data are provided in Supplemental File 1.

Statistical analysis in QIIME2 of each alpha diversity metric described above, using Kruskal–Wallis tests and post hoc pairwise Mann–Whitney U tests without adjustment for multiple testing, were conducted on all categorical variables in the metadata describing each sample submitted for 16S rRNA gene sequencing. These variables included treatment group, trauma status, and transfused fluid in tertiles, and the following variables split into halves: NE used for blood pressure maintenance (N = 11; n = 7, high NE; n = 4, low NE), biological signatures of inflammation in tissue homogenates of the colon and jejunum (C3a, C5a, IL-6, and occludin), and biological signatures of inflammation, barrier breakdown, and organ dysfunction in plasma drawn during tissue collection as described previously (C3a, creatinine, IL-6, JAM-A, MCP-1, and mucin-2).

To identify taxa driving differences in microbial composition between treatment groups, the pre-processed ASV table was then used in a linear mixed-effects model of experimental day × treatment condition using the ANCOM-II implementation in R (source code: http://github.com/FrederickHuangLin/ANCOM). We chose a W-statistic cutoff value of 0.8 where the p-value obtained for each taxon was corrected for multiple testing against all other taxa using a Benjamini–Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR) adjustment with significant taxonomic abundance differences reported at an alpha-threshold of 0.05.

We first analyzed whether there were significant alterations in measures of microbial alpha-diversity depending on group allocation of the animals. However, throughout all parameters assessed, comparisons of the varying treatment groups showed no significant differences in the between-groups alpha-diversity analysis of the cecal microbiome (data not shown). We then proceeded to separate animals according to experimental and biological variables in those with low and those with high values, and assessed differences in alpha-diversity metrics.

We also performed Pearson’s correlation analyses of all four alpha-diversity metrics against continuous measurements of Jonosteril or NE transfused for blood pressure maintenance, as well as measurements of cytokines, chemokines, and membrane integrity proteins. Only one statistically significant correlation was observed; number of distinct features, a measure of microbial richness, was inversely associated with jejunum C5a such that high jejunum C5a samples had low microbial diversity (N = 36; r = –0.37, p = 0.026; Fig. 3A). Investigation of the relationships between localized intestinal inflammation and microbial alpha diversity showed that high jejunum IL-6 concentrations were associated with high Pielou’s J’ (N = 36; H-statistic = 5.28, p = 0.022; Fig. 3B) with a tendency for higher jejunum IL-6 in HS and HS + PT mice (low jejunum IL-6 concentration, n = 2 HS, n = 6 PT, n = 3 PT + HS, n = 3 Sham, n = 5 Ctrl; high jejunum IL-6 concentration, n = 6 HS, n = 2 PT, n = 4 PT + HS, n = 5 Sham). Colon C5a, a marker of acute intestinal inflammation induced by innate immune mechanisms, was inversely associated with Pielou’s J’ such that high colon C5a concentrations were associated with low microbial evenness (N = 36; H-statistic = 5.19, p = 0.023; Fig. 3C). We did not find any associations between injury severity and colon C5a concentrations although C5a was tendentially higher in Sham and Ctrl animals (low colon C5a, n = 6 HS, n = 4 PT, n = 6 PT + HS, n = 2 Sham; high colon C5a, n = 2 HS, n = 4 PT, n = 1 PT + HS, n = 6 Sham, n = 5 Ctrl).

As certain protein markers of inflammation and membrane damage may be associated with compositional changes in the microbiome, we conducted PERMANOVAs on the unweighted and weighted UniFrac distance matrices generated from the rarefied feature table. Analysis of weighted UniFrac in the comparisons of the varying treatment groups showed no significant differences in the between-groups beta-diversity analysis of the cecal microbiome (pseudo-F = 1.00, p = 0.463; data not shown). Analysis of unweighted UniFrac in the comparisons of the varying treatment groups showed no significant differences in the between-groups beta-diversity analysis of the cecal microbiome (pseudo-F = 0.58, p = 0.999; data not shown).

However, composition of the cecal microbiome as assessed by weighted UniFrac was correlated with jejunum occludin levels in such a way that low concentrations of jejunum occludin clustered around axes 1 and 2 (pseudo-F = 4.22, p = 0.001; Fig. 4A). In addition, the composition of the cecal microbiome as assessed by unweighted UniFrac distance metric was associated with plasma MCP-1 concentrations, with a low plasma MCP-1 cluster around axis 2 and a high plasma MCP-1 cluster around axis 3 (pseudo-F = 1.87, p = 0.019; Fig. 4B). Finally, composition of the cecal microbiome as assessed by unweighted UniFrac distance metric was associated with plasma mucin-2 concentrations, with low mucin-2 concentrations associated with ordinal clustering around axes 2 and 3 (pseudo-F = 1.64, p = 0.043; Fig. 4C).

Linear mixed-effects model analysis of the cecal microbiome using ANCOM-II identified one significant feature above the coefficient of concordance threshold of 0.6 that was differentially abundant in the low/high analysis of plasma creatinine (Fig. 5A). In the analysis of low and high plasma creatinine, Leptotrichia oral clone FP036 (W-statistic = 99; Fig. 5B) was the only differentially abundant feature detected by ANCOM-II; its relative abundance was significantly increased in the high plasma creatinine group.

Random forest is a supervised machine learning algorithm that was used to evaluate sample classification of low and high inflammatory marker levels based on microbial features in this analysis. With sufficient computational ability and a relatively small dataset of n < 50, a nested cross-validation approach (k = fivefold) was employed to reduce bias and improve model performance54. Further unbiased classification of samples based on microbial composition allowed us to better understand how injury severity affected the cecal microbiomes of mice in this study beyond ANCOM-II-based analysis of taxa driving differences. Model performance and prediction accuracy were based on receiver operating characteristic (ROC) scores that evaluated predictive true positive rates (TPR) against false positive rates (FPR).

The random forest predictions for jejunum occludin prevalence based on features of the cecal microbiome were also significant as indicated by the macro-average (AUC = 0.68) and micro-average (AUC = 0.67) values, which were both greater than chance alone (Fig. 7A). Per class ROC plots showed that the classification of samples to low or high jejunum occludin was 66% accurate (Fig. 7B). The confusion matrix shown in Fig. 7C indicates that the algorithm could correctly classify samples into the high jejunum occludin group, with an accuracy of 91% for the low jejunum occludin group. The feature importance plot in Fig. 7D demonstrates that many bacteria drive the classification of low and high jejunum occludin levels, including Actinomyces graevenitzii group F0530, Aggregatibacter spp., Bregeyella spp., Corynebacterium durum, Gemella spp., Haemophilus spp., Prevotella melaninogenica, and Rothia spp. There were also multiple features in the genus Neisseria spp., Streptococcus spp., and Veillonella spp. (Fig. 7D). It is important to note that the following features were observed as important drivers in both machine learning classification schemes of plasma IL-6 and jejunum occludin: Neisseria spp., multiple members of Veillonella spp., Streptococcus spp., Haemophilus spp., Prevotella melaninogenica, and Gemella spp.

In the present study, (1) we could not confirm the hypothesis that as early as 4 h after experimental PT + HS, the composition of the intestinal microbiome is significantly altered in comparison to respective sham-treated mice; more specifically, we did not find any changes in microbial alpha diversity or microbial community structure directly associated with types of injury according to experimental group allocation; however, (2) we did observe a general association of measures of intestinal microbial alpha and beta diversity with markers of systemic and local gut inflammation as well as intestinal barrier functioning. Thus, the data support the hypothesis that gut microbiome composition at the time of trauma affects both gut permeability and local/systemic inflammation.

In conclusion, our results demonstrate that systemic and local inflammation as well as intestinal barrier dysfunction are associated with the diversity and community composition of the cecal microbiome very early after trauma with an overabundance of oral pathogens. Since the type of insult determines the magnitude of systemic and local inflammatory responses as well as organ injury patterns, longitudinal studies in larger group sizes will elucidate the extent to which specific traumatic insults intercommunicate with the intestinal microbial composition and will shed light on the directionality of the effects observed in this study.



Publisher's note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

These authors contributed equally: Sandra A. Appiah, Christine L. Foxx, Christopher A. Lowry and Rebecca Halbgebauer.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41598-021-85897-w.

