Integrated multi-omics reveal important roles of gut contents in intestinal ischemia–reperfusion induced injuries in rats

Intestinal ischemia–reperfusion (IIR) is a life-threatening clinical event with damaging signals whose origin and contents are unclear. Here we observe that IIR significantly affect the metabolic profiles of most organs by unbiased organ-wide metabolic analysis of gut contents, blood, and fifteen organs in rats (n = 29). Remarkably, correlations between gut content metabolic profiles and those of other organs are the most significant. Gut contents are also the only ones to show dynamic correlations during IIR. Additionally, according to targeted metabolomics analysis, several neurotransmitters are considerably altered in the gut during IIR, and displayed noteworthy correlations with remote organs. Likewise, metagenomics analysis (n = 35) confirm the effects of IIR on gut microbiota, and identify key species fundamental to the changes in gut metabolites, particularly neurotransmitters. Our multi-omics results establish key roles of gut contents in IIR induced remote injury and provide clues for future exploration.

Intestinal ischemia-reperfusion (IIR) is a life-threatening clinical event in many diseases that affect infants, children, and adults1–4. It is a result of both surgical and non-surgical approaches such as abdominal aortic aneurysm surgery5, cardiopulmonary bypass5, small bowel transplantation6, acute mesenteric ischemia7, neonatal necrotizing enterocolitis8, trauma6, and septic shock9. The primary clinical characteristic of these diseases is the interruption of blood supply, which causes ischemic impairment10. Paradoxically, restoring of blood flow does not alleviate the symptoms of the injury; on the contrary, it magnifies the damage drastically. Most astonishingly, IIR substantially impacts the integrity and function of remote organs (the non-ischemic organs), and if severe enough, it can clinically result in systemic inflammatory response syndrome and multiple organ dysfunction syndrome4, which account for 30–40% of in-hospital mortality11.

To answer these questions, we performed a systemic, time-resolved multi-omic analysis of gut contents, blood, bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) and fifteen organs during IIR using a rat model. Our results support a gut translocation model in which gut contents leaked into peripheral blood because of a compromised gut barrier during IIR and then to remote organs, causing inflammatory responses. Additionally, we found that several neurotransmitter-related gut metabolites changed significantly during IIR, which could influence remote organs through the enteric nervous system. We also profiled the gut microbiota during IIR, and identified a few key species that underly the changes in metabolites and neurotransmitters. In summary, we provide evidence that gut contents, as the major source of IIR, caused damage to remote organs and established their putative routes. Our results warrant further research on the impact of gut-derived metabolites, neurotransmitters, and microbes.

To explore the key roles gut contents play in IIR-induced injury, we carried out a series of multi-layer and multi-angle experiments. Our overall experimental design is shown in Fig. 1a. We first explored unbiased organ-wide metabolic profiling for gut contents, blood, BALF and 15 organs in rats (n = 29) to understand the impact of IIR on gut contents and remote organs (Fig. 1b,
c). Then we used metagenomics analysis (n = 35) to explore the taxonomic and functional characterization alteration of the gut microbiome during IIR.

As expected, we detected significant changes in the concentrations (p values < 0.05, Wilcoxon test) of most of these substances in the blood and a few of them in several tissues (see Fig. 1a for the overall experimental design and Fig. 1d and Supplementary Fig. 1 for the results), suggesting that IIR caused damage to the intestinal barrier, resulting in gut contents leaking into the blood and remote organs. Reduced plasma citrulline levels have only been recognized recently as a biomarker of significantly reduced enterocyte mass and function in different disease states in humans23. Here, we detected reduced levels of citrulline in IIR6h compared to the Sham Group, though with no significance. We further confirmed damage to the intestinal barrier (Supplementary Fig. 2) and remote organs (Supplementary Figs. 3–5) using haematoxylin and eosin staining. Levels of the inflammation marker IL-6 increased in the blood (Fig. 1d). We also revealed that several oxidative stress indices, including malondialdehyde, superoxide dismutase and myeloperoxidase, increased in remote organs (Supplementary Fig. 1). Together, our results suggest that gut contents can leak into the blood and remote organs due to compromised intestinal barrier and contribute to IIR-induced damages.

To provide an unbiased view of body-wide metabolic changes during IIR, we performed global metabolomics profiling using both liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC/TOF-MS) and gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC/MS) on blood, gut (cecal) contents, BALF and 15 organs including liver, kidney, adrenal glands, thymus, heart, jejunum, ileum, colon, rectum, brain, epididymal fat (EpiFat), lung, lymph, spleen and subcutaneous fat (SubFat) (Fig. 1a). To check whether the overall metabolic profiles (i.e., features and their relative abundances) of these organs significantly changed during IIR, we applied a multiblock method25–27 to integrate metabolomic profiles from both LC/MS and GC/MS. And a PCA2Tree tool28 was used to visualize the relationships between the metabolic profiles at four different time points for all organs. PCA2Tree generates a dendrogram from scores in principal component analysis (PCA) using Mahalanobis distances and reports p values for the null hypothesis at all internal branches; p values less than 0.05 indicated a statistically significant difference.

Pathway enrichment analysis showed that pathways involved in the biosynthesis of amino acids, 2-oxocarboxylic acid metabolism, biosynthesis of unsaturated fatty acids, bile secretion, phenylalanine, tyrosine and tryptophan biosynthesis ranked top (Fisher’s exact test) in most organs (Supplementary Figs. 12, 13). Of these, phenylalanine, tyrosine, and tryptophan are aromatic amino acids that can serve as precursors for neurotransmitters, such as serotonin, dopamine, and norepinephrine30,31. Our results suggest that IIR can trigger changes in neurotransmitter metabolism of remote organs. Other inflammation-related pathways, like the mechanistic target of the rapamycin signaling pathway, inflammation mediator regulation of transient receptor potential channels, and eicosanoids changed markedly in several remote organs (Supplementary Figs. 12,13), indicating that inflammatory processes were modulated during IIR. In summary, multiple pathways in intestinal tissues, gut contents, and remote organs were altered during IIR.

We next compared metabolic profiles between organs and sought to identify the primary source of IIR-caused damaging signals. We speculated that the metabolic profiles of the source organ would correlate most with other organs, and these correlations would show dynamic changes during IIR.

We then examined the metabolites underlying the correlations between gut contents and remote organs. As shown in Supplementary Fig. 15, nine gut content metabolites, including leucine, cyclic phosphatidic acid (CPA (18:1(9Z)/0:0)), phenylalanine, acetylcholine, lysine, linoleic acid, alpha-linolenic acid, leucyThreonine, and hypotaurine correlated substantially with remote organs. Surprisingly, most of them are either neurotransmitters or associated with their biosynthesis or regulations. For example, acetylcholine is a neurotransmitter32. Phenylalanine is an aromatic amino acid and a precursor for neurotransmitters, such as serotonin, dopamine, and others30. Lysine is a key precursor for the de novo synthesis of glutamate, which is the most important excitatory neurotransmitter in the mammalian central nervous system33. Linoleic acid is a long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acid, which has been verified as capable of inducing neurotransmitter release34. These results suggest that gut-derived neurotransmitters also contribute to IIR-induced damages to remote organs.

Having established that gut contents contribute notably to IIR-induced damages, we further explored the impact of their alteration during IIR and their putative roles in IIR-induced injury to remote organs.

Together, our results suggest that IIR induces complex changes in the gut metabolome. Many of the Recovered metabolites participated in carbohydrate metabolism and energy production, consistent with the stress-recover design of our experiments. However, the functions of the Uncovered metabolites, most of them being neurotransmitters, were more diverse. The latter metabolite types can interact with and subsequently induce changes to the enteric nervous system and then influence remote organs. The long-lasting changes in their abundance after reperfusion indicate that they possibly contribute to the long-term impact of IIR on remote organs. Compared to their Recovered counterparts, UnRecovered metabolites perhaps also play critical roles in physiological or pathological processes of IIR-induced impairment of remote organs and warrant further investigation.

To further explore the alteration of intestinal flora and their associations with gut metabolome, we submitted cecal samples to metagenomic next-generation sequencing, followed by taxonomic analysis using MetaPhlAn246 and functional characterization using HUMAnN247 (see Methods for details).

We also uncovered the principal microbial driver species for all the functional pathways using a leave-one-out algorithm49 (Supplementary Data 16, 17). Surprisingly, E. coli, which increased sharply at IIR6h, was identified as the strongest driver specie for most of the functional pathways (Fig. 5h and Supplementary Fig. 21d). These results suggested a causal relation between E. coli and those significantly altered metabolites at IIR6h, which is further supported by several literatures, linking Enterobacteriaceae, and more specifically E. coli, to IIR associated diseases such as acute surgical abdomen50, small bowel transplantation51, necrotizing enterocolitis52–54, and sepsis55. Because IIR-induced remote organ injury is a complex physiological process associated with many factors, systematic and comprehensive explorations are still needed to further validate whether E.coli is truly the driver of downstream IIR-instigated complications.

To link the altered gut metabolites during IIR to gut microbes, we performed an inter-omics Spearman correlation analysis (see Methods for details). The overall correlation pattern between microbial metabolites and gut pathways during reperfusion was distinctive from that during ischemia (Fig. 6b and Supplementary Fig. 23). We identified more connections between pathways and metabolites (Supplementary Fig. 23), particularly markedly elevated neurologic function-related molecules, like ADMA, 5-aminopentanoic acid, histamine, and acetylcholine during reperfusion. Likewise, we observed more links between gut metabolites and E. coli, L. johnsonii and several other species in genus Enterococcus during reperfusion (Fig. 6a and Supplementary Fig. 24). Furthermore, E. coli and species in the genus Lactobacillus correlated strongly with gut-derived metabolites in Model-based Integration of Metabolite Observations and Species Abundances 2 (MIMOSA2)56 analysis (Supplementary Fig. 25). These results are consistent with the microbial driver analysis that a few key species are probably fundamental to the changes in gut metabolites.

In summary, we identified some key species fundamental to the changes in gut metabolites and their putative roles in regulating the metabolism of neurotransmitters. Gut metabolite alterations during reperfusion could be the result of gut bacteria metabolism activation after blood supply restoration.

Gut microbes have been implicated in IIR-induced damages to remote organs. However, it remains unclear if gut contents contribute substantially to these damages and what the molecular nature of the damaging signals and their impacts on remote organs are. In this study, we first confirmed with selected biomarkers that IIR increased gut barrier permeability, caused gut contents to leak into the blood and remote organs, and induced inflammatory responses in the blood. These results support a gut translocation model for IIR-induced damages. Remarkably, we also found injuries in several remote organs by haematoxylin and eosin staining, alongside numerous elevated oxidative stress indices during IIR (Fig. 1d and Supplementary Figs. 1–5).

In summary, we revealed that gut contents are critical to IIR-caused remote organ injuries. We performed an integrated multi-omics analysis of gut content during IIR in multi-layer and multi-angle, trying to explore how cecal metabolites and microbes could alter the metabolomes in remote organs. Here we established the routes of gut contents to remote organs, including translocation through compromised gut barrier and influencing the enteric nervous system by neurotransmitters. As IIR-induced remote organs injury is a complex physiological process associated with many factors, systematical and comprehensive explorations are still needed. Our results provide clues for future experiments aiming to illustrate the molecular mechanisms causing the damages. Given that experimental rats are small in size, future efforts are still needed to further explore and validate the study findings.

All animal experiments were approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of Huazhong University of science and technology and were performed in accordance with their guidelines. Male Sprague–Dawley rats (220–260 g body weight) in specific pathogen-free status were purchased from Vital River Laboratory Animal Technology Co., Ltd., Beijing, China. Rats were randomly assigned to the Sham or IIR group, maintained under controlled conditions of temperature(21 ± 1 °C) and relative humidity (&55%) on a 12 h light/12 h dark cycle. Animals were fed ad libitum with food and water for 1 week before experiments and were fasted overnight before the day of the experiment.

In total, 64 rats were used in our experiments and a two-stage approach was performed. First, 29 rats (n = 7 in Sham, n = 6 in IIR0h, n = 9 in IIR6h, n = 7 in IIR72h) were sacrificed for global metabolite profiling, and then 35 rats (n = 10 in Sham, n = 15 in IIR0h, n = 10 in IIR6h) were used for metagenomic analysis and further validation.

The biochemical indexes (Citrulline, d-lactic acid, IFABP, IL-6, endotoxin, myeloperoxidase, superoxide dismutase, malondialdehyde) were determined using a BioTek Epoch microplate spectrophotometer (Vermont, USA) and Chemray 240 automated biochemical analyzer (Shenzhen Redu Lifeience and Technology, Shenzhen, China). All assay plates were run according to the manufacturer’s protocol.

Four hours prior to operation, rats received a 20 ml/kg dose of 4 kDa fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)‐dextran (Sigma‐Aldrich, NSW, Australia, Catalog # 4013) by oral gavage. Blood was collected at IIR 6 h by retro-orbital bleeding and stored in a dark and dry place to protect it from light. Samples were centrifuged at 3000×g for 5 min and serum isolated. Then dilute serum samples 1:2 with 1 X PBS. FITC-Dextran was quantified using Spark 10 M microplate spectrophotometer (Tecan, Austria) relative to a standard curve (range 12.5–2500 ug/ml).

The collected tissues were first fixed and then dehydrated and embedded in melted paraffin wax. The obtained block was then mounted on a microtome and cut into thin slices. The slices were affixed to microscope slides with the wax removed. The tissue slices attached to the slides were rehydrated and then stained. The hematoxylin and eosin staining was performed by the first application of haematoxylin mixed with a metallic salt, then removing excess staining with a rinse in a weak acid solution, followed by building in mildly alkaline water, then counterstaining with eosin. Following the eosin stain, the slide was passed through several changes of alcohol to remove all traces of water, then rinsed in several baths of xylene, which clears the tissue and renders it completely transparent. A thin layer of polystyrene mountant was used, followed by a glass cover slip. Then microscopic image acquisition and analysis were performed.

The paraffin sections of the intestinal were immunostained with antibodies nitric oxide synthase Rabbit pAb (# A0312), C-Kit (#A0357), synaptophysin (#A6344), protein gene product 9.5 (#A19101), substance P (#A13550) (ABclonal Biotech Co., Ltd, Wuhan, China), which were commonly used molecular markers for neuroendocrine system41 and enteric nervous system42–45. All procedures were performed according to the recommended protocols of Abclonal’s film method.

The immunostaining level was assessed and analysed using the Image-pro Plus 6.0 (IPP 6.0) software59. The irregular automated optical inspection function in the software was applied to score and rule out non-target staining. The measurement parameter was integrated optical density. All images obtained from IPP 6.0 were further verified by pathologists. Measurements for three cores per sample were averaged and the mean value of the integrated optical density was considered the final value.

Coupling chromatography to mass spectrometry (MS) offers a combination of sensitivity and selectivity for complex mixture analyses and has evolved as a critical and indispensable platform in metabolomics. As each detecting method has its biases, a combination of gas chromatography (GC)-MS and liquid chromatography (LC)-MS data provides a more comprehensive and unbiased metabolite profiling.

For GC/MS analysis, helium was used as the carrier gas and the flow rate was 1 mL/min. The oven temperature was programmed at 70 °C for 2 min and then increased at a rate of 10 °C/min to 320 °C, and held at 320 °C for 2 min. And the total run time was 29 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in electron impact mode (70 eV) at full scan mode from m/z 45 to 600 with a scan time of 0.2 s. The injector split ratio was set to 1:50. Metabolites in GC/MS were identified by comparison of mass spectra and retention time with those in the commercial compound libraries, National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). And they were further confirmed by comparison with the reference standards in our lab.

Peak deconvolution and alignment for the LC/MS and GC/MS chromatograms were performed using Profiling Solution version 1.1 (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) installed in the instrument. As a result, a matrix containing matched peaks with m/z value, retention time and corresponding intensities was generated and was then exported to an Excel table.

Possible sources of instrumental or reagent contamination were excluded by randomly injecting solvent blanks and checking against the blank runs. The so-called 80% rule was used to retain metabolites detectable in at least 80% of subjects. And 30% rule was applied to remove features with higher relative standard deviation (RSD) in quality control (QC) samples. Furthermore, the missing values were filled with half of the minimum value in the dataset. Additionally, the total area normalization was performed and the relative abundances were obtained.

LC–MS/MS analysis was performed on an Agilent 1290 Infinity UHPLC coupled to an AB Sciex Qtrap ® 5500 MS/MS using an Acquity UPLC™ BEH Amide column (2.1 mm × 100 mm, 1.7 μm; Waters, which was maintained at 45 °C. The injection volume was 4 μL and the flow rate was 300 μL /min. The mobile phase consisted of 15 mM ammonium acetate in water (A) and acetonitrile (B). The initial gradient condition was 90% B, which was decreased to 40% gradually over 18 min, to 90% after 18.1 min, and then maintained at 90% B from 18.1 to 23 min.

The MS system was operated using electrospray ionization (ESI) in negative mode. The optimum conditions were source temperature, 450 °C; ion Source Gas1 (Gas1), 45; Ion Source Gas2 (Gas2), 45; Curtain gas (CUR), 30; ion sapary voltage floating (ISVF), 4500 V. The MRM transitions, retention times, and conditions are shown in Supplementary Data 18. Data were processed using Multiquant software.

DNA was extracted from frozen fecal samples using E.Z.N.A.® DNA Kit (Omega Biotek, Norcross, GA, U.S.) according to the manufacturer’s protocols. The DNA concentration and purity was quantified with TBS-380 and NanoDrop2000, respectively. DNA quality was assessed with the 1% agarose gel electrophoresis system. After final precipitation, the DNA samples were resuspended in TE buffer and stored at −80 °C for further analysis.

DNA was first fragmented to an average size of about 300 bp using Covaris M220 (Gene Company Limited, China). And Paired-end library was constructed by using the TruSeqTM DNA Sample Prep Kit (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA). Adapters containing the full complement of sequencing primer hybridization sites were ligated to the Blunt-end fragments. Whole-genome shotgun sequencing of fecal samples was carried out on the Illumina HiSeq4000 platform (Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA, USA) with HiSeq 3000/4000PE Cluster Kit and HiSeq 3000/4000 SBS Kits (www.illumina.com).

Fecal metagenomic shotgun sequences were trimmed for adapters and low-quality bases using trimmomatic, discarding reads of lengths less than 50 base pairs and reads of average quality less than 20. Filtered reads were then aligned to the human genome (hg 19) using bowtie2. And those mapped were considered unwanted human reads and were discarded. FastQC was then used for quality control prior to downstream analysis.

To identify reads belonging to rats, we first downloaded the reference genome of rat from NCBI. And then, we align the obtained metagenomic sequence reads to the rat reference genome using Bowtie2 (version bowtie2-2.1.0). By doing this, we identified and deleted the reads belonging to rat. MetaPhlAn246 was applied to quantitatively profile the taxonomic composition of the metagenome of all metagenomic samples, whereas HUMANn247 was conducted with the UniRef90 database for functional analysis. The HUMAnN2 algorithm generated pathway abundance, gene-family abundance and pathway coverage. Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) effect size (LEfSe), using a factorial Kruskal–Wallis and LDA test, was applied to identify significant differences in bacterial groups.

Through extensive searching, exploring, and reading literature, we obtained the potential functional role of every bacteria identified. Detailed information about the functions/characteristics of the species searched from the literature is listed in Supplementary Data 19. The total abundance of the functional bacteria (oxygen utilization, anti-inflammation bacteria, pro-inflammation bacteria, neurotransmitter-producing bacteria) was calculated.

For metabolomics data with different metabolic states, it will be difficult to evaluate the similarity or difference between the respective data point clusters in PCA score plots62. Here, PCAtoTree28 was applied for improved quantitative analysis in score plots and for better visualization. Employing both nonparametric and parametric hypothesis testing, it can quantitatively describe significant differences between different groups through dendrograms and bootstrapping techniques.

Metabolites detected in LC/MS and GC/MS are different and can complement each other. To get a comprehensive view of the metabolites, it is better to fuse LG/MS and GC/MS datasets of the same samples. Multiblock methods were used here to merge datasets from different platforms by extracting latent variables from each block, which was considered information carriers25. Multiblock-PCA can be applied for visualizing the overall tendency of the fusing data. And multiblock-PLS (MBPLS), a kind of regression model, can be used for variable selection using the regression coefficients (the b values). These multiblock methods were performed using the ade4 R package.

The linear discriminant analysis (LDA) effect size (LEfSe) analysis was performed to compare the relative abundance of the different features between groups. LDA score threshold of >2.0 and a 0.05 alpha value for the factorial Kruskal–Wallis test was applied to select different bacteria.

A series of strict filtering criteria were applied to select significant different features for gut metabolites, KO and pathway abundance data. The VIP (Variable Importance in Projection) value, representing the importance of selected metabolites in the discriminating OPLS-DA model, was first used to filter variables (VIP value >1). Then the dataset was further screened using Wilcoxon test p value <0.05 and absolute Log2 fold change (Log2FC) >1. The volcano Plot was used to simultaneously display the statistical significance (P value) versus the magnitude of change (Log2 fold change). We could get a quick visual identification of features with large fold changes that are also statistically significant, which may be the most biologically significant features.

Microbial driver species analysis was a pipeline referred to the methods explained in literature49, which can combine three data dimensions (microbial species, microbial functions and clinical phenotypes). Using a so-called leave-one-out analysis, this method can identify species which contributed particularly to the observed linkage between clinical phenotype and metagenomic functional potential. And the identified species was considered a driver species, which may have a great influence on the functions of the microbiome. The detailed analysis framework has been reported as source R code at the accompanying Git repository (https://bitbucket.org/hellekp/clinical-micro-meta-integration)

A novel comprehensive framework, the Model-based Integration of Metabolite Observations and Species Abundances 2 (MIMOSA2)56, is used for metabolic model-based evaluation of paired microbiome-metabolome datasets to support mechanistic interpretation and hypothesis generation. MIMOSA2 first constructs community metabolic models, and then assesses whether metabolite measurements are consistent with estimated community metabolic potential, followed by identifying specific taxa and reactions that can explain metabolite variation. The MIMOSA2 web application is available at http://elbo-spice.cs.tau.ac.il/shiny/MIMOSA2shiny/.

MixOmics26 is an R package dedicated to integrate multivariate “omics biological data. By adopting a biology approach, the toolkit provides a wide range of methods focused on data exploration, dimension reduction and visualization. Among which, the toolkit can provide a supervised framework” analyses (Data Integration Analysis for Biomarker discovery using Latent cOmponents, or DIABLO for short)27 to probe relationships between different tissues by identifying a multi-tissue signature composed of highly correlated features across different tissues and which can discriminate the outcome of interest. The packages can be obtained on the website http://mixomics.org.

All the data analysis and the drawing of the diagrams were implemented in the R package (version 4.0.4, http://www.r-project.org). Mann–Whitney U-test was used to select different features. P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

For the global metabolite profiling, 29 rats were used (n = 7 in Sham, n = 6 in IIR0h, n = 9 in IIR6h, n = 7 in IIR72h). For the metagenomic analysis of gut contents, 35 rats were used (n = 10 in Sham, n = 15 in IIR0h, n = 10 in IIR6h). And for detection of the bowel barrier damage-related biomarkers and immunohistochemical analysis, three biologically independent animals were used.

Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.



Communications Biology thanks Silvia Turroni and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Primary Handling Editor: George Inglis.

Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s42003-022-03887-8.

