The Gut Microbiome and Sex Hormone-Related Diseases

The role of the gut microbiome has been a hot topic in recent years. One aim of this review is to shed light on the crosstalk between sex hormones and the gut microbiome. Researchers have observed a sex bias of the composition of the gut microbiome in mice and have proved that sex differences influence the composition of the gut microbiome, although the influence is usually obscured by genetic variations. Via cell studies, animal studies and some observational studies in humans, researchers have confirmed that the gut microbiome can be shaped by the hormonal environment. On other hand, some theories suggest that the gut microbiota regulates the levels of sex hormones via interactions among its metabolites, the immune system, chronic inflammation and some nerve-endocrine axes, such as the gut-brain axis. In addition, bidirectional interactions between the microbiome and the hormonal system have also been observed, and the mechanisms of these interactions are being explored. We further describe the role of the gut microbiome in sex hormone-related diseases, such as ovarian cancer, postmenopausal osteoporosis (PMOP), polycystic ovary syndrome and type 1 diabetes. Among these diseases, PMOP is described in detail. Finally, we discuss the treatments of these diseases and the application prospects of microbial intervention.

The gut microbiome system is the largest ecosystem in the human body. In addition to the large number of microbes in the gut microbiota, gene expression in the gut microbiota is 100 times greater than human gene expression, with more than 1,000 bacterial species in the human colon and each individual host having at least 160 species (Qin et al., 2010; Sommer and Backhed, 2013; Fukuda and Ohno, 2014). The type and quantity of the gut microbiome are closely related to human health. Some scholars even regard the normal intestinal microbiome as a ‘separate organ’ (Possemiers et al., 2011). It is now a consensus opinion that the gut microbiota and host are interdependent. The gut microbiota is necessary for the health of its host and affects the endocrine system, digestive function, intestinal permeability, resistance to foreign pathogens and stimulation of immunisation (Blumberg and Powrie, 2012).

In this review, we discuss animal and human studies on some gut microbiota-mediated diseases related to sex hormones and the possible mechanisms involved and present evidence for microbial intervention as a treatment for sex hormone-driven diseases.

It has been widely accepted that the gut microbiome is diverse. Existing studies have noted that this diversity is a result of a combination of factors, including sex differences (Human Microbiome Project Consortium, 2012). In a study including NOD mice (non-obese diabetic), Yurkovetskiy et al. observed that the abundances of Porphyromonadaceae, Veillonellaceae, Kineosporiaceae, Peptococcaceae, Enterobacteriaceae, Lactobacillaceae, Cytophagaceae, Peptostreptococcaceae and Bacteroidaceae were higher in male mice than in female mice (Yurkovetskiy et al., 2013).

When considering each microbial phylum within the 89 matched strains of mice, Elin Org et al. observed clear differences in the microbiota composition and diversity between sexes, especially in the C57BL/6J and C3H/HeJ strains of mice. In mice from both abovementioned strains, the abundances of Allobaculum, Erwinia and Anaeroplasma were higher in male mice than in female mice. However, when Elin Org et al. examined the entire population together using Bray-Curtis dissimilarity, there were no clear patterns differentiating samples between males and females (Org et al., 2016). These results indicate that sex differences influence the composition of the gut microbiome, although the influence is usually obscured by genetic variations.

Researchers have speculated that differences in sex hormones may contribute to the sex bias (diversity) of the gut microbial composition, and many studies have provided evidence supporting this speculation (Neuman et al., 2015).

A few relatively convincing studies have been performed indicating the causal relationship between sex hormones and the microbiome. Koren et al. sequenced stool samples from 91 women and observed that the gut microbiome was profoundly altered during pregnancy, especially during T3 (the third trimester of pregnancy), when oestrogens are at their maximal peak, regardless of health status (Koren et al., 2012). A study from Europe showed that healthy males had a higher abundance of Bacteroides-Prevotella than females, while the microbiota of postmenopausal women did not differ from that of males (Mueller et al., 2006). The results of both studies indicated that oestrogens and related female hormones play an important role in regulating the composition of the gut microbiome.

It appears that not only is the gut microbiome influenced by sex hormones but also the gut microbiota itself also influences hormone levels.

As early as the last century, researchers observed a decline in oestrogen levels while discovering that antibiotics can affect the composition of the gut microbiome (Adlercreutz et al., 1984).

In addition to bacterial β-glucuronidase, some researchers have recently proposed a theory called the gut-brain axis, which may contribute to explaining how the microbiome influences the levels of sex hormones. In this theory, the gut microbiome is seen as a crucial component of the axis, which is involved in the connection between the central nervous system (CNS) and the endocrine system (Cussotto et al., 2018; Osadchiy et al., 2019). Unfortunately, the majority of related studies have been performed using single-sex mice; thus, their focus on the endocrine system is on the HPA axis or insulin secretion, and they do not explain how sex hormones are affected within the gut-brain axis. Therefore, how the microbiome affects the level of sex hormones through the brain-gut axis remains to be explored.

There are relatively few experiments that directly prove that the intestinal flora affects androgens. In a recently published article, Hannah et al. detected higher levels of glucuronidated testosterone and dihydrotestosterone but lower free dihydrotestosterone levels in the distal intestine of germ-free mice compared with mice with a normal gut microbiome composition, which proved that gut microbiome plays a vital role in androgen metabolism in mice (Collden et al., 2019).

Previous studies have shown that germ-free (GM) animals lose the sexual dimorphism of T1D in NOD mice (Yurkovetskiy et al., 2013). However, germ-free mice transplanted gut microbiome from male mice showed increased serum testosterone levels and lower morbidity of T1D (Markle et al., 2013). These results indicate that the protective effect of androgen on T1D is microbiome dependent and highlight the importance of microbial colonisation in modulating host hormone levels, but the specific mechanism remains to be explored (The abovementioned studies suggesting the interaction between intestinal flora and sex hormones were summarised in Table 1; Some cellular and molecular mechanisms involved in the interaction between sex hormones and the gut microbiome were shown in Figure 1).

The aetiology of ovarian cancer is unknown and may be related to environmental, reproductive, behavioural and genetic factors. Among these factors, dysfunctions of oestrogen levels and the activity of oestrogens are considered important factors. The gut microbiome may be involved in the development of the ovaries by affecting oestrogen levels. Laura et al. found that E2 (17β-oestradiol) treatment could alter the pathophysiology of an ovarian cancer mouse model, leading to earlier onset of tumours, reduced overall survival time and a characteristic papillary histology (Laviolette et al., 2010). Guillermo et al. conducted an in vitro study using different ovarian cancer cell lines to confirm the requirement of oestrogen receptors in the aetiology of ovarian cancer. Their results showed that the adhesion and migration abilities of the oestrogen-receptor-positive cell lines were enhanced after oestrogen treatment, while those of the oestrogen-receptor-negative cell line 2,774 EOC were not significantly changed. These results indicated that the effect of oestrogen is directly related to the expression of oestrogen receptors and that oestrogen enhances cell adhesion and migration, which contribute to the metastasis and colonisation of ovarian cancer.

As mentioned above, bacteria with β-glucuronidase activity can mediate the deconjugation of oestrogen to affect the amount of active oestrogen in circulation (see ‘The gut microbiome influences the levels of oestrogen, progesterone and corticosterone and a possible mechanism of these effects’). Combined with the roles that oestrogen level and activity play in the aetiology of ovarian cancer, we can infer that the gut microbiome may contribute to the development of oestrogen-driven diseases, such as ovarian cancer, by affecting the amount of active oestrogen.

Breakthroughs in knowledge of the relationship between the gut microbiome and the chemotherapy efficiency of ovarian cancer have been made using animal experiments. The importance of the gut microbiome in the treatment of ovarian cancer has also been confirmed in many aspects (Chase et al., 2015). Cyclophosphamide is one of the first-line chemotherapy drugs for treating ovarian cancer and can interfere with the synthesis of DNA and RNA. Romain et al. found that the efficacy of cyclophosphamide treatment is related to some species of gut bacteria. The specific mechanisms are still unclear, but they identified that Enterococcus hirae translocate from the small intestine to secondary lymphoid organs and increase the intratumoural CD8/Treg ratio, which may participate in the mechanism of action of cyclophosphamide (Daillere et al., 2016).

We mentioned above that E2, an active form of oestrogen, contributes to the development of ovarian cancer. Regarding the pathway from which E2 is derived, studies have shown that steroid sulfatase (STS) and sulfotransferase (SULT1E1) may play significant roles in the production of E2. STS can activate oestrogens, while SULT1E1 can convert active oestrone (E1) and other forms of oestrogens into an inactive state (Kodama et al., 2011; Purohit et al., 2011). In advanced ovarian cancer patients, researchers have also found a high level of STS and a low level of SULT1E1 (Secky et al., 2013). In addition, there have been reports that the production of STS may be related to some species of the gut microbiome. For example, J Van Eldere succeeded in isolating intestinal steroid-desulfating bacteria from rats and humans (Van Eldere et al., 1988). These results indicate that oestrogen-related cancers can be treated using STS inhibitors or bacterial treatment.

Osteoporosis is a bone metabolic disease taking the form of bone loss and structural destruction. Postmenopausal osteoporosis (PMOP) is a form of osteoporosis that is induced by oestrogen deficiency and leads to an increased frequency of fracture in postmenopausal women. Current studies have suggested the potential and close relationship between gut microbiota and bone remodelling as well as that between gut microbiota and bone metabolic diseases (Collins et al., 2017).

On other hand, some researchers have proved that oestrogen depletion increases gut permeability, causing some metabolites of the gut microbiome to enter subepithelial tissues as antigens to trigger an immune response, leading to the upregulation of osteoclastogenic cytokines, such as TNF-α, RANKL and IFN-γ (Ye et al., 2003). TNF-α and IFN-γ can reduce the expression of the TJ protein Occludin and increase the synthesis of the TJ cation channel constituent protein Claudin-2 through the Ras-Raf-MEK1/2-Erk1/2 and MLKs- MKK3/6-p38 pathways of the MAPK pathway, leading to a further increase in permeability of the paracellular pathway (Matsumura and Ellington, 2001).

Recent studies have shown that probiotic treatment can decrease gut permeability by affecting TJ protein expression and enhance the function of the intestinal epithelial barrier, which can reduce the invasion of intestinal pathogenic bacteria and harmful products into the host and reduce the immune response caused by inflammation (Mennigen et al., 2009; Anderson et al., 2010). These results suggest the potential of probiotics for treating PMOP.

Although existing studies have shown that probiotics have many regulatory functions, whether the effects of different probiotics on the host are individual or species-specific remains to be further studied. At the same time, the biosafety, safe and optimal doses and dosage form of probiotics in the treatment of PMOP also urgently need to be verified by corresponding animal and clinical experiments.

Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a common endocrine disorder in women of reproductive age whose aetiology may be related to hyperandrogenism, insulin resistance and neuroendocrine dysfunction. There are some studies focusing on the gut microbiome of patients with PCOS, and these studies have found some association between gut microbiome and PCOS. However, the exact mechanisms of the microbes associated with PCOS have not yet been identified.

Others have suggested that disturbances of the gut microbiome caused by a poor diet lead to a higher gut permeability and more delivery of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) from Gram-negative colonic bacteria into systemic circulation subsequently (Tremellen and Pearce, 2012). The subsequent activation of the immune system may cause interference with insulin receptor function, increase serum insulin levels and then stimulate the ovaries to produce higher androgens and affect normal follicular development.

Xue J revealed the alleviating effect of inulin and metformin on PCOS is related to anti-inflammation and modulation of the gut microbiota, which may contribute to potential clinical therapy for PCOS (Xue et al., 2019). Diane-35 (oestrogen and progesterone) and probiotics could help to rebuild the diversity of the gut microbiota, and reduction of intestinal flora disorders improved the reproductive function in PCOS-like rats (Zhang et al., 2019a). Moreover, further studies are needed to find out whether manipulation of the gut microbiome can be used as an effective treatment for PCOS.

Transplanting gut microbiota from females with PCOS to recipient mice colonised by B. vulgatus resulted in increased destruction of ovarian functions and resistance against insulin, bile acid metabolism alternation and decreased secretion of interleukin-22. As for the possible mechanisms, glycodeoxycholic acid induced IL-22 secretion in three groups of innate lymphoid cells through GATA-binding protein 3. Subsequently, IL-22 improved the PCOS phenotype. These results suggest that manipulation of the gut microbiome, altering bile acid metabolism and increasing IL-22 levels might be a feasible treatment for treating PCOS (Qi et al., 2019). Zhang J monitored observed that the levels of sex hormones and intestinal short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) increased significantly under the impact of probiotic Bifidobacterium lactis V9. Based on these results, they proposed a potential mechanism that B. lactis V9 regulates the levels of sex hormones by adjusting the intestinal microbiome in PCOS patients (Zhang et al., 2019b). The above studies provided new insights into the pathogenesis of PCOS, and the potential for using probiotics in PCOS therapy has gradually been noted.

Abnormal/aberrant microbiota community structures have been reported in many autoimmune diseases (AIDs), including T1D, IBD, asthma and RA (Gianchecchi and Fierabracci, 2017).

However, the protection butyrate against T1D remains controversial, and a more recent randomised controlled trial suggested that oral butyrate did not affect innate immunity and autoimmunity of islet in patients with long-term T1D.

For a long time, insulin has been the only choice for treating most T1D patients, but the perspective of the ‘gut microbiome-metabolites-immune axis’ provides inspiration for T1D prevention and treatment strategies. The effectiveness and mechanism of the combined application of probiotics, SCFAs and oral anti-sugar drugs in T1D therapy may be future research directions

(A neat epitome of possible treating strategies for sex hormone-related diseases depending on the interaction between sex hormones and the gut microbiome was shown in Figure 2).

There is a consensus opinion that the gut microbiome plays an important role in maintaining the ecological balance of the human body and mediating the occurrence of certain diseases.

The role of the gut microbiome in sex hormone-related diseases is increasingly being studied. However, the mechanisms of synergy or pathways involved in the interaction among the gut microbiome, its metabolites, the immune response and sex hormone levels are still worthy of further study. With the development of technology and the advancement of research, a broader outlook must be taken using microbial supplementation and targeted intervention aimed at investigating the role of the sex hormone metabolism pathway related to the microbiome and its metabolites in the treatment of sex hormone-related diseases.

SH contributed to the consulting literature, data collection and drafting of the manuscript. HL, ZY, FZ, SL, and HL participated in the production of pictures, data analysis and made suggestions for revision. ML made suggestions for revision. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.

This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China, Award id 81972296, https://doi.org/10.13039/501100001809 and Southwest Medical University, Award id 00031718, https://doi.org/10.13039/501100014895. Talent Development Project of The Affiliated Hospital of Southwest Medical University. The grant numbers are 20079 and 20061, respectively.

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

