Identification and Characterization of Human Observational Studies in Nutritional Epidemiology on Gut Microbiomics for Joint Data Analysis

In any research field, data access and data integration are major challenges that even large, well-established consortia face. Although data sharing initiatives are increasing, joint data analyses on nutrition and microbiomics in health and disease are still scarce. We aimed to identify observational studies with data on nutrition and gut microbiome composition from the Intestinal Microbiomics (INTIMIC) Knowledge Platform following the findable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable (FAIR) principles. An adapted template from the European Nutritional Phenotype Assessment and Data Sharing Initiative (ENPADASI) consortium was used to collect microbiome-specific information and other related factors. In total, 23 studies (17 longitudinal and 6 cross-sectional) were identified from Italy (7), Germany (6), Netherlands (3), Spain (2), Belgium (1), and France (1) or multiple countries (3). Of these, 21 studies collected information on both dietary intake (24 h dietary recall, food frequency questionnaire (FFQ), or Food Records) and gut microbiome. All studies collected stool samples. The most often used sequencing platform was Illumina MiSeq, and the preferred hypervariable regions of the 16S rRNA gene were V3–V4 or V4. The combination of datasets will allow for sufficiently powered investigations to increase the knowledge and understanding of the relationship between food and gut microbiome in health and disease.

Microbiome research has gained popularity over the past 15 years thanks to a reduction in the cost of high-throughput sequencing technology and the increased availability of sophisticated mathematical and computational techniques, allowing for a better quantification of the microbial composition and, therefore, an understanding of its impacts on human health [1,2]. Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes are the two dominant phyla. Together, Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes represent approximately 90% of the total community of the adult human gut microbiota. Other subdominant phyla, namely Proteobacteria, Actinobacteria, and Verrucomicrobia, are also present [3,4]. The primary determinants capable of modulating the gut microbial composition are diet and interindividual variations, such as epigenetic variations of the host [2]. A diverse diet leads to a diverse microbiome, which, in turn, is considered a healthy microbiome [5]. However, intra- and interindividual variations, as well as the temporal dynamics of the microbiome, preclude a single narrow definition of a healthy human gut microbiome [6].

Here, we present a description of the design, characteristics, methods, and available data and metadata of epidemiological observational studies on food, diet, and gut microbiomics identified within the context of KP-INTIMIC. As in a previous JPI Knowledge Hub, the European Nutritional Phenotype Assessment and Data Sharing Initiative (ENPADASI) [23,24], the identified studies may be used in future federated individual-level joint data analyses examining the human gut microbiome and the role of diet in health and disease in the areas of early infancy, the development of sub-chronic and chronic diseases during lifespan, and aging. “Federated” refers to the joint analyses of individual-level data using the statistical platform DataSHIELD, a flexible, modular, free, open-source solution that allows the conduct of analysis without the need of individual studies to physically transfer their data into a single central database, as a way to circumvent privacy, ethical, and legal constrains of observational studies that often preclude the physical sharing of data [25].

KP-INTIMIC is a knowledge hub comprising 55 partners from 9 countries with the aim of fostering studies on the microbiome, nutrition, and health, making them findable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable (FAIR) to the scientific community to reduce fragmentation. The consortium also aims to (1) standardize and harmonize data for comparability, (2) move from association to causality, and (3) facilitate data sharing [25,26]. The consortium was assembled in response to a call by the Joint Programming Initiative “A Healthy Diet for a Healthy Life” (JPI-HDHL) ERA-Net Cofund “Interrelation of the INtesTInal MICrobiome, Diet and Health” (HDHL-INTIMIC). The research groups that showed an interest in the call submitted an “Expression of Interest” letter to the Call Secretariat. Subsequently, the research groups networked to frame the KP-INTIMIC program proposal, in which an initial list of 36 human studies (17 observational and 19 intervention) and 11 model organism studies potentially available within the consortium were provided.

We developed a template to gather meta-information from each observational study identified in the KP-INTIMIC network using an already existing template from the previous JPI European Nutritional Phenotype Assessment and Data Sharing Initiative (ENPADASI) [23]. The template was adapted for the collection of microbiome-specific metadata. A three-step approach was followed to develop a template suitable for the KP-INTIMIC needs. The first step was to agree with our partners on the type of information we would like to collect from the identified studies. To this end, a virtual Working Group meeting was organized, and discussions were held regarding types of metadata. The second step was to seek advice from an expert in computational science to discuss relevant microbiome metadata that would be interesting to collect for the use cases. The third step was to hold a meeting with the partners responsible for the creation of the templates (human (intervention and observational) and animal studies) to further discuss the templates for metadata collection of human and animal studies, as well as the strategies to harmonize the metadata related to the microbiome. To capture all relevant observational studies, human studies of various designs (cohort, case-control, or cross-sectional) were collected. However, in the present report, we only describe studies that collected data on nutrition (e.g., dietary assessment), as well as stool samples.

We first circulated the template among the principal investigators (PIs) from the 17 observational studies listed in the KP-INTIMIC program proposal for the confirmation of participation. Then, we circulated the template among all KP-INTIMIC partners to identify more studies. The PIs filled in the template and sent it back with the requested meta-information to the Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, where they were kept and aggregated into a single meta-database for integration in KP-INTIMIC. An initial list of 27 studies was obtained, but 4 were finally excluded, resulting in 23 studies. Reasons for exclusion were as follows: intervention design (n = 2), no collection of data on dietary intake, and no collection of stool samples for gut microbiome measurement (n = 2).

Within the KP-INTIMIC, we identified 23 observational studies conducted in Italy (n = 7), Germany (n = 6), the Netherlands (n = 3), Spain (n = 2), Belgium (n = 1), and France (n = 1), and multinational studies conducted in two or more countries (including Burkina Faso, Cyprus, Denmark, Estonia, France, Germany, Hungary, Italy, and Sweden) (n = 3) (Table 1). Sixteen studies were population-based, whereas seven were disease-based (eating disorders; Parkinson’s disease; chronic kidney diseases; cardiometabolic diseases, including IBD (including ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease); and irritable bowel syndrome). Of the 16 population-based studies, 13 were of cohort design and 3 were of cross-sectional design. Of the seven disease-based studies, four were of cohort design and three were of cross-sectional design. Of the seven disease-based studies, one had no controls and exclusively recruited diseased individuals with chronic kidney disease (Medika, Italy), whereas the other six primarily recruited disease-based participants but also included a non-diseased control group, which was mainly recruited through advertisements. Of the 23 studies, 8 studies recruited children, of which 3 (birth cohort) studies recruited children at birth (LISA, Germany; LucKI Gut Study, Netherlands; DORIAN-PISAC, Italy), 3 in the first year of life (Infant microbiome studies, Italy; EarlyMicroHealth, Spain; DONALD study, Germany), and 2 studies recruited children and adolescents (IDEFICS/I.Family cohort, TransMic, Multinational). The other 15 studies recruited adult populations. Six studies were still ongoing. Of the 23 observational studies, 15 studies recruited <1000 individuals, 4 recruited ≥1000 individuals (FoCus, and LISA, Germany; Metacardis, Multinational; IBD South Limburg Cohort, Netherlands), and 3 recruited over 10,000 individuals (DONALD, EPIC-Potsdam, IDEFICS/I.Family cohort, and NAKO, Germany), although data on the gut microbiome or collected stool samples were often available only in subsamples.

1 DONALD: DOrtmund Nutritional and Anthropometric Longitudinally Designed; 2 LISA: Influences of Lifestyle-Related Factors on the Human Immune System and Development of Allergies in Children; 3 NAKO: German National cohort; 4 DORIAN-PISAC: Developmental ORigins of healthy and unhealthy AgeiNg: The Role of Maternal Obesity-Pisa Birth Cohort; 5 VLBW: very low birth weight; 6 EDILS: Eating Disorders Inventory and Longitudinal Survey; 7 CKD: chronic kidney disease; 8 PLIC: Progression of Lesions in the Intima of the Carotid; 9 IBD: inflammatory bowel disease; 10 UC: Ulcerative Colitis; 11 CD: Crohn’s disease; 12 IBS: irritable bowel syndrome; 13 SCFA: short chain fatty acids; 14 FoCus: Food Chain Plus; 15 CMD: cardiometabolic disease. N.A.: not available.

Twenty-two studies collected data on dietary intake, whereas one did not (Effect of food on gut microbiota and metabolites in Parkinson patients, Belgium). Seventeen studies collected dietary intake using a single method, such as the food frequency questionnaire (FFQ) (n = 9), food records (n = 4), and other forms (n = 4). Four studies collected information using two methods (24 h dietary recall and FFQs), and none used all three methods (24 h dietary recall, FFQs and food records) (Table 2). Multiple 24 h dietary recalls were administered in five studies. FFQs were semiquantitative (n = 13) and qualitative (n = 1).

1 FFQ: food frequency questionnaire; 2 M: multiple; 3 SQ: semiquantitative; 4 The following information is available: feeding with human (mother’s or donor’s) milk, formula, or mixed; 5 QU: qualitative; 6 available for a subset of participants.

Information on further collected data, such as alcohol and tobacco consumption, physical activity, anthropometry, socioeconomic status (SES) (including sex, age, residence, country of birth, country of citizenship, marital status, income, and education level, among other variables), medication use, and health status are described in Supplement Table S1.

All the studies collected stool samples, and all but one study (NAKO, Germany) already had microbiome data available from the stool samples. Three studies also collected saliva (NAKO, Germany; Diet4MicroGut, Italy) or oral swabs (Infant microbiome studies, Italy) for the microbiome, although data on the microbiome was only available in the two Italian studies (Table 3).

1 16S: 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing (amplified variable regions), shotgun: shotgun metagenomic sequencing; 2 in a subset at 6 years; 3 depending on the follow-up; 4 ITS: internal transcribed spacer; 5 at 0-, 18-, and 36-month follow-ups. NR: not reported.

Information on biomarkers, such as blood lipids, glucose/insulin, inflammatory markers, adiposity biomarkers, and metabolome data, are described in Supplement Table S2. In total, 14 studies had data on blood lipids (HDL, LDL, and total cholesterol) and glucose/insulin (glucose, HbA1c, fasting insulin, C-peptide), 16 studies had data on inflammatory biomarkers (C-Reactive Protein (CRP), interleukin 6 (IL-6), tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α), and 10 studies had data on adiposity biomarkers (adiponectin, leptin). Moreover, 15 studies collected metabolome data from stool, urine, plasma, or serum. These studies mainly used nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and mass spectrometry (MS) in different forms, such as gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) and liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS/MS).

All the studies were approved by an Ethics Committee and had collected the informed consent from the individuals participating in their study. In total, 12 studies showed interest in the storage and data sharing within the KP-INTIMIC consortium, although some of them needed confirmation or requested an agreement form. Storing and sharing raw data directly within KP-INTIMIC is restricted by study agreements or consent, necessitating a federated approach similar to the one proposed here for fully exploring their potential. All studies expressed their will to store and share raw data for specific research projects outside the INTIMIC, with the exception of three studies (Effect of food on gut microbiota and metabolites in Parkinson patients, Belgium; EPIC-Potsdam, Germany, TransMic, Multinational). Regarding metadata, all but the Belgian study agreed to share metadata, although some of them needed confirmation or required board approval (Supplement Table S3).

Within the KP-INTIMIC, we identified a total of 23 observational studies which were mainly of longitudinal or cross-sectional design. These studies were conducted in 12 European countries and 1 African country, with data on dietary intake, microbiome, and/or health outcomes. Sixteen studies recruited individuals from the general population whilst seven were disease-based. Most of the studies included adults. Twenty-one studies had data both on dietary assessment and the gut microbiome, whereas one study had data on dietary intake but not on the gut microbiome, although stool samples were collected. Another study had data on the microbiome but not on dietary intake. The studies mostly amplified and sequenced hypervariable regions of the 16S rRNA gene, such as the V3 and V4, using the Illumina MiSeq sequencing platform. Seven studies conducted shotgun metagenome sequencing mostly using the Illumina (MiSeq, NextSeq, NovaSeq, or HiSeq) sequencing platform, and fifteen studies had also data on the urine, stool, plasma, or serum metabolome.

Another relevant aspect that needs to be addressed to advance the microbiome field is the examination of the functional products of the microbes by means of metabolomics and the underutilized meta-transcriptomics technology approach [49]. Of the 23 studies, 15 identified in the KP-INTIMIC have also collected data on metabolomics using different strategies such as the targeted and untargeted metabolomics in urine, stool, plasma, or serum. The metabolomics investigations in microbiome studies are fundamental in assessing the role of diet in shaping the functions of the gut microbiome. In fact, many health-related microbial metabolites, such as short-chain fatty acids, TMAO, urolithins, and bile acids, have dietary nutrients as precursors. Targeted metabolomics is a strategy characterized by a predefined list of molecules, which can be detected and quantified with high-quality standards. A caveat is that targeted metabolomics does not allow for the discovery of molecules that are not in the predetermined list [50], whereas untargeted metabolomics does. The molecules detected by metabolomics are metabolites resulting from the action of the microbiota and their quantification provide a clear portrait of the alterations in the metabolic performance of the microbiota under any condition [6]. One study, which used data from a population-based twin study (TwinsUK), estimated stool metabolite associations with adiposity and gut microbial composition. The researchers found that stool metabolites, which were strongly associated with obesity, explained nearly 68% of the variance in gut microbial composition [51]. Thus, understanding how microbiome–metabolome associations relate not only to obesity but also to other chronic disease risk factors could shed light on disease etiology and identify targets for intervention [10].

In conclusion, 23 observational studies with a wealth of data on dietary intake, microbiome, biomarkers, and health outcomes were identified within KP-INTIMIC for future combined analysis. Crucially, due to common data sharing restrictions, a federated approach similar to the one proposed here appears to be a necessity to make full use of this body of knowledge. The identified studies may promote collaboration initiatives using FAIR data to conduct secondary data analysis that may shed light on the understanding of the role of the human gut microbiome in health and disease, as well as the effects of diet on the composition of the gastrointestinal ecosystem in early infancy, ageing, and in health and disease both within and outside the KP-INTIMIC consortium.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

