Human milk oligosaccharides, milk microbiome and infant gut microbiome modulate neonatal rotavirus infection

Neonatal rotavirus infections are predominantly asymptomatic. While an association with gastrointestinal symptoms has been described in some settings, factors influencing differences in clinical presentation are not well understood. Using multidisciplinary approaches, we show that a complex interplay between human milk oligosaccharides (HMOs), milk microbiome, and infant gut microbiome impacts neonatal rotavirus infections. Validating in vitro studies where HMOs are not decoy receptors for neonatal strain G10P[11], population studies show significantly higher levels of Lacto-N-tetraose (LNT), 2’-fucosyllactose (2’FL), and 6’-siallylactose (6’SL) in milk from mothers of rotavirus-positive neonates with gastrointestinal symptoms. Further, these HMOs correlate with abundance of Enterobacter/Klebsiella in maternal milk and infant stool. Specific HMOs also improve the infectivity of a neonatal strain-derived rotavirus vaccine. This study provides molecular and translational insight into host factors influencing neonatal rotavirus infections and identifies maternal components that could promote the performance of live, attenuated rotavirus vaccines.

Breast milk is an excellent source of nutrition for a newborn infant, providing macronutrients such as lipids, fats, proteins, and carbohydrates, as well as numerous micronutrients essential for infant growth. In addition, breast milk contains several biologically active components such as immunoglobulins, growth hormones, oligosaccharides, and microbiota that play critical roles in infant intestinal homeostasis and immune development1. Among the bioactive components, human milk oligosaccharides (HMOs) are the third most abundant solid component after lactose and lipids. These unconjugated complex glycans act as prebiotics, antiadhesives, and antimicrobials and play critical roles in altering epithelial and immune cell responses2. HMOs are composed of five monosaccharide building blocks, including glucose (Glc), galactose (Gal), N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc), fucose (Fuc), and sialic acid (Sia). Over 100 HMOs have been structurally characterized; all contain lactose at the reducing end and are extended into complex structures by the addition of type 1 (Galβ1-3GlcNAc) or type 2 (Galβ1-4GlcNAc) chains, fucosylation, or sialylation3. The total amount and composition of HMOs varies between women and are dependent on maternal genetics, environment, and geographic location4.

Analysis of virological factors including whole-genome characterization of virus from asymptomatic and symptomatic neonates, examination of differences in viral load and virus shedding, and the role of the environment and care givers in virus transmission did not provide insight into differences in clinical presentations18–20. Since structures analogous to precursor HBGAs are present in human milk and P[11] VP8* binds HMOs on a shotgun milk glycan array21, we hypothesized that HMOs act as decoy receptors, competitively inhibiting the binding of G10P[11] to intestinal HBGAs and that differences in expression of such HMOs may explain the differences in clinical presentation between neonates. Multidisciplinary studies including in vitro infectivity assays, nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), and analysis of samples from a cohort of mother–infant pairs demonstrate that, contrary to our hypothesis, HMOs are not decoy receptors for G10P[11] and provide an unexpected new insight into the pathogenesis of neonatal enteric infections. Of public health importance, HMOs enhance the infectivity of a licensed P[11] rotavirus vaccine, highlighting maternal factors that could promote the performance of live, attenuated vaccines.

The VP8* domain of the spike protein of G10P[11] virus binds both type I and type II HMOs on a shotgun milk glycan array21. X-ray crystallographic studies of P[11] VP8* in complex with type I and type II HMOs [Lacto-N-tetraose (LNT) and Lacto-N-neotetraose (LNnT), respectively] revealed a previously uncharacterized receptor-binding site in rotavirus VP8*22. To elucidate the biological relevance of these interactions and determine whether HMOs act as soluble decoy receptors for G10P[11], infectivity assays were carried out on African green monkey kidney epithelial cells (MA104 cells), a well-established model for rotavirus studies in vitro, using increasing concentrations of LNT and LNnT. The highest concentrations tested were reflective of average biological concentrations in breast milk from healthy mothers4.

Infectivity assays were therefore carried out using two globally dominant human rotavirus strains G1P[8] (strain Wa) and G2P[4] (strain DS1), as well as a G10P[11] rotavirus strain of bovine origin (strain B223). G10P[11] strains are a common cause of diarrhea in cattle24–26, and phylogenetic analyses show that human neonatal G10P[11] strains are most closely related to G10P[11] strains that cause diarrhea in cattle19. Pooled HMOs had no significant effect on the infectivity of the globally dominant P[4] and P[8] human rotavirus strains while the infectivity of both the human neonatal and bovine P[11] viruses was significantly enhanced (Fig. 1c). These data confirm that HMO-mediated enhancement in virus infectivity is specific to P[11] rotaviruses. Since all HMOs contain lactose at the reducing end, infectivity assays were carried out using lactose at the highest concentration in pooled HMOs. The addition of lactose alone did not recapitulate the enhanced infectivity seen with LNT, LNnT, or the pooled HMOs (Supplementary Figure 1). To gain preliminary mechanistic insight into the mode of action, either viruses or cells were preincubated with pooled HMOs prior to infectivity assays. Pretreated cells were washed before inoculation with virus to ensure the absence of HMO during infection. In both experimental conditions, no HMOs were included during the course of infection. Irrespective of whether there was enhancement in infectivity as seen with G10P[11] or reduction in infectivity as seen with SA11-4F, the outcome was mediated by the effect of HMOs acting directly on the virus rather than on the cells (Fig. 1d).

There are no animal models to study the human neonatal G10P[11] rotavirus. Therefore, to directly determine the biological and clinical significance of the in vitro findings for neonates, a cohort of 181 mother–infant pairs was recruited from the neonatal nurseries of the Christian Medical College (CMC) in Vellore, India, where a high incidence of neonatal G10P[11] infections has been described over a long period of time15. Based on clinical presentations and detection of rotavirus in stool samples from the neonates, the samples were classified into 3 groups: symptomatic rotavirus positive (n = 56), asymptomatic rotavirus positive (n = 60), and rotavirus negative (n = 65). HMO profiles of breast milk samples were characterized for 167 samples using high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)27.

To determine the functional role of 2’FL, LNFP I and II, and 6’SL identified from the population studies, the average biological concentration of these HMOs was tested in infectivity assays with the neonatal G10P[11] virus. Significant enhancement in infectivity was seen with 2’FL and LNFP I but not with 6’SL and LNFP II (Fig. 3a). To determine whether enhanced infectivity is a function of VP8*–HMO binding, the binding constant (Kd) was determined using NMR spectroscopy by monitoring the chemical shift changes as a function of increasing ligand concentrations for LNT, 2’FL, LNFP I, and 6’SL. The data were globally fitted to calculate a Kd of 42 ± 2 mM for LNT (Fig. 3b), 150 ± 6 mM for LNFP I, and 313 ± 24 mM for 2’FL (Fig. 3c). The highest binding was seen with LNT, which was the most discriminatory HMO in both secretors and non-secretors while no binding was seen with 6’SL (Fig. 3c). The representative NMR peaks displayed significant chemical shift changes (1H dimension) in the two-dimensional (2D) 1H-15N heteronuclear single quantum coherence (HSQC) spectra in the presence of the HMOs (Supplementary Figure 4A-D), revealing the direct molecular interactions between 15N-labeled P[11] VP8* and LNT, 2’FL, and LNFP I in solution.

Since HMOs can potentially affect pathogen infectivity by indirect mechanisms such as modulation of the infant gut microbiome, we next characterized the breast milk and infant stool microbiome from mother–infant samples. Unlike HMOs, there were no differences in breast milk or infant fecal microbiome based on maternal secretor status (Supplementary Figure 5A–B and 5C–D, respectively). The absence of difference in infant microbiota based on maternal secretor status is different from studies in other populations; however, maternal secretor status is one of many factors influencing the infant gut microbiome, and it is likely that other population-specific factors may play a role in this difference. Indeed, a recent study in 1190 healthy adults showed that FUT2 genotype and secretor status may not be associated with fecal microbial composition29.

Analysis of the infant fecal microbiome showed that the symptomatic rotavirus-positive neonates were significantly different (p = 0.002) compared to rotavirus-negative and asymptomatic neonates (Fig. 4d). Similar to the breast milk microbiome, the relative abundance of Enterobacter/Klebsiella was significantly higher in symptomatic neonates (KW test with FDR, p < 0.001; Fig. 4e). LEfSe analysis again corroborated these findings, with Enterobacter/Klebsiella identified as the most discriminatory genera in symptomatic neonates and Staphylococcus as the most discriminatory genera in rotavirus-negative and asymptomatic infants (Fig. 4f). These data indicate a strong association of Enterobacter/Klebsiella, whether in breast milk or in infant stool, with gastrointestinal disease presentations in neonates and a potential protective effect of Staphylococcus and Streptococcus against rotavirus infection and disease.

Population studies individually showed the association of HMOs and the microbiota with symptomatic rotavirus infections. To evaluate the interplay between these factors, we performed sparse partial least squared (sPLS) canonical analyses to determine correlations between concentrations of the five significant HMOs identified in the field studies (described in Fig. 2) and the relative abundance of the three principally significant and discriminatory genera identified from the microbiome analyses (described in Fig. 4). Overall, the HMOs significantly associated with symptomatic infections in the neonates were positively correlated with Enterobacter/Klebsiella and/or negatively correlated with Staphylococcus and Streptococcus in breast milk (Fig. 5a) and infant stool (Fig. 5b). For example, LNT and 6’SL that are associated with symptomatic infections were both positively correlated with Enterobacter/Klebsiella and negatively correlated with Staphylococcus in breast milk (Fig. 5a). While LNT was directly found to enhance virus infectivity in vitro, these analyses indicate potential roles for microbiome modulation by HMOs such as 6’SL that were associated with symptomatic infections but without a direct effect on G10P[11] infectivity. Similarly examining correlations between infant stool microbiome and HMOs (Fig. 5b), the negative correlations between LNT and 6’SL in breast milk and Staphylococcus continued to be seen for the fecal microbiome while the positive correlations with Enterobacter/Klebsiella were lost. Conversely, 2’FL and LNFP I were positively correlated with Enterobacter/Klebsiella in stool samples. LNFP II was the only HMO significantly associated with asymptomatic rotavirus infections and showed weak correlations with both breast milk and infant fecal microbiomes. Finally, as would be expected if the breast milk microbiome contributed to colonization of the infant gut, comparing the relative abundance of the bacterial genera between breast milk and infant stool showed that each genus was positively correlated with itself between the sample types (Fig. 5c).

All rotavirus vaccines currently used worldwide are live, attenuated viruses recommended to be administered at 6, 10 and 14 weeks of age31 where breast milk components are likely to play a critical role. A naturally attenuated neonatal virus strain belonging to the P[11] VP4 genotype (G9P[11], strain 116E) is being used as a rotavirus vaccine in India (Rotavac®) and has recently received World Health Organization (WHO) prequalification for global use32,33. Since Rotavac® and the G10P[11] strain described in this study share the same P[11] VP4 type19, we tested the effect of HMOs identified from our field studies on the infectivity of Rotavac® in MA104 cells. Similar to the neonatal G10P[11] virus, an enhancement in Rotavac® infectivity was seen with biological concentrations of LNT, 2’FL, and LNFP I but not with 6’SL (Fig. 6). These data suggest that maternal HMO profiles, both through direct effects on vaccine replication and/or possibly through indirect effects mediated by the microbiome, may be an important and previously unexplored factor contributing to differences in rotavirus vaccine take between children.

Breast milk is dynamic and has evolved over millennia to provide nourishment for the newborn infant. The antimicrobial and immunomodulatory effects of bioactive components such as HMOs are key for protection of the infant from infectious agents at a developmental stage where the infant’s own immune system is relatively immature and naive. However, susceptibility to infection and clinical outcome is also modulated by how the pathogen counters host restriction. This study exemplifies microbial success in an evolutionary arms race between host and pathogens. While the pathogen appears to exploit abundantly available breast milk factors to cause disease in neonates, this dominance is limited to a highly age-restricted neonatal niche, perhaps suggesting an evolutionary cost for this adaptation.

Overall, bridging the gap between the laboratory bench and the population, integrating molecular virology, NMR, and field studies provided new molecular and translational insight into the complex interplay between HMO, milk microbiome, and infant gut microbiome in neonatal enteric viral infection and disease. At a global level, the benefits of providing expressed breast milk far outweigh risks associated with enhanced infectivity of a unique neonatal rotavirus strain. However, the association of specific maternal factors with gastrointestinal presentations warrants further mechanistic investigation into the contribution of these factors to changes in intestinal permeability and homeostasis. Apart from addressing key questions on neonatal rotavirus infections, our findings have broad implications for neonatal enteric infections, lactation research, manufacturing infant formula, and vaccine studies.

Rotavirus infections were carried out on MA104 cells (African green monkey kidney epithelial cells, originally obtained from Dr. T. H. Flewett, Birmingham, UK)61. Rotaviruses are classified by a binary nomenclature system based on the genes encoding outer capsid proteins VP7 (G type) and VP4 (P type)62. Infectivity assays were carried out with a neonatal G10P[11] rotavirus isolate N1509 [stock titer 1.11E + 06 fluorescent focus units (FFU)/ml] that was previously adapted to cell culture by multiple passages on MA104 cells17. Other well-characterized rotavirus strains include simian rotavirus SA11 variant 4F SA11-4F (stock titer 8.98E + 06 FFU/ml), bovine G10P[11] rotavirus B223 (stock titer 8.22E + 05 FFU/ml), human G1P[8] rotavirus strain Wa (stock titer 9.60E + 06 FFU/ml), and human G2P[4] rotavirus strain DS1 (stock titer 5.15E + 06 FFU/ml). The MA104 cells and all rotavirus strains were serially passaged in the Estes Laboratory at Baylor College of Medicine. The G9P[11] rotavirus vaccine Rotavac® (1.0E + 05 FFU/ml) was donated for use in the study by Bharat Biotech International Ltd.

Pooled HMOs were prepared from donor milk samples using centrifugation, filtration, and chromatography as previously described63. Milk from >50 donors was pooled to account for heterogeneity in HMO composition between different women. HMO composition was analyzed by HPLC and mass spectrometry to ensure relative consistency of HMO composition among batches. The pooled preparation contained 22.8% LNT, 16.5% 2’FL, 10.0% LNFP I, 11.4% difucosyllacto-N-tetraose, 2.7% 3’SL, 1.9% LNnT, 1.6% 6’SL, 16.9% LNFP II, 1.7% sialyllacto-N-tetraose c (LSTc), 2.8% 3’FL, 0.4% sialyllacto-N-tetraose b (LSTb), 0.4% LNFP III, 1.1% disialyllactose-N-tetraose (DSLNT), and several other HMOs with <1% relative abundance. Pooled HMOs were lyophilized for long-term storage. Individual HMOs (2’FL, LNT, LNFP I, LNFP II, and 6’SL) were purchased from Dextra. Appropriate concentrations of lyophilized HMOs were weighed, diluted into cell culture media (0% Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium), and used in infectivity assays.

The effect of HMOs on rotavirus infectivity was assessed through standard fluorescent focus assays on MA104 cells described as previously described5. MA104 cells are highly permissive to rotavirus infection and are a well-established cell line for rotavirus infectivity assays in laboratories worldwide. We and others have used MA104 cells to evaluate the effects of glycans on multiple rotavirus strains, including the genotype studied in this work5,53,61. Briefly, confluent MA104 monolayers on 96-well plates were incubated overnight in serum-free media prior to infection. Rotavirus strains were activated with 10 µg/ml of trypsin at 37 °C for half an hour. The dilutions of virus that yielded approximately 100–200 FFU per well were suspended in media with and without HMOs at specified concentrations and allowed to bind to MA104 cells for 1 h at 37 °C. The inoculum was removed and the cells were washed once with serum-free media to remove any unbound virus. Media (with or without HMO) was then added, and the infection was allowed to continue for 15 h. Cells were then fixed with ice-cold methanol and intracellular viral antigen was detected using an anti-rotavirus polyclonal rabbit primary antibody followed by a fluorescently conjugated anti-rabbit secondary antibody (Alexa FluorTM 488-conjugated donkey anti-rabbit antibody). The number of infected cells was counted and expressed as FFU/ml. Modifications of this protocol were used to determine whether the effect of HMOs was on the virus or the cells. To determine whether HMOs had a direct effect on the virus, N1509 or SA11-4F was preincubated with pooled HMOs at 37 °C for 2 h prior to infection. Alternatively, MA104 cells were treated with HMOs overnight at 37 °C. The cells were pretreated for a longer duration when compared to pretreatment of the virus because extended incubation of Caco-2 cells in the presence of HMOs was shown to alter the expression of cell surface glycans affecting adhesion of enteropathogenic Escherichia coli64. To determine the effect of HMOs on cells, MA104 cells were washed following pretreatment with HMOs and then inoculated with virus. For effects on the virus, pretreated virus strains were inoculated on cells as described above. In both cases, HMOs were not included during the 15 h course of infection. Infectivity in the absence of HMOs served as the control in all experiments.

The field component of the study was carried out in the neonatal nurseries and post-natal units of CMC, a 2700-bed tertiary care referral hospital in Vellore, India as described in previous epidemiological studies in this population15. Briefly, samples and clinical data were collected after informed consent was obtained from mothers of neonates hospitalized at CMC. Trained study nurses were available in the nurseries round the clock for consent, recruitment, and sample collection. Stool samples from neonates admitted in the neonatal nurseries for over 48 h with gastrointestinal symptoms (including diarrhea, vomiting, gastroesophageal reflux, gastrointestinal bleed, necrotizing enterocolitis, pneumatosis intestinalis, abdominal distension, and/or feed intolerance) were screened for rotavirus using an enzyme immunoassay (ProSpecT, Thermofisher Scientific, UK) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Stool samples from infants admitted for >48 h in the post-natal units with non-enteric pathology or where the hospitalization was for maternal causes were tested to identify asymptomatically infected neonates and rotavirus-negative neonates. Molecular characterization of G and P types were carried out on rotavirus-positive stool samples15. At least one breast milk sample was collected from each mother as soon as feasible after recruitment of the mother–infant dyad. For breast milk collection, mothers were instructed to clean the breast with soap and water before collection of breast milk and then expressed breastmilk into a sterile container. We did not discard the first milk or clean with any disinfectant since babies receive the microbiome of the skin as well as that in the breastmilk. Neonates with gastrointestinal symptoms were admitted in the tertiary level nursery where pooled breast milk from mothers is given to neonates without matching of mother and neonate. Therefore, a sample of the pooled breastmilk actually given to each infant was collected for the first 10 feeds after recruitment. Since no significant differences were observed in HMO profile between different feeds (Supplementary Figure 7), data from the first sample was used for subsequent analysis. The remaining asymptomatic and rotavirus-negative neonates received direct breast milk. Demographic information on the study population is given in Supplementary Table 1.

The amount and composition of HMOs in breast milk samples was analyzed by HPLC after labeling with the fluorescent tag 2-aminobenzamide as described previously27. The well-established method allows for absolute quantification of the 19 most abundant and structurally distinct HMOs (that constitute >95% total HMOs), including 2’FL, 3’FL, 3’SL, LNT, LNnT, LNFP I, LNFP II, LNFP III, LSTb, LSTc, or DSLNT. Maternal secretor status was identified based on the presence or near-absence of 2’FL in breast milk.

Recombinant N-terminal glutathione S-transferase (GST)-tagged P[11] VP8* were expressed in E. coli BL21(DE3) cells (Novagen) and purified with Glutathione Sepharose 4 Fast Flow (GE Healthcare) affinity column as described previously17,22. The GST tag was removed by the treatment with protease thrombin overnight at 4 °C and rebinding the protein mixture to the Glutathione Sepharose column. The VP8* was further purified by size exclusion column Superdex75 (GE Healthcare) with 10 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM dithiothreitol at 4 °C. The concentration of the purified protein was determined by measuring absorbance at 280 nm and using an absorption coefficient of 32,430/M/cm for VP8* calculated using ProtPraram on the ExPASy server65. 1H-15N-labeled P[11] VP8* was purified and ligands were dissolved in 10 mM sodium phosphate, 50 mM NaCl, and 10% D2O buffer, pH 7. NMR experiments were performed on Avance III HD 800 MHz Ascend™ Bruker instrument equipped with quadruple resonance inverse detection QCI CryoProbeTM (NMR and Drug Discovery Core, Baylor College of Medicine). 2D 1H-15N HSQC NMR experiments were collected on P[11] VP8* (70 μM) using various ligand concentrations (0.5, 2.0, 3.5, 5, 8, 20 mM). NMR spectra were analyzed using the NMRPipe66 and NMRFAM-Sparky67 software. Chemical shift changes in the 1H dimension for nine peaks were used to calculate Kd for the VP8:LNT glycan complex. The binding data for all glycans were globally fit to the general binding model “ML ↔ M + L” using the equation

Bacterial genomic DNA was extracted from breast milk and stool samples using MOBIO PowerMag DNA Isolation Kit (MO BIO Laboratories; San Diego, CA). The 16S rDNA V4 region was amplified by PCR using barcoded Illumina adapter-containing primers 515F and 806R69 and sequenced on the MiSeq platform (Illumina; SanDiego, CA) using the 2 × 250 bp paired-end protocol yielding pair-end reads. Sequencing read pairs were demultiplexed based on the unique molecular barcodes, and reads were merged using USEARCH v7.0.109070. Merging allowed zero mismatches and a minimum overlap of 50 bases, and merged reads were trimmed at the first base with a Q ≤ 5. In addition, a quality filter was applied to the resulting merged reads and those containing >0.05% expected errors were discarded. Sequences were stepwise clustered into operational taxonomic units (OTUs) at a similarity cutoff value of 97% using the UPARSE algorithm71. Chimeras were removed using USEARCH v7.0.1090. OTUs were determined by mapping the centroids to the SILVA v128 database72 containing only the 16S rRNA V4 region to determine taxonomies. We utilized multiple quality-control (QC) measures, including the use of non-template controls, at the microbial DNA extraction, 16S rRNA gene amplification, and amplicon sequencing processes for QC purposes. Breast milk and stool samples were processed in separate extraction and sequencing runs totaling six individual runs. Each extraction and sequencing run included a set of controls used routinely in the Alkek Center for Metagenomics and Microbiome Research (CMMR) at Baylor College of Medicine as part of its quality management program in conformity with its CLIA certification. Controls consisted of negative or blank reagent-only controls, and positive controls consisted of a previously characterized bacterial isolate carried through all the steps of the pipeline. In all cases, the positive control yielded >20,000 sequencing reads of which >99% mapped to the known bacterial isolate. All reagent-only negative controls yielded <500 sequencing reads of which <20% were mapped to bacteria. These results were in line with the guidelines established by the CMMR to maintain QC and assurance of the projects processed through the center. Resulting OTU tables were rarified to 940 reads per sample. In total, 3,047,373 reads passed QC and were successfully mapped, with 313,020 reads included in the final analysis at 940 reads/sample.

For infectivity assays, each experimental condition was tested a minimum of three times, with technical replicates for each virus and HMO concentration within each assay. Virus titer measured in the absence of HMOs was considered to be 100% infectivity; change in virus titer in the presence of HMOs was expressed as the percentage of infectivity compared with no HMO treatment. Percentage of infectivity in the presence of each HMO was compared to the percentage of infectivity in the absence of HMOs as described previously5. No comparisons between different HMOs or between two concentrations of the same HMO were carried out. In the population studies, the levels of each HMO were compared between milk from mothers of symptomatic, asymptomatic, and rotavirus-negative neonates. All statistical analyses for infectivity assays and HMO profiles were performed with use of ANOVA with Dunnett’s post hoc test on GraphPad Prism version 6.0 for Windows (GraphPad Software). Multiplicity-adjusted p values were determined, with p values <0.05 considered to be statistically significant.

The HMO data underwent OPLS-DA using MetaboAnalyst 3.076 and validated using 2000 random permutations. To determine the predictivity of individual HMOs as a marker for symptomatic rotavirus infection, ROC curves were generated in MetaboAnalyst 3.0 by linear SVM classification with Monte-Carlo cross-validation using balanced subsampling. In each Monte-Carlo cross-validation, two thirds of the samples were used to examine the feature importance and the classification model was validated using the one third of samples left out. Several iterations were performed with increasing number of HMOs to determine the optimal number of metabolites to predict symptomatic rotavirus infection, with analysis based on 2, 3, 5, 7, 10, or 19 of the top HMOs based on the selected frequency. Within- and between-subject pairwise comparisons of temporal breast milk samples was performed on samples obtained from at least four feeds based on the Bray–Curtis dissimilarity distance77 using the Vegan package78. The significance of within- and between-subject distances was calculated by Wilcox test. Statistics and figure generation was performed in R using the ggplot package75. MixOmics79 was implemented in R version 3.3 to determine the correlations between the significant HMOs and significant bacterial genera in breast milk and stool. MixOmixs uses sPLS regression and was performed in canonical mode with LASSO penalization80.



The authors declare no competing interests.

Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Supplementary Information accompanies this paper at 10.1038/s41467-018-07476-4.

