Temporal development of the gut microbiome in early childhood from the TEDDY study

The development of the microbiome from infancy to childhood is dependent on a range of factors, with microbial–immune crosstalk during this time thought to be involved in the pathobiology of later life diseases1–9 such as persistent islet autoimmunity and type 1 diabetes10–12. However, to our knowledge, no studies have performed extensive characterization of the microbiome in early life in a large, multi-centre population. Here we analyse longitudinal stool samples from 903 children between 3 and 46 months of age by 16S rRNA gene sequencing (n = 12,005) and metagenomic sequencing (n = 10,867), as part of the The Environmental Determinants of Diabetes in the Young (TEDDY) study. We show that the developing gut microbiome undergoes three distinct phases of microbiome progression: a developmental phase (months 3–14), a transitional phase (months 15–30), and a stable phase (months 31–46). Receipt of breast milk, either exclusive or partial, was the most significant factor associated with the microbiome structure. Breastfeeding was associated with higher levels of Bifidobacterium species (B. breve and B. bifidum), and the cessation of breast milk resulted in faster maturation of the gut microbiome, as marked by the phylum Firmicutes. Birth mode was also significantly associated with the microbiome during the developmental phase, driven by higher levels of Bacteroides species (particularly B. fragilis) in infants delivered vaginally. Bacteroides was also associated with increased gut diversity and faster maturation, regardless of the birth mode. Environmental factors including geographical location and household exposures (such as siblings and furry pets) also represented important covariates. A nested case–control analysis revealed subtle associations between microbial taxonomy and the development of islet autoimmunity or type 1 diabetes. These data determine the structural and functional assembly of the microbiome in early life and provide a foundation for targeted mechanistic investigation into the consequences of microbial–immune crosstalk for long-term health.

In this study, a total of 12,500 stool samples from 903 children from three European countries (Germany, Sweden and Finland) and three US states (Colorado, Georgia and Washington) were analysed. The children represent those who seroconverted to islet cell autoantibody positivity or developed type 1 diabetes (T1D) and matched controls. Stool samples were collected, on average, monthly from around 3 months of age as part of the The Environmental Determinants of Type 1 Diabetes in the Young (TEDDY) study13. After rarefaction and limiting samples to 3–46 months of age, we analysed the microbiome (16S rRNA gene sequencing, n = 12,005 samples from 903 children; metagenomic sequencing, n = 10,867 samples from 783 children) and functional metagenome (metagenomic sequencing only) from longitudinal stool samples (Extended Data Table 1). A companion paper by Vatanen et al.14 focused exclusively on metagenomic sequencing data.

The overall microbiome development and significant covariates are in concordance with previous reports in westernized populations, although caution should be exercised when extrapolating the findings from the TEDDY cohort of children with risk factors of developing T1D to the wider population. Nevertheless, the significant covariates reported in the current study have been independently linked to the risk of later life diseases such as obesity, asthma and allergy1–8. The current study provides several testable hypotheses of microbiome development in infancy, and it remains important to determine the potential mechanism of altered early life microbiome and the subsequent effect on immune development and functioning. With a more comprehensive understanding of the crucial early life phases and their effect on health and disease, lifestyles and therapeutics can be tailored to support optimal microbial–immune homeostasis.

The TEDDY Study is composed of six clinical research centres: three in the United States (Colorado, Georgia/Florida and Washington), and three in Europe (Finland, Germany and Sweden). Children enrolled are followed prospectively from three months to 15 years with study visits every three months until age 4 years and every three or six months thereafter depending on autoantibody positivity. Stool samples and associated metadata were collected as of 31 May 2012. Stool samples were collected monthly from 3 to 48 months of life, then every three months until the age of 10 years, and then biannually thereafter, into the three plastic stool containers provided by the clinical centre. Children who were antibody negative after 4 years of age were encouraged to submit four times a year even though after 4 years their visits schedule switched to biannual. Parents sent the stool containers at either ambient or +4 °C temperature with guaranteed delivery within 24 h in the appropriate shipping box to the NIDDK repository if living in the United States or their affiliated clinical centre if living in Europe. The European clinical centres stored the stool samples and sent monthly bulk shipments of frozen stool to the NIDDK repository. The population (both cases and controls) is based on children at high risk for T1D based on their HLA genotype with 10% based on family history in addition to HLA. Detailed study design and methods have been previously published13,29,30. Matching factors for case and control children were geographical location, sex and family history of T1D.

A priori power calculations using discrete Cox’s proportional hazards regression32 for the matched IA case–control study estimated 80% power, α = 0.01, two-sided test to detect an odds ratio > 3 for an exposure with 5% prevalence to an odds ratio > 1.8 for an exposure with 20% prevalence. The experiments were not randomized, and investigators were not blinded to allocation during experiments and outcome assessment.

16S rRNA gene sequencing methods were adapted from the methods developed by the NIH-Human Microbiome Project and the Earth Microbiome Project33–35. Bacterial DNA was extracted using the PowerMag Microbiome DNA isolation kit following the manufacturer’s instructions. The V4 region of the 16S rRNA gene was amplified by PCR and sequenced on the MiSeq platform (Illumina) using the 2 × 250 bp paired-end read protocol. The read pairs were demultiplexed and reads were merged using USEARCH v7.0.109036. Merging allowed zero mismatches and a minimum overlap of 50 bases, and merged reads were trimmed at the first base with a q ≤ 5. A quality filter was applied to the resulting merged reads and those containing above 0.5% expected errors were discarded. Sequences were stepwise clustered into OTUs at a similarity cut-off value of 97% using the UPARSE algorithm37. Chimeras were removed using USEARCH v7.0.1090 and UCHIME v4.2. To determine taxonomies, OTUs were mapped to a version of the SILVA Database38 containing only the 16S V4 region using USEARCH v7.0.1090. Abundances were recovered by mapping the merged reads to the UPARSE OTUs. A custom script constructed a rarefied OTU table from the output files generated in the previous two steps for downstream analyses of taxonomic relative abundance, alpha diversity, and beta diversity (including UniFrac)39. A total of 114,313,601 reads (median 8,442 reads per sample) were obtained from 16S rRNA gene sequencing and each sample was rarefied to 3,000 reads. Stringent merging parameters account for the relatively low number of OTUs, with the number of species by metagenomics around fourfold higher than the number of OTUs by 16S rRNA gene sequencing.

Individual libraries constructed from each sample were pooled and loaded onto the HiSeq 2000 platform (Illumina) and sequenced using the 2 × 100 bp paired-end read protocol. The process of quality filtering, trimming, and demultiplexing was carried out by in-house pipeline developed by assembling publicly available tools such as Casava v1.8.2 (Illumina) for the generation of fastqs, Trim Galore v0.2.8 (http://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/trim_galore/) and cutadapt v1.9dev2 for adaptor and quality trimming, and PRINSEQ v0.20.540 for sample dereplication and low complexity filtering. In addition, Bowtie2 v2.2.341 was used to map reads to a database containing complete genomes and assemblies for bacteria, viruses, human, and vectors in the NCBI whole-genome sequencing (WGS) archive (as of March 2015). Reads in which the highest identity matches were not bacterial were removed from subsequent analysis. The edit distance (Levenshtein distance) was used to determine the score of the alignments to the reference genomes42. For bacterial reads, the highest scoring match (greater than 90%) was chosen per read considering only the top 25 highest scoring alignments. In the event of multiple identical top scoring hits, the lowest common ancestor was determined.

Reads in which the genomic coordinates overlap with known KEGG orthologues43,44 were tabulated, and KEGG modules were calculated step-wise and determined to be complete if 65% of the reaction steps were present per detected species and for the metagenome. Pathways were constructed for each taxa and metagenome by calculating the minimum set through MinPath45 resulting from the gene orthologues present. A total of 19,967,936,136 reads (median 1,606,240 reads per sample) were obtained from metagenomic sequencing and for subsequent analysis each sample was rarefied to 100,000 reads.

The analysis was conducted in two parts: (1) characterize the longitudinal maturation of the microbiome and (2) determine the significant covariates that influence microbiome development. For both parts of analysis, alpha diversity (richness and Shannon diversity) was calculated at the OTU-level for 16S rRNA gene sequencing and species-level for metagenomics data. Alpha diversity and taxonomic abundance were modelled using LOESS regression, and implemented and plotted with 95% confidence intervals in R (http://www.R-project.org) using the ggplot package46.

The first part of the analysis determined the key phases of microbiome progression, which included the use of DMM. DMM bins samples on the basis of microbial community structure47. The appropriate number of clusters was determined based on the lowest Laplace approximation score. For this specific analysis, samples up to month 46 of life were included, whereas all other analyses included samples up to month 40 of life. Including the additional samples here allowed for more accurate determination of the microbiome phases.

The second part of the analysis sought to determine the significant covariates in shaping the microbiome profiles at discrete time points and further ascertain the significantly altered taxa based on samples up to month 40 of life. The framework for the statistical analysis considered the longitudinal nature of the dataset and accounted for the dynamic nature of the covariates. Owing to the potential that some covariates might influence the microbiome before the start date (for example, underlying indication for an antibiotic prescription) and some covariates will alter the microbiome for an unknown time frame (for example, microbiome disrupted by antibiotics may continue to be altered months after treatment), covariates were classified as ‘before’, ‘during’, or ‘after’. In the case a covariate was negative for an infant, all samples would be classified as ‘never’. In instances in which several onsets of a covariate were possible (for example, multiple antibiotic start and end time points), after the first onset the covariate was classified as ‘after’ for the remaining samples, unless another event occurred, in which case ‘during’ would be applied where appropriate according to the start and stop dates. Analysis was performed at specific time windows, including samples collected between months 3–6, 7–10, 11–14, 15–18, 19–22, 23–26, 27–30 and 31–40. Only the first sample collected from a given child was included in each time window to account for repeated measures.

The effect size and significance of each covariate were determined using the ‘envfit’ function in ‘vegan’ (https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/vegan/index.html) comparing the difference in the centroids of each group relative to the total variation. Ordination was performed using NMDS based on Bray–Curtis dissimilarity. The significance value was determined based on 10,000 permutations. All P values derived from envfit were adjusted for multiple comparisons using FDR adjustment (Benjamini–Hochberg procedure)48. In total, 22 covariates with known associations to gut microbiome development in neonates, infants, and children were included in the envfit analysis and the grouping used for within each variable is presented in Extended Data Table 1. Specifically, we tested maternal factors including diabetes (gestational, T1D, T2D or none)49, diabetes medication (insulin, metformin, glyburide, antihypertensives)50, BMI51,52, gestational weight gain category (excess or non-excess)53, preeclampsia52, maternal probiotic consumption54, as well as offspring factors such as prematurity18,55, birth mode15–17,56, gender56, receipt of breast milk and/or formula17,53,57–59, introduction of solid foods60,61, geographical location57, probiotics62, vitamin D supplementation63, antibiotics18, household siblings56,64, household furry pets64,65, living on a farm with animals66,67, day-care exposure68, coeliac disease69, acute disease, and chronic disease69.

MaAsLin was used for adjustment of covariates when determining the significance of taxa (genus level for 16S rRNA gene sequencing and species level for metagenomic sequencing) contributing to a specific variable, while accounting for potentially confounding covariates70. In brief, this multivariate linear modelling system for microbial data selects from among a set of (potentially high-dimensional) covariates to associate with microbial taxon or pathway abundances. Mixed-effects linear models using a variance-stabilizing arcsin square root transform on relative abundances are then used to determine the significance of putative associations from among this reduced set. Nominal P values across all associations are then adjusted using the Benjamini–Hochberg FDR method. Here, microbial features with corrected q < 0.25 were reported. All 22 covariates tested in the envfit were included in the adjustment regardless of significance by envfit. Subject age was also included to adjust for potential age driven changes in taxa within each three-month time window and IA and T1D outcome were included to adjust for the nested case control nature of the cohort. The default MaAsLin parameters were applied (maximum percentage of samples NA in metadata 10%, minimum percentage relative abundance 0.01%, P < 0.05, q < 0.25). All P values were adjusted for multiple comparisons using FDR48.

The random forest regression model71 was performed as previously described25, using the ‘randomForest’ R package72. In brief, the model was trained on 150 randomly selected full term (>37 weeks gestation), vaginally delivered, breastfed infants who had a minimum of 10 samples included in the final dataset. The model was built using the default parameters: growing 10,000 trees and n/3 OTUs randomly sampled at each split, in which n represents the number of OTUs. The model was further refined by applying ‘rfcv’ with tenfold cross-validation resulting in the inclusion of 20 OTUs to train the final model based on percentage increase in mean-squared error. These 20 OTUs explained 72% of the total variance of the model (compared to 75% with all OTUs included). The age of the subject predicted by this model was termed microbiota age and was further used to determine MAZ scores using the formulae described preiously25. Significant differences in alpha diversity, microbiota age, and MAZ scores were calculated using linear mixed-effects models in R, with the ‘lmer’ command within the ‘lme4’ package73. We included random slopes and intercept for individual children, and evaluated delivery mode, age, Bacteroides positive or negative, predominant diet, geographical location, presence of siblings, and presence of household pets as fixed effects. To perform these piecewise longitudinal models, we divided samples into the three developmental phases (<14 months, >15–<30 months, and >31 months). Owing to the relatively low number of samples in the exclusive and never breastfed groups, the analysis of breast milk status was conducted based on ‘some breast milk’ or ‘after breast milk’, with these groups found to cluster with exclusive and never breastfed, respectively.

The development of persistent confirmed IA was assessed every three months. Persistent autoimmunity was defined by the presence of confirmed islet autoantibody on two or more consecutive visits. The date of persistent autoimmunity was defined as the draw date of the first sample of the two consecutive samples that deemed the child persistent confirmed positive for a specific autoantibody (or any autoantibody). T1D was defined according to American Diabetes Association criteria for diagnosis74. A dataset with equal numbers of cases and control samples was created to preform conditional logistic regression of summary metric variables (that is, counting for each person the number of unique clusters exhibited and the number of temporal transitions between different clusters). On average, cases tended to have more samples than controls, and therefore had more transitions and observed states, which resulted in spurious associations between our metrics and disease outcome. For this purpose, we created a dataset in which case and control samples were matched to the paired case based on the nearest sample by day of life (unmatched sample or sample outside of ±20% were omitted from analyses). This resulted in an analytical cohort of 316 IA cases and 316 paired controls (n = 3,097 stool samples in each group) and 98 T1D cases and 98 paired controls (n = 1,270 stool samples in each group). For consistency, we used these datasets for all matched case–control analyses. The IA and T1D analysis was based on 16S rRNA gene sequencing data only and analysis of the metagenomic sequencing data (that is, species level taxonomic profiling and functional capacity) are presented in the companion paper14.

16S rRNA gene sequencing data was used to determine differences between alpha diversity (number of OTUs (richness) and Shannon’s diversity index), microbiota age, and MAZ scores. Significant differences in alpha diversity, microbiota age, and MAZ scores were calculated using linear mixed-effects models in R, with the ‘lmer’ command within the ‘lme4’ package73. To perform these piecewise longitudinal models, we divided samples into the three developmental phases (<14 months, >15–<30 months, and >31 months). Conditional logistic regression of matched case–control pairs was performed on the top 50 most dominant bacterial genera from samples prior to disease diagnosis. Odds ratios were calculated with 95% confidence intervals, adjusted for potential confounding variables, including age at sample collection, HLA genotype, mode of delivery, and duration of breastfeeding. Abundance information for genera was entered into the model as log2-transformed read counts. A value of 0.01 was added to avoid 0 s. The Benjamini–Hochberg procedure was applied to correct for multiple comparisons48 and corrected P < 0.05 was considered significant.

For each subject, the total number of clusters exhibited throughout sampling per infant and the number of transitions between different clusters from one sample to the next were calculated to provide summary measures of microbiome stability over time. These summary metrics were then used in conditional logistic regression to assess the relationship of microbiome stability with IA and T1D. Odds ratios were calculated with 95% confidence intervals, adjusted for potential confounding variables, including HLA genotype, mode of delivery, duration of breastfeeding, number of antibiotic courses, and number of infectious episodes.

Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this paper.

Code for the transition model showing the progression of samples through each DMM cluster, which are presented in Fig. 1 and Extended Data Fig. 2, has been made publicly available at https://github.com/StewartLab/Stewart_TEDDY_Microbiome_Analysis. Other analysis software including quality control, taxonomic, and functional profilers is publicly available and referenced as appropriate.

Any methods, additional references, Nature Research reporting summaries, source data, statements of data availability and associated accession codes are available at 10.1038/s41586-018-0617-x.



Nature thanks K. Aagaard, C. Lozupone and L. Wen for their contribution to the peer review of this work.





Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

These authors contributed equally: Christopher J. Stewart, Nadim J. Ajami

is available for this paper at 10.1038/s41586-018-0617-x.

is available for this paper at 10.1038/s41586-018-0617-x.

