Health and disease markers correlate with gut microbiome composition across thousands of people

Variation in the human gut microbiome can reflect host lifestyle and behaviors and influence disease biomarker levels in the blood. Understanding the relationships between gut microbes and host phenotypes are critical for understanding wellness and disease. Here, we examine associations between the gut microbiota and ~150 host phenotypic features across ~3,400 individuals. We identify major axes of taxonomic variance in the gut and a putative diversity maximum along the Firmicutes-to-Bacteroidetes axis. Our analyses reveal both known and unknown associations between microbiome composition and host clinical markers and lifestyle factors, including host-microbe associations that are composition-specific. These results suggest potential opportunities for targeted interventions that alter the composition of the microbiome to improve host health. By uncovering the interrelationships between host diet and lifestyle factors, clinical blood markers, and the human gut microbiome at the population-scale, our results serve as a roadmap for future studies on host-microbe interactions and interventions.

The human gut microbiome—the collection of microorganisms residing in the gastrointestinal tract—is thought to play a role in the etiology of various diseases, including inflammatory bowel disease1–3, type 2 diabetes4–6, hypertension7–9, and colorectal cancer10–13. Individual clinical blood markers, such as those for diabetes14 and cholesterol15, have been found to be associated with abundances of certain gut bacteria. Lifestyle habits can also impact the composition of the gut microbial community. For example, diet can profoundly influence the composition of the microbiome16–18. Similarly, physical activity has been shown to drive shifts in the composition of the gut microbiome in animal models19,20, and there is preliminary evidence from small-cohort studies that exercise impacts the microbiome in humans as well21–25.

Here, we provide an in-depth analysis of the relationship between the gut microbiome and host factors across ~3400 healthy US individuals in a large cross-sectional study. We identify lifestyle and clinical factors, including diet, medication use, and clinical blood markers, that are associated with the composition of the gut microbiome, including diversity, individual taxonomies, and inferred functional pathways. Stratifying individuals by the major axes of variation in microbial composition, we identify lifestyle behaviors and host factors that are associated with microbiome diversity only in certain underlying microbiome contexts. Finally, we identify host-microbiome associations that are robust and independent from the underlying species diversity of the microbial community.

The data presented in this study were collected at baseline from 3409 research-consenting participants in a commercial Scientific Wellness program (Arivale Inc., see Methods). Participants included 59% females, 84% self-reported European-Americans, with an average age of 49 ± 12 years, and an average BMI of 27 ± 6 kg/m2 (Table 1). All participants completed lifestyle, stress, digestion, and diet questionnaires, and for 90% (n = 3064) of participants, 65 clinical laboratory tests were measured from blood (Supplementary Data 1). Gut microbiome composition from a baseline stool sample was determined by 16S amplicon sequencing for all participants (see Methods).

When examining the overall composition of the gut microbiome in the study participants, the relative abundance of Firmicutes ranged from ~6% to ~100%, while the relative abundance of Bacteroidetes ranged from ~0% to ~90% (Fig. 1). We observed that Shannon diversity was strongly negatively correlated with the relative abundance of Bacteroidetes (r = −0.67, P < 10−15, Pearson’s correlation), however, this trend was not linear and showed a positive correlation for the lowest levels of Bacteroidetes. This nonlinear trend was also observed in other measures of diversity such as Pielou’s evenness index, species richness, and Faith’s phylogenetic index (See Supplementary Fig. 1). Overall, Shannon diversity was maximized when the relative abundances of Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes were ~15% and ~80%, respectively (Supplementary Fig. 2; see Methods). In addition, the phyla Proteobacteria, Fusobacteria, and TM-7 were significantly negatively correlated with diversity (r = −0.18, P < 10−15; r = −0.13, P < 10−13; r = −0.10, P < 10−8, respectively), while the phyla Tenericutes, Euryarchaeota, Lentisphaerae, and Cyanobacteria were significantly positively correlated with diversity (r = 0.28, P < 10−15; r = 0.19, P < 10−15; r = 0.17, P < 10−15; r = 0.13, P < 10−13, respectively).

We also compared these results with the results obtained by applying nonmetric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) to either weighted UniFrac or Bray-Curtis distances and found similar results, although the principal components of edgePCA were better correlated with these main taxonomic drivers than the principal coordinates of Bray-Curtis or UniFrac-based NMDS, highlighting the benefit of using a microbiome-specific ordination technique (see Supplementary Figs. 4-5).

We next set out to identify, which host factors are associated with the diversity of the gut microbiome. Out of 148 lifestyle and clinical factors we examined, 75 were significantly correlated with Shannon diversity (Fig. 3 and Supplementary Data 2; FDR-adjusted P < 0.05, see Methods). The identified 42 blood clinical markers included some markers previously reported to be associated with microbiome diversity such as markers for diabetes (fasting insulin, P < 10−12), inflammation (hs-CRP, P < 10−14), liver function (ALAT, P < 10−9), and cholesterol (LDL, P < 10−16). In addition, omega-3 fatty acids and other markers related to fish intake, such as DHA and mercury, were found to be positively correlated with diversity (P < 10−13; P < 10−14; P < 10−16; respectively). BMI, weight, and blood pressure were significantly negatively correlated with diversity, while height was found to be significantly positively correlated with diversity.

Recent animal studies and small-scale case-control human studies have indicated a relationship between exercise and the gut microbiome composition19,20,22,25,33, but the robustness of this association at population-level remains uncertain. Here we identify associations between microbiome diversity and both moderate physical activity (MPA; times per week) and vigorous physical activity (VPA; times per week) that are highly significant (Fig. 3; P < 10−15 and P < 10−15, for MPA and VPA, respectively). Since many host factors are co-correlated, we sought to understand whether the relationship with physical activity is independent of other healthy lifestyle habits. We thus adjusted for related dietary factors, such as weekly intake of fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and sugary drinks, and found that the association remained significant (P < 10−5 and P < 10−15, for MPA and VPA, respectively). When BMI was included as an additional covariate, the correlation for vigorous physical activity remained significant (P = 0.08 and P = 0.04, for MPA and VPA, respectively). Our results thus reveal a robust relationship at population-level between physical activity and microbiome diversity that is independent of major dietary factors and BMI.

To understand whether the associations between microbiome diversity and host factors differ in the context of different microbiome compositional states, we defined four clusters on the continuum of Firmicutes-to-Bacteroidetes and Bacteroides-to-Prevotella axes: a reference cluster with an average Firmicutes relative abundance level, a Firmicutes-rich cluster, a Bacteroides-rich cluster, and a Prevotella-rich cluster (see Methods and Supplementary Fig. 6). Compared to the associations found within the average Firmicutes cluster (as the reference group), we identified 0, 14, and 14 unique associations within the Firmicutes-rich, Bacteroides-rich, and Prevotella-rich clusters, respectively (p < 0.05 after FDR correction, Supplementary Data 3). For example, we found that the association between insulin levels and microbiome diversity was significantly more pronounced in the Bacteroides-rich cluster than the reference cluster (p < 10−6) and that the number of vegetables consumed per day was significantly more positively associated with microbiome diversity for the Prevotella-rich cluster than other microbiome composition clusters (p < 10−4, Fig. 4).

We next explored the relationship between host factors and individual genera and inferred functional pathways. After FDR correction, we identified >1500 significant associations across 142 host factors, 102 bacterial genera, and 274 bacterial metabolic pathways (see Methods). We found that host factors aggregate into two large groups by their patterns of microbiome associations (Fig. 5, see full list of associations in Supplementary Data 4). The first is a health-related group, where higher values of the host factors or increased cadence of lifestyle behaviors are generally associated with better overall health, including clinical lab measurements (e.g., vitamin D, HDL, LDL particle size, omega−3 index, and adiponectin); dietary factors (e.g., consumption of fruits and vegetables); activity factors (e.g., physical activity); and digestion factors (e.g., bowel movement ease). The second is a disease-related group, in which higher values of the host factors or increased cadence of lifestyle behaviors are generally associated with worse overall health, including BMI; diabetes markers (e.g., HOMA − IR, Insulin, glucose, HbA1c); cardiovascular risk factors (e.g., LDL cholesterol, triglycerides, and blood pressure); inflammation risk markers (e.g., CRP − HS, IL − 6); and poor digestion symptoms (e.g., diarrhea, acid reflux). Each group was highly associated with a different set of genera. The factors in the health-related group were positively correlated and significantly explained the abundance of the genera Coprococcus, Lachnospira, Faecalibacterium, and unclassified genera from the families/orders Ruminococcaceae, Ml615j − 28, Clostridiales, and Rf39. Some of these genera were previously reported to be health-promoting; for example, Lachnospira and Faecalibacterium are known producers of the anti-inflammatory short-chain fatty acid butyrate. The factors in the disease-related group significantly explained (and were positively correlated with) the abundance of the genera Bacteroides, Ruminococcus, Sutterella, Bilophila, Acidaminococcus, and Megasphaera.

When examining the results from the analysis of inferred functional pathways (Methods), we found that the host factors similarly aggregated into a health-related group and a disease-related group based on their association with microbiome pathways (Fig. 6, full list of associations in Supplementary Data 6). The health-related group included host factors and behaviors generally associated with good overall health, such as more physical activity, healthier dietary choices, and better clinical blood chemistries, while factors in the disease-related group were generally associated with poorer overall health, such as increased levels of BMI, digestive symptoms, and risk markers related to diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and inflammation. Notably, most glycan and carbohydrate metabolism pathways were positively associated with the disease-related group. In addition, primary and secondary bile acid metabolic pathways, and vitamin or vitamin-like metabolic pathways were positively associated with the disease-related group. In contrast, xenobiotics metabolism pathways were positively associated with the health-related group. Finally, we adjusted our models to identify associations that are independent of microbiome diversity. We found that certain microbial pathways, such as lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis, were not associated with the disease-related group once diversity was accounted for, while other pathways, such as primary and secondary bile acid metabolism, were still associated with the disease-related group even after adjusting for diversity, indicating a robust association between these microbial pathways and host factors and behaviors.

Recent studies have revealed the impact of medications on the gut microbiome27,34. We built on these analyses by accounting for co-occurrence between medications and their associated disease by adjusting our models for the respective clinical measurement that serves as biomarkers of disease (Methods). We compared the relative abundance of genera and functions in medication-users vs. non-users and identified 70 significant associations between medication usage and the relative abundance of genera (Supplementary Data 7). The genus Klebsiella (an opportunistic pathogen from the family Enterobacteriaceae) was found to be significantly more abundant in individuals taking blood-sugar medications (fold-change > 6, p value < 10−4), consistent with a recent study of the impact of metformin (a common blood-sugar medication) on the microbiome35. On the other hand, the genus Faecalibacterium was significantly lower in individuals taking blood-sugar medications (FDR-corrected P < 10−6). In addition, members of Enterobacteriaceae and Burkholderiales were increased in abundance in individuals using cholesterol-lowering drugs, consistent with a recent study that included an analysis of the impact of statins on the microbiome36.

When examining the functional composition of the microbiome, we identified 109 and 271 significant associations between medication usage and the predicted abundance of pathways and modules, respectively (Supplementary Data 8–9). Examples of functional shifts that were seen for medication users (adjusted for the respective levels of relevant blood markers) included the enrichment of the metabolic pathway for fructose and mannose metabolism for users of blood-sugar lowering medications, recently shown to be enriched in type 2 diabetes patients using the medication metformin34.

Host lifestyle and diet can greatly impact the gut microbiome, which in turn can influence host metabolism and wellbeing. Our study of the human gut microbiome across ~3400 individuals with extensive phenotyping of ~150 host factors enabled us to identify host-microbiome associations relevant to health and disease. We also reveal how certain host phenotypic associations are unique to specific microbial community contexts, suggesting that microbiome heterogeneity may play a role in personalized phenotypic responses to dietary and lifestyle interventions. Overall, our integrated approach provided insights into the complex relationships between the gut microbiome and host phenotypic features, which have implications for future clinical and interventional studies.

While our extensive phenotyping of host factors and our large sample size enables us to have the statistical power to identify many host-microbiome associations, we note that these associations do not imply causality. Understanding directional and causal relationships will require randomized control studies and interventions, which can control for both known and potential hidden confounders. Similarly, while we adjust for many co-varying factors, we note that statistical adjustment cannot fully account for all confounders, as there are many factors that remain unmeasured. For example, certain health-related activities are manifestations of lifestyle factors but the effect of lifestyle may be cumulative across a variety of activities, not all of which will be measured in a given cohort. In the case of medications and disease, while we account for age, sex, race, season, and levels of related disease biomarkers when examining the associations between medication use and individual genera, these adjustments may not fully disentangle the impact of medications on the microbiome from that of the associated disease condition. Further experimental studies using in vitro or in vivo models are needed to better understand the direct impact of specific medications on gut microbes independent of disease state. Regardless of these important caveats, it is clear that the microbiome is intimately connected to a wide range of host phenotypes and the ability to engineer our commensal microbiota will likely be an important component of precision medicine in the 21st century.

Procedures for the current study were run under the Western Institutional Review Board at Arivale Inc. (Seattle, WA) and at the Institute for Systems Biology (IRB Study Number 1178906 and 20170658, respectively).

All de-identified data are from consenting individuals in a commercially-available, non-medical lifestyle intervention program (Arivale Inc., Seattle, WA). Only data from individuals who provided explicit informed consent and authorization for their anonymized data for research use are included in this study. Data were collected starting in July 2015. The Arivale program involved health coaching on exercise, nutrition, stress management, and other wellness goals. Only baseline data prior to intervention from a total of 3409 individuals who reported not taking antibiotics 3 months prior to sampling were included in the current study. This research project was performed independent of Arivale’s commercial operations and was done entirely using only de-identified data.

Participants’ clinical blood laboratory tests were collected at LabCorp (North Carolina, USA) or Quest Diagnostics (Secaucus, NJ) facilities in the near vicinity of participants’ geographic locations. Participants were directed to avoid alcohol, vigorous exercise, aspartame, and monosodium glutamate for a 24 h period prior to the blood draw, and to begin fasting 12 h in advance. Weight, height, waist circumference, and blood pressure measurements were collected at the time of each blood draw. Clinical blood laboratory tests involved a lipid panel and complete blood cell counts, as well as markers of diabetes, inflammation, liver function, kidney function, and nutrition (Supplementary Data 1).

Fresh stool specimens were taken at participants’ homes using a sterile spoon or swab and were immediately preserved using chemical DNA stabilizers (OMNIgene Gut) to maintain DNA integrity. Previous analyses have demonstrated the ability for these stabilizers to preserve samples sufficiently at varying temperature conditions over multiple weeks with results comparable with immediate freezing61–63. Microbial DNA was then isolated from 250 μL of homogenized stool, using an automated protocol and MoBio’s PowerMag® Soil DNA isolation kit (+ClearMag®) microbiome DNA isolation kit on the KingFisherTM Flex instrument. This extraction protocol involved a bead beating step for mechanical lysis using glass beads and plate shaker for recovery of more DNA from a more diverse microbial community, as previously recommended64. Concentrations of extracted DNA from each sample were determined by Qubit, and an estimate of sample purity was determined via spectrophotometry by measuring the A260/A280 absorbance ratio. Gut microbiome sequencing data in the form of FASTQ files were obtained based on either 250 bp paired-end MiSeq profiling of the 16S V4 region (Second Genome) or 300 bp paired-end MiSeq profiling of the 16S V3 + V4 regions (DNA Genotek).

Operational Taxonomic Units (OTUs) read counts were calculated using the QIIME pipeline65 (version 1.9.1; default parameters) with closed-reference OTU picking against the Greengenes database66 (version 13_08). To account for differences in sequencing depth in diversity analyses, we rarified each sample to 50,000 reads, removing samples that had <50,000 reads from further analysis. Rarefaction curves showed a tendency toward saturation, revealing sufficient sequencing depth. To examine the functional capacity of participants’ gut microbiome, we applied the PICRUSt67 pipeline to predict the KEGG68 orthology (KO) profile for each sample from the relative abundances of OTUs (see Methods). We next applied MUSiCC69 to these KO profiles to convert the relative abundances to the average copy numbers and aggregated the resulting MUSiCC-normalized KO profiles to pathways and modules based on the KEGG annotations.

Baseline assessment data were collected using a web-based interface and timed to coincide with blood draws. Validated assessments include: Dietary Targets Monitor, Oxford Happiness Questionnaire (OHQ), International Personality Item Pool-50 (IPIP-50), and Perceived Stress Scale (PSS-4)70–73. We also developed a set of in-house questionnaires that were also administered to the participants to collect health history and lifestyle data: personal and family health history, lifestyle (e.g., sleep habits, physical activity frequency, smoking and alcohol use), and digestive health (e.g., frequency of bowel movements, diarrhea, laxatives). We performed formal psychometric analysis of assessment data focusing on the measures of reliability (defined here as internal consistency or general factor saturation) and factorial structures of OHQ, IPIP-50, PSS-4, as well as custom 4-question sleep quality and 30-question digestive health questionnaires. Analyses revealed reliable estimates consistent with those reported for the validated assessments previously: Cronbach’s alpha was estimated at 0.80 for PSS-4, 0.92 for OHQ, ranged from 0.80 to 0.89 for the five IPIP-50 subscales. We established closed correspondence between the proposed and observed factorial structure (using exploratory and confirmatory factor analysis, CFA): a five-factorial structure for IPIP-50 and 1-factorial structures for OHQ and PSS-4. For the custom assessments, a one-factor structure was established for sleep quality and digestive health measures, and these also displayed high levels of internal consistency (0.86 and 0.70, respectively).

Statistical analysis was performed using R version 3.5.1. All correlations reported in the paper are based on Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient unless noted otherwise. We adjusted for age, sex, race of the individual, the season in which the microbiome sample was taken, and the microbiome sequencing vendor prior to analyses. Multiple hypothesis correction for p values was performed using the Benjamini–Hochberg method of False Discovery Rate (FDR) control74.

We calculated various measures of alpha diversity using methods implemented in the QIIME pipeline. The alpha diversity measures calculated using rarefied reads includes Shannon’s diversity, Faith’s Phylogenetic Diversity index, number of OTUs observed, and Pielou’s evenness index.

To examine which taxa are associated with Shannon diversity when the abundance of Bacteroidetes is accounted for, Pearson correlations were computed between residuals of a cubic polynomial regression of Shannon diversity on relative abundance of Bacteroidetes. The residuals from the regression model are referred to as Bacteroidetes-adjusted diversity.

To examine interactions between overall microbiome composition and associations of microbial diversity or taxa abundance with host factors, each sample was defined as one of four possible taxonomic clusters. Samples with over 85% relative abundance of firmicutes were defined as the high-Firmicutes cluster (HF, 91 samples). Samples with Firmicutes relative abundance between 60–85% were defined as the Firmicutes cluster (F, 2095 samples). Samples with <60% Firmicutes where Bacteroides relative abundance was higher than twice the Prevotella abundance were defined as the Bacteroides cluster (B, 941 samples), and samples with <60% Firmicutes where Bacteroides relative abundance was lower than twice the Prevotella abundance were defined as the Prevotella cluster (P, 282 samples).

Different dimension-reduction and ordination techniques were applied to the taxonomic profiles obtained from the samples. These included the principal component analysis technique edgePCA28, and principal coordinate analysis using weighted UniFrac distance75 and genus-level Bray-Curtis distance. Since edge PCA does not require rarefied reads, we used the non-rarefied table.

For each analyte (e.g., lifestyle, diet, clinical test), associations were tested by fitting linear regression models of Shannon diversity on each analyte, adjusting for age, sex, race of the individual, the season in which the microbiome sample was taken, and the microbiome sequencing vendor. The FDR of the resulting tests were controlled for at level α = 0.05 (see Statistical Methods, above).

For each analyte (e.g., lifestyle, diet, clinical test), associations were tested by fitting generalized linear models of the microbiome feature on each analyte, adjusting for age, sex, race, the season in which the microbiome sample was taken, and the microbiome sequencing vendor. The model distribution depended on the type of microbiome feature: for microbial genera, a logistic regression model was assumed for genera present in <75% of samples, otherwise a Poisson regression model was assumed; a linear regression model was assumed for microbial pathway analysis. The FDR of the resulting tests were controlled for at level α = 0.05 (see Statistical Methods, above).

Each of the participants self-reported whether they are currently using one of three medication categories: cholesterol-lowering medications (e.g., statins), anti-hypertensive medications (e.g., valsartan), and blood-sugar regulating medications (e.g., metformin). In order to test for associations between microbial features (genera or pathways) and medication use, a Poisson regression model of genera abundance or linear regression model of pathway abundance, was fit on an indicator of medication use, adjusting for the age, sex, and race of the individual, the samples’ season, the microbiome sequencing vendor, and biomarkers relevant to the medication. Specifically, for cholesterol-lowering medications the models were further adjusted for the levels of LDL cholesterol; for anti-hypertensive medications the models were further adjusted for systolic and diastolic blood pressures measures; and for blood-sugar regulating medications the models were further adjusted for fasting glucose and insulin levels. The FDR of the resulting tests were controlled for at level α = 0.05 (see Statistical Methods, above).

Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.

Peer review information Nature Communications thanks the anonymous reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Peer reviewer reports are available.

Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

These authors contributed equally: Ohad Manor, Chengzhen L. Dai.

Supplementary information is available for this paper at 10.1038/s41467-020-18871-1.

