Effects of Thermal Stress on the Gut Microbiome of Juvenile Milkfish (Chanos chanos)

Milkfish, an important aquaculture species in Asian countries, are traditionally cultured in outdoor-based systems. There, they experience potentially stressful fluctuations in environmental conditions, such as temperature, eliciting changes in fish physiology. While the importance of the gut microbiome for the welfare and performance of fish has been recognized, little is known about the effects of thermal stress on the gut microbiome of milkfish and its interactions with the host’s metabolism. We investigated the gut microbiome of juvenile milkfish in a thermal stress experiment, comparing control (26 °C) and elevated temperature (33 °C) treatments over three weeks, analyzing physiological biomarkers, gut microbiome composition, and tank water microbial communities using 16S amplicon sequencing. The gut microbiome was distinct from the tank water and dominated by Cetobacterium, Enterovibrio, and Vibrio. We observed a parallel succession in both temperature treatments, with microbial communities at 33 °C differing more strongly from the control after the initial temperature increase and becoming more similar towards the end of the experiment. As proxy for the fish’s energy status, HSI (hepatosomatic index) was correlated with gut microbiome composition. Our study showed that thermal stress induced changes in the milkfish gut microbiome, which may contribute to the host’s habituation to elevated temperatures over time.

Milkfish (Chanos chanos) is a euryhaline, mainly herbivorous teleost of the Chanidae family and an important aquaculture species for tropical countries. With an annual global production of more than 1 Mt in the last years [1] and several Southeast Asian countries as main producers, milkfish plays a key role in providing affordable animal-based protein for the local population. Milkfish are traditionally cultured in outdoor-based systems in hypersaline lagoons, brackish-water ponds or marine systems, where they experience daily and/or seasonal variation in ambient conditions [2,3]. For instance, water temperature can reach limits at 15 and 40 °C during cold snaps or heat waves [2]. Being poikilothermic ectotherms, fluctuations in water temperature have a direct effect on many key physiological processes and behavioral activities of fish [4]. Temperature changes beyond the optimal range are known to induce various stress related responses in teleosts [5,6,7], such as oxidative stress [8,9], resulting in changes in the fish’s metabolism to regain homeostasis [5].

The objectives of the present study were to determine the effects of elevated water temperatures within the range of those commonly occurring in outdoor milkfish aquaculture systems [2] on the gut microbiome of juvenile milkfish under controlled experimental conditions, and to assess the relationship between microbiome dynamics and physiological changes. Using 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing, we investigated gut microbiome composition and diversity in a thermal exposure experiment, for which milkfish stress and biomarker data were available [40,44], comparing control (26 °C) and elevated temperature (33 °C) treatments over a three week period. We hypothesize that thermal stress will lead to changes in the gut microbiome, which are mediated by host−microbiome interactions and affect the functional role of the microbiome for the host. Our findings provide valuable insights into the so far poorly described milkfish gut microbiome in the context of the host’s physiological state at elevated temperatures, and may contribute to predicting future responses of these animals in outdoor culture systems to climate change.

This study was conducted alongside the thermal stress experiment described in Hanke et al. [40] and Hanke [44]. Briefly, 150 juvenile milkfish obtained from the Brackish Water Aquaculture Development Center in Situbondo (Indonesia) were randomly distributed among six experimental tanks, each integrated into an independent recirculation system (RAS). After an acclimatization period of four weeks at 26 °C, the temperature in three tanks was gradually increased from 26 °C to 33 °C by 1 °C per day over the course of one week and kept constant at 33 °C for three weeks (HT: high temperature treatment), while the remaining three tanks were kept at 26 °C (CT: control treatment). Four to seven fish per tank (for more details see https://doi.pangaea.de/10.1594/PANGAEA.919971) were sacrificed for gut microbiome analysis after the initial temperature increase (d0: day 0), after two weeks (d14: day 14), and at the end of the experiment (d21: day 21). To ensure the presence of as little as possible foreign material in the gut, the fish were not fed 24 h prior to each sampling event. The sacrificed fish were immediately dissected on ice with forceps and scalpels sterilized by ethanol and flaming. The fish’s abdomen was carefully opened, and the internal organs removed. The content of the intestine between the pylori gland and anus was squeezed out and collected in a sterile 2 mL Eppendorf tube, and stored at −80 °C until DNA extraction. To assess the influence of the microorganisms in the tank water or the fish feed on the gut microbiome, 250 mL of tank water were filtered onto 0.2 μm polycarbonate filter (Whatman Nuclepore, Dassel, Germany) at each sampling event and 0.5 g of feed pellets were collected for microbial community analysis and likewise stored at −80 °C.

Additionally, samples of muscle and liver tissue were collected from the same milkfish specimens at each sampling event (d0, d14, d21) for the analysis of the following physiological biomarkers: The activities of key enzymes in metabolic (IDH: isocitrate dehydrogenase, LDH: lactate dehydrogenase, ETS: electron transfer system) and antioxidant related (SOD: superoxide dismutase, CAT: catalase) pathways, the amount of available energy resources (total protein, carbohydrates, lipids) and potential cellular damage due to oxidative stress (LPO: lipid peroxidation) were measured. The hepatosomatic index (HSI) was calculated for each fish as ratio of fish weight and liver weight. Furthermore, regenerated scales that were regrown over the duration of the experiment between d0 and d21 were sampled at d21 for the analysis of scale cortisol to quantify chronic stress levels. These parameters are summarized in the Supplementary Materials Table S1 and the full data set is available on Pangaea (https://doi.pangaea.de/10.1594/PANGAEA.919971). Further details about milkfish husbandry conditions, sample collection, analytical procedures, and results of the cortisol and biomarker measurements are described elsewhere [40,44]. The experiment was conducted according to German guidelines and regulations regarding animal welfare (permission according to §11 Section 1 clause 1, Tierschutzgesetz; permit number: Az. 522-27-11/0200(132)).

DNA extraction followed a phenol-chloroform-isoamyl alcohol protocol modified after Nercessian et al. [45]. Frozen samples were thawed and processed on ice. The gut content was fully suspended in 750 μL CTAB buffer (5% w/v cetyltrimethylammonium bromide, 0.8 M NaCl, 120 mM potassium phosphate in DEPC water at pH 8) and transferred to a UV-sterilized bead tube prefilled with 0.3 g of 0.1 mm, 0.25 g of 1 mm and 3 beads of 3 mm diameter glass beads. Filters and feed pellets were directly placed in the bead tube and 750 μL CTAB buffer was added. To the sample in the bead tube, 37.5 μL of 20% SDS (prewarmed to 50 °C) and 75 μL 10% N-Lauroylsarcosin were added and mixed by inverting the tubes. Bead beating was then conducted on the FastPrep-24 Instrument (MP Biomedicals Germany, Eschwege, Germany) at 4 s/m for 20 s. To reduce the foam, tubes were centrifuged for 10 s at 16,000× g before adding 750 μL phenol-chloroform-isoamyl alcohol (25:24:1). To ensure a uniform emulsion, tubes were vigorously vortexed twice for 30 s. To separate the aquatic from the organic phase, samples were centrifuged at 4 °C at 16,000× g for 10 min. 450 μL of the upper aquatic phase were carefully transferred without disturbing the organic phase to a new 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube filled with 900 μL PEG/NaCl (1.6 M NaCl, 30% w/v polyethylene glycol 6000 in DEPC water) solution and 2 μL of glycogen solution (5 mg/mL). The tubes were mixed by inverting 10 times to avoid surface layer formation and then stored on ice in the dark for 2 h. The precipitated DNA was pelleted by centrifugation at 17,000× g for 90 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was decanted and the pellet was washed with 1 mL ice-cold 70% ethanol by centrifugation at 17,000× g at room temperature for 10 min. To fully evaporate the ethanol, pellets were air-dried at room temperature for 10 min. DNA pellets from gut content, fish feed, and water filters were resuspended in 50 μL and in 30µL 1 x TE Buffer (10 mM TRIS-HCl, 0.1 mM EDTA pH 8.0, ThermoFischer Scientific), respectively, on a thermoblock with 400 rpm shaking at 35 °C for 20 min.

DNA extracts were sent to LGC Genomics GmbH (Berlin, Germany) for paired-end amplicon sequencing on the Illumina MiSeq platform (V3 chemistry). Sequencing libraries were prepared using the primer pair 515F-Y (5′-GTGYCAGCMGCCGCGGTAA-3′) and 926R (5′-CCGYCAATTYMTTTRAGTTT-3′) to amplify the V4V5 hypervariable region of the 16S rRNA gene [46]. Primer-clipped paired-end reads were archived using the brokerage service GFBio [47] and are accessible on ENA (PRJEB39140). Further sequence processing steps were conducted together with the sequencing data generated from other samples related to this study on the same sequencing platform with the same library preparation protocol (SRA: SRP155505, ENA: PRJEB33594) using the R package dada2 version 1.8.0 [48]. Briefly, forward and reverse reads were trimmed to 220 bp and 210 bp, respectively, and quality filtered at a maximum expected error rate of 4. Learning of error rates and denoising were conducted using the complete data set for both steps. Reads were then merged and resulting amplicon sequence variants checked for chimeras using default parameters. Only amplicon sequence variants, hereafter referred to as operational taxonomic units (OTUs), between 362 and 399 bp and occurring at least twice in the data set were taxonomically classified using the SILVA reference database version 132 and the SILVAngs web service [49,50,51]. OTUs unclassified on phylum level and those affiliated with eukaryotes, chloroplast and mitochondrial sequences were removed from the analysis. Furthermore, samples with less than 500 sequences were excluded. The final OTU table and associated taxonomy are available on Pangaea (https://doi.pangaea.de/10.1594/PANGAEA.919971).

Amplicon sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene resulted in a total of 3,792,545 quality checked sequences, with on average 40,064 and 29,819 sequences per tank water and fish gut sample, ranging from 13,317 to 100,226 and from 544 to 157,951, respectively, and representing 3567 OTUs in total. No 16S was amplifiable from the fish feed sample.

All statistical analyses and data visualization were implemented in the statistical computing environment R 3.5.1 [52] using the packages vegan [53], nlme [54], and emmeans [55]. R scripts are available on Pangaea (https://doi.pangaea.de/10.1594/PANGAEA.919971)

Furthermore, patterns among individual OTUs depending either on treatment and timepoint or on physiological biomarkers were investigated using clr-transformed sequence counts in a GLMM as described above, followed by pairwise post hoc comparisons, or by calculating correlation coefficients, respectively. OTUs were identified as differentially enriched based on Benjamini−Hochberg corrected p-values for each model term at a significance threshold of 0.05, or as moderately to strongly correlated with biomarker parameters at an absolute Pearson and Spearman correlation coefficient of 0.5.

The milkfish gut microbiome was distinct from the microbial communities in the tank water, which formed well separated clusters without any overlap (Figure 1A). Bray-Curtis dissimilarities between gut and water microbial communities per tank at any given sampling event were at least 0.92, and for the majority of samples greater than 0.99. Water communities were dominated by heterotrophic taxa involved in organic matter degradation, such as representatives of the orders Alteromonadales, Flavobacteriales, Oceanospirillales, and Rhodobacterales (Figure 1B). The contribution of dominant gut microbiome OTUs, which cumulatively constitute 70% of the sequences in the fish gut samples, to the tank water at any given sampling event was negligible (<1%, Figure 1B). Likewise, dominant water OTUs were either completely absent or only contributed a minor proportion to the gut microbiome, with the exception of one high temperature (HT) and one control (CT) tank at d14 (Figure 1C). Given the strong separation between gut and water microbial communities, as well as the lack of amplifiable 16S from the fish feed, we classified the observed milkfish gut microbiome as native without external contamination.

The milkfish gut microbiome showed a high degree of dominance as indicated by the inverse Simpson index, which ranged between 1.23 and 13.65 with a median of 3.75 (Figure 2A). While no statistically significant differences in the inverse Simpson index were detected between temperature treatments, there was a significant pattern over time, with two to three times lower inverse Simpson indices at the end of the experiment at d21 (Table 1). This pattern was less pronounced for the high temperature treatment, where immediately after the temperature increase at d0 on average lower and less variable inverse Simpson indices were recorded compared to the control treatment.

1 Numerator degrees of freedom; 2 denominator degrees of freedom.

PERMANOVA provided statistical support for the differences between treatments and succession over time observed in the PCoA ordination, showing strong effects for treatment and timepoint as well as a weaker but significant effect of the interaction of both factors (Table 1). However, only a small fraction of 8.62, 12.84, and 2.94% of the variation in microbiome composition could be explained by treatment, timepoint, and their interaction, respectively. The R values of pairwise ANOSIM tests indicated that microbial communities were only weakly to moderately separated between each combination of treatment and timepoint, with average Bray-Curtis dissimilarities between groups being only marginally higher than those within groups (Table 2). The degree of community separation increased over time in both treatments, while control and high temperature treatments displayed increasing community overlap towards the end of the experiment. In summary, both alpha and beta diversity measures pointed towards strongest differences between control and high temperature treatments immediately after the temperature increase (d0) that diminished over time.

The milkfish gut microbiome was dominated by the bacterial taxonomic orders Fusobacteriales and Vibrionales, which constituted a high, albeit variable, sequence proportion in all samples (Figure 3A). Fusobacteriales comprised the majority of the sequences in the high temperature treatment at d0 (average sequence proportion 60%) and decreased in their contribution over time at d14 (40%) and d21 (23%). Their proportion in the control treatment was generally lower with 22, 8, and 1% at d0, d14, and d21, respectively. Presumably, Fusobacteriales were gradually replaced by Vibrionales, which displayed the opposite pattern with on average 58, 63, 79% in the control treatment, and 32, 48, and 60% in the high temperature treatment at d0, d14, and d21, respectively. Other taxa, such as Clostridiales and Propionibacteriales, occurred in high sequence proportions of > 20% only in isolated samples compared to a median proportion in the remaining samples of 1% or less. While the primer pair used in this study was theoretically also able to amplify archaeal 16S, only 2 sequences in the whole data set were classified as archaea.

At a higher taxonomic resolution, the gut microbiome was dominated by OTUs affiliated with the genera Catenococcus, Enterovibrio, and Vibrio (Vibrionales), Cetobacterium (Fusobacteriales), and Epulopiscium, Romboutsia, and Tyzzerella (Clostridiales). Many of these OTUs were differentially enriched between temperature treatments and sampling timepoints, driving the observed beta diversity patterns (Figure 3B; Table S2). Overall, 132 OTUs were detected as differentially enriched, of which 77, 123, and 4 OTUs displayed significant differences between treatments, timepoints, and their interaction, respectively. Succession over time was mainly related to differentially enriched OTUs of the genera Enterovibrio and Vibrio, which exhibited inverse trends. OTUs of the genus Cetobacterium showed generally decreasing proportions over time as well as overall increased proportions in the high temperature treatment. Otherwise, differences between treatments were attributed to a taxonomically diverse group of less dominant OTUs, e.g., Cutibacterium (Propionibacteriales), Curvibacter (Betaproteobacteriales), and one Vibrio OTU, which all displayed increased proportions in the control treatment. Furthermore, among the most dominant OTUs, one Cetobacterium and two Enterovibrio OTUs exhibited different trends over time in the two treatments, with their proportion decreasing sooner in the control than the high temperature treatment. Overall, differentially enriched OTUs constituted the majority of the sequences in most samples (Figure 3C), indicating that succession and temperature effects caused a profound restructuring of the milkfish gut microbiome composition.

Additional to the effects of the experimental treatments, we explored the relationship between gut microbiome composition and physiological biomarkers. Considering the collinearity patterns among the observed biomarkers, only HSI was selected as the parameter best suited to explain changes in gut microbiome composition in the RDA, with an adjusted R2 of 16% (Table 3). While individually also some of the other physiological biomarkers, i.e., superoxide dismutase (SOD), isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH), lipid peroxidation (LPO), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), electron transfer system (ETS) and lipid content, were able to explain a low to moderate proportion of the variability in gut microbiome composition, when accounting for collinearity their pure effects were negligible. Other parameters, i.e., carbohydrate and protein content, catalase (CAT), cellular energy allocation (CEA), and scale cortisol concentrations were not related to gut microbiome composition. Correlation analysis between HSI and individual OTU proportions revealed exclusively negative relationships with several Cetobacterium OTUs, including a highly dominant one (Figure 3B; Table S2). Positive correlations were only observed with less dominant OTUs mainly of the genus Vibrio (Table S2).

1 See footnote to Table S1; 2 numerator degrees of freedom; 3 denominator degrees of freedom.

This study documented the development of the gut microbiome of juvenile milkfish kept at different temperature regimes under controlled experimental conditions, assessing different external (temperature, feed and water microbial communities) and internal (fish physiology) influences. The pronounced difference between the gut microbiome and the microbial community in the tank water supported the hypothesis of a strong selection for certain microbes by the host. These observations aligned with previous findings, which revealed that fish intestinal microbiota contained only a few free-living environmental bacteria [57] and were derived from host-specific selection pressures within the intestine [11,58]. The taxonomic composition of the microbial community of the tank water was comparable to that of eutrophic coastal marine and pelagic environments [59,60,61]. Dominant OTUs were affiliated with the genera Marivita (Rhodobacterales), [Polaribacter] huanghezhanensis, and the NS3 marine group (Flavobacteriales). Their metabolism characterizes them as aerobic anoxygenic photoheterotrophs and chemoheterotrophs adapted to exploit elevated concentrations of inorganic nutrients and dissolved organic matter [61,62,63,64]. As such, water conditions in the tanks during the experiment [40], including water microbial communities, were representative of the conditions milkfish are likely to encounter in outdoor farming facilities.

The gut microbiome of the investigated milkfish specimens was mainly composed of Proteobacteria (mainly Vibrionales) and Fusobacteria (mainly Fusobacteriales). It is common for the fish gut microbiome to be dominated by only a limited number of bacterial phyla [58]. Previous studies identified the phyla Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, Actinobacteria, Bacteroidetes and Fusobacteria as predominant members of the teleost gut microbiome [13,65]. At a higher taxonomic resolution, Pelomonas and Fusobacterium spp. were reported as dominant genera in outdoor cultured milkfish [28]. Interestingly, both genera were not detected in the gut microbiome of our experimental milkfish. Instead, we identified dominant OTUs as Catenococcus, Enterovibrio, and Vibrio (Vibrionales), Cetobacterium (Fusobacteriales), and Epulopiscium, Romboutsia, and Tyzzerella (Clostridiales). These and other discrepancies to previous observations [28,29,30,31,32] were likely associated with differences in the developmental stage of the investigated fish, fish culturing conditions and methodological biases as with the exception of one study [28], cultivation-dependent methods were used.

Vibrionales dominated the gut microbiome in the majority of the experimental milkfish, in particular those of the control treatment, and were mostly represented by OTUs from the genera Catenococcus, Vibrio and Enterovibrio. Vibrio species are often found to be prevalent in and on marine fish and are common members of the gut microbiome of both farmed and wild fish [19]. Here, dominant Vibrionales OTUs were closely related to Enterovibrio coralii and various Vibrio spp. strains (≥98.7% sequence identity [74]). Although Enterovibrio coralii and Vibrio spp. have been identified as potential fish pathogens [77], we deem it unlikely that the strains present in the milkfish gut were pathogenic. Considering their high sequence proportion and the overall healthy state of milkfish throughout the experiment (no starvation or exposure to oxygen stress), we assume that the observed strains were likely harmless commensal or even mutualistic bacteria, without negative implications for the animal’s welfare [19,78]. Indeed, isolation-based studies have identified Vibrio strains as common members of the milkfish microbiome during late larval and juvenile stages, with potential probiotic properties [29,30,31]. A great variety of digestive enzymes have been described for the genus Vibrio, such as amylase, protease, lipase [79] and chitinase [80], all of which may enhance the host’s digestive capabilities and improve nutrient uptake [19,81], thereby making Vibrio an important member of the functional gut microbiome of milkfish.

We observed pronounced changes in the composition and diversity of the milkfish gut microbiome in both control and high temperature treatments over time. In the control treatment, the drastic increase in the proportion of Vibrio OTUs, resulting in the observed decrease in alpha diversity, was the most prominent temporal change. Numerous studies document how teleost gut microbiota are altered by diet, bacteria in the water column, and environmental factors such as salinity, pH or temperature [13,19,20,75]. As the fish in the experiment were kept under stable conditions with respect to water temperature, oxygen levels, salinity and feed [40], these parameters are unlikely to explain the observed changes in the gut microbiome of the control treatment. Instead, such changes might be attributed to the natural succession of the gut microbiome during the ontogenetic development of the fish and associated changes in dietary requirements and metabolism, and may have been shaped by the host’s internal selection pressures [11,82,83]. Additionally, temporal changes in the milkfish gut microbiome may be related to the decrease in stocking density, as fish were removed at each sampling event [84,85].

Notably, physiological biomarkers, which were not strongly correlated with gut microbiome composition (LDH, ETS, CAT, CEA, and total lipids, carbohydrates, and protein), also exhibited less pronounced temperature treatment and/or timepoint effects [44]. It is therefore possible that the previously described correlations between gut microbiome and host physiology may be confounded by congruent but independent patterns between treatments and over time. For instance, as milkfish are poikilothermic ectotherms, their body temperature depends on the ambient conditions. As temperature is furthermore known to be one of the most important drivers of microbial community composition [87], changes in the gut microbiome may also be directly related to the temperature change in the high temperature treatment. However, given the strong documented interactions between host and gut microbiome [20] it appears unlikely that temperature alone would determine gut microbiome composition. Yet, temperature may modulate physiological effects on the gut microbiome [88]. Similarly, additional environmental factors would need to be considered in a coastal aquaculture setting, where the majority of the milkfish production is taking place in open cages or pens [3].

We demonstrated that even gradual temperature changes within a range commonly occurring in outdoor milkfish aquaculture systems lead to a major restructuring of the milkfish gut microbiome. This trend seemed to be mediated by host−microbiome interactions in accordance with a pronounced physiological response of the milkfish to the temperature increase. Given the predicted functional role of the affected bacterial taxa for the host, the gut microbiome may be involved in alleviating thermal stress, presumably contributing to the habituation of the milkfish to the elevated temperature over time. Our findings emphasize the importance of the gut microbiome and host−microbiome interactions for fish welfare and aquaculture management, especially in future ocean scenarios in a warmer world.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

