Network of Interactions Between Gut Microbiome, Host Biomarkers, and Urine Metabolome in Carotid Atherosclerosis



Comprehensive analyses of multi-omics data may provide insights into interactions between different biological layers concerning distinct clinical features. We integrated data on the gut microbiota, blood parameters and urine metabolites of treatment-naive individuals presenting a wide range of metabolic disease phenotypes to delineate clinically meaningful associations. Trans-omics correlation networks revealed that candidate gut microbial biomarkers and urine metabolite feature were covaried with distinct clinical phenotypes. Integration of the gut microbiome, the urine metabolome and the phenome revealed that variations in one of these three systems correlated with changes in the other two. In a specific note about clinical parameters of liver function, we identified Eubacteriumeligens, Faecalibacteriumprausnitzii and Ruminococcuslactaris to be associated with a healthy liver function, whereas Clostridium bolteae, Tyzzerellanexills, Ruminococcusgnavus, Blautiahansenii, and Atopobiumparvulum were associated with blood biomarkers for liver diseases. Variations in these microbiota features paralleled changes in specific urine metabolites. Network modeling yielded two core clusters including one large gut microbe-urine metabolite close-knit cluster and one triangular cluster composed of a gut microbe-blood-urine network, demonstrating close inter-system crosstalk especially between the gut microbiome and the urine metabolome. Distinct clinical phenotypes are manifested in both the gut microbiome and the urine metabolome, and inter-domain connectivity takes the form of high-dimensional networks. Such networks may further our understanding of complex biological systems, and may provide a basis for identifying biomarkers for diseases. Deciphering the complexity of human physiology and disease requires a holistic and trans-omics approach integrating multi-layer data sets, including the gut microbiome and profiles of biological fluids. By studying the gut microbiome on carotid atherosclerosis, we identified microbial features associated with clinical parameters, and we observed that groups of urine metabolites correlated with groups of clinical parameters. Combining the three data sets, we revealed correlations of entities across the three systems, suggesting that physiological changes are reflected in each of the omics. Our findings provided insights into the interactive network between the gut microbiome, blood clinical parameters and the urine metabolome concerning physiological variations, and showed the promise of trans-omics study for biomarker discovery.

Systemic metabolism is regulated at numerous levels. Apart from direct interactions, the gut microbiota may indirectly interact with the host via metabolites, which may appear in circulation and the urine. Considering the complexity and the inter-dependency of biological systems, a holistic approach integrating multiple omics data may further the understanding of metabolic disease development.

Extensive pieces of research have investigated the relationship between gut microbiota and a variety of immune systems and metabolic diseases, but, despite these advances, no direct evidence has established a direct and causal relationship between altered gut microbiota and these diseases. To address this question, we chose carotid atherosclerosis, which is systemic disease sharing metabolism, chronic inflammation, immune, infection, and senility, to combine data on the composition and functional potential of the gut microbiome with blood and urine metabolite profiles. These results may reveal novel associations with clinical phenotypes and thereby provide new knowledge of host-microbiome interactions in health and disease. Findings from the past decade have suggested that the structure and composition of the gut microbiota are associated with carotid atherosclerosis in humans and animal models (Jonsson and Backhed, 2017). Metabolites filtered or produced by gut microbiota, such as trimethylamine-N-oxide, short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), and secondary bile acids, have been observed to affect the development of atherosclerosis (Wang et al., 2011; Wahlstrom et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2018). Although the commensal microbiota composition has emerged as a risk factor for cardiometabolic disease (Schroeder and Bäckhed, 2016), it remains controversial how the gut metagenome contributes to the development of atherosclerosis (Wright et al., 2000; Stepankova et al., 2010; Wang et al., 2011; Li et al., 2016) and in particular how the gut microbiota influences atherothrombotic processes.Taking advantage of a cohort of treatment-naïve subjects representing various clinical phenotypes, we performed an integrative trans-omics study combining blood biomarkers, fecal metagenomics and urine metabolomics. We found that microbiome was a poor biomarker for carotid atherosclerosis even in functional attributes. Trans omics analysis identified potential biomarkers characterizing different phenotypes, while integration of the three omics datasets revealed novel covariations and links. Community modeling further revealed the intimate interaction among the three systems, especially between the gut microbiota and the urine metabolome.

138 Chinese individuals (aged 32-76, including 76 males and 57 females) living in the north of China were recruited during physical examination in a carotid atherosclerosis screening program at the Chinese PLA General Hospital. None of them had been diagnosed with diseases before the inclusion, and subjects using antibiotics or receiving other medication within 1 month were excluded. Ultrasound examination of the carotid arteries was used to diagnose carotid arteriosclerosis. Blood tests on 124 clinical parameters were performed (Additional File: Tables S1-3). Fecal and urine samples were collected on the day of physical examination, immediately frozen and stored at -80°C until being further processed.

The study was approved by the Medical Ethical Review Committee of the Chinese PLA General Hospital and the Institutional Review Board at BGI-Shenzhen. Informed written consent was obtained from all participants.

DNA was extracted from fecal samples using Qiagen QIAamp DNA Stool Mini Kit (Qiagen, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Construction of a paired-end library with insert size of 350bp was performed according to the manufacturer’s instruction, and the DNA library was sequenced with PE reads of 2×100bp on the Illumina Hiseq2000 platform (Illumina, US). The sequencing reads were quality-controlled as described previously (Fang et al., 2018), and implementation of the pipeline is available at https://github.com/jiezhuye/cOMG. The raw sequences with low quality were filtered and trim by overall accuracy (OA) control strategy (Fang et al., 2018) using OAs1 (-Qsys = 33, -minLen= 30, -Scut=0.9, -Qcut=0.8). Then the high-quality reads were aligned to hg19 by SOAP2.22 (identity ≥ 0.9) to remove human-related reads by removeHost (-D 4 -s 30 -r 1 -v 7 -i 0.9). After quality control and host gene removal, clean reads were mapped to the 9,879,896 genes in the integrated gene catalog (IGC, Li et al., 2014) with a threshold of more than 90% identity over 95% of the length by SOAP2.22. Gene abundances were determined as previously described (Li et al., 2014), and subsequently used to calculate the relative abundances of genera and KEGG Orthology (KOs). The genes were clustered into Metagenomic species (MGS) based on co-abundance and gene content (≥700 genes) (Nielsen et al., 2014) with MGS canopy algorithm (Nielsen et al., 2014). Taxonomy assignment was based on >50% of the genes in one MGS (Qin et al., 2012). The relative abundance of a MGS was calculated from the mean relative abundance of its constituent genes (Qin et al., 2012). MGS present in >10% samples were subjected to further analysis (Additional File: Table S4).

Spearman correlation was determined between the microbiome (relative abundance of MGS or functions) and blood biomarkers, between the urine metabolome (metabolite groups) and blood biomarkers (Additional File: Table S5), and between the urine metabolome and the gut microbiome using the cor function in the base R package. MGS/functions, metabolite groups, and biomarkers that reached statistical significance at three rounds of correlations were retained (p<0.05), and correlations with q<0.1 are indicated in the heatmap.

Pair-wise Spearman correlation was calculated between MGSs and urine metabolites, between urine metabolites and blood biomarkers, and between MGS and blood parameters (Additional File: Table S6) with base cor function in R software. Multiple hypothesis testing was adjusted using the method of Benjamini and Hochberg (q<0.1), and correlations were further filtered by a cutoff of |ρ|≥0.3. Only inter-omic correlations were used for community analysis. Non-directional communities composed of nodes from and edges between the three sets of omics data were modeled using the algorithm proposed by Girvan and Newman (Girvan and Newman, 2002) with igraph package in R. This method involved the iterative calculation of edge betweenness centrality on a network, which is the number of weighted shortest paths from all vertices to all other vertices that pass over a given edge. After each iteration, the edges with the highest betweenness centrality were removed, and the process was repeated until only individual nodes remained. Community structure was visualized with igraph package in R (Additional File: Tables S7-8, S10).

Prediction of clinical parameters was performed by a 5-repeated 10-fold down-sampling cross-validation random forest model (R 3.3.0, random Forest 4.6-12 package) using the relative abundance of MGS as input. Downsample majority class was controlled by the sampsize and strata parameter in the randomForest function. Prediction accuracy was evaluated by Spearman correlation between the predicted value and the measured value.

Non-carotid atherosclerosis versus carotid atherosclerosis classification was performed by a 5-repeated 10-fold down-sampling cross-validation random forest model (R 3.3.0, random Forest 4.6-12 package) using blood biomarkers or MGSs as input (Additional File: Tables S9, S11). Five-repeated 10-foldcross-validationis a robust model matric estimation and down-sampling to deal with the unbalanced sample size between groups. Receiver operator characteristic (ROC) curves were plotted using this classifier with R 3.3.0, pROC package.

The reporter score (Z-score) (Patil and Nielsen, 2005) was calculated for KO modules or the gut metabolic modules (GMMs) (Vieira-Silva et al., 2016) to identify the differentially enriched functions comparing non-carotid atherosclerosis and carotid atherosclerosis groups. Modules with |Z-score|≥1.96 were considered significant.

Metabolomic profiling of urine samples was performed on a 2777C UPLC system (Waters, UK) coupled to a Xevo G2-XS QTOF mass spectrometer (Waters, UK). Peak picking and compound identification were performed with Progenesis QI (ver2.2), aligned against the HMDB (The Human Metabolome Database) and KEGG (The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) databases. The untargeted metabolite data set was subjected to dimension reduction by the cluster of co-abundant metabolites into groups following the methods provided by a previous study using the R package Weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) (Pedersen et al., 2016). The positively charged and negatively charged metabolites were analyzed together. Signed weighted co-abundance correlations (biweight midcorrelations after log2 transformation) were calculated across all individuals. A scale-free topology criterion was used to choose the soft threshold of β = 13. Clusters were identified with the dynamic hybrid tree-cutting algorithm, using deep split of 4 and a minimum cluster size of 3. The profile of each metabolite cluster was summarized by the cluster eigenvector.

We included 138 treatment-naïve subjects who presented wide variations in clinical blood parameters (based on 124 blood biomarkers, including biomarkers associated with metabolic abnormalities such as hyperglycemia, hyperinsulinemia, hyperlipidemia, and kidney dysfunction) (Additional File: Tables S2-3). Amongst these treatment-naïve subjects, we have an over representation of individuals diagnosed with carotid atherosclerosis at the time of sampling (n=102), as the study subjects took part in a specifically designed screening program for carotid atherosclerosis. Due to their display of a diverse range of metabolic abnormalities and a large variation in blood biomarkers, the collected data allowed us to evaluate possible associations between gut microbiota composition, clinical parameters and urine metabolites across different clinical states.

Shotgun-based metagenomic sequencing of fecal microbial DNA generated a total of 1110.22 Gb of data (on average 7.93 Gb data per sample), which we clustered into 645 MGS (Nielsen et al., 2014) present in more than 10% of samples.

To examine associations between phenotypes and the overall microbiota profile, we performed a permutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) of each variable vs MGS compositions. Thirty two variables were identified as covariates, of which gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT, r2 = 0.022), ferritin (r2 = 0.020), alanine aminotransferase (ALT, r2 = 0.020), monocytes (r2 = 0.020), and triglyceride (TRIG, r2 = 0.018) had the largest effect sizes (p<0.05, q<0.1, Figure 1A). Five clinical covariates correlated significantly with α-diversity, and 6 clinical covariates correlated significantly with total gene counts in the gut microbiota (Additional File: Figure S1). Conversely, we also tested whether the microbiome data could be used to predict phenotypic variations. We built prediction models using random forest based on the relative abundance of MGSs. The gut microbiota-based predictor performed best in the prediction of triglyceride (TRIG) (r=0.35), followed by low fluorescence reticulocytes (LFR, r=0.28), middle fluorescent reticulocytes (MFR, r=0.25), hematocrit (r=0.21), and uric acid (URIC, r=0.21) (Figure 1B, and Additional File: Figure S2), indicating generally weak associations between certain blood biomarkers and the overall composition of the gut microbiota.

We next aimed to identify potential biomarkers in the gut microbiome that could be linked to clinical parameters. Spearman correlation analysis was conducted between individual MGSs and clinical parameters. Among the false discovery rates (FDR)-adjusted significant correlations, the abundance of Eubacteriumeligens correlated negatively with GGT (MGS 0507, r=-0.30; MGS1459, r=-0.31; MGS1432, r=-0.33) and total blood levels bilirubin (TBIL) (MGS1459, r=-0.26; MGS1432, r=-0.28; MGS 0507, r=-0.33);, whereas the abundances of Tyzzerellanexilis (MGS0415, r=0.30) and Blautiahansenii (MGS0787, r=0.30) correlated positively with GGT. Atopobiumparvulum (MGS1482, r=0.39) and Solobacteriummoorei (MGS0945, r=0.35) correlated positively with blood levels of thyroxine (T4) (p<0.05, q<0.1, Figure 2). In line with this, Eubacteriumeligens and Atopobiumparvulum have been reported to be depleted and enriched, respectively, in patients with atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (Jie et al., 2017). Accumulating evidence has shown that GGT, TBIL, and T4 serve as risk factors in carotid atherosclerosis by influencing host inflammation and oxidation stress, but relatively little is known regarding the mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis (Kozakova et al., 2012; Lee et al., 2020; Papadopoulou et al., 2020). We found a significant relation between GGT, TBIL, T4 and gut microbiota, which were involved in the progression of carotid atherosclerosis. Therefore, through an integrated analysis of multi-omics, we can further explore how gut microbiota contribute to the well-established link between these clinical parameters and carotid atherosclerosis.

Next, we analyzed the correlation between microbial functions and clinical parameters. The abundances of genes encoding proteins involved in amino acid metabolism (Proline biosynthesis, M00015, r=-0.27; Cysteine biosynthesis, M00021, r=-0.32; Tryptophan biosynthesis, M00023, r=-0.26; Histidine biosynthesis, M00026, r=-0.30; Ornithine biosynthesis, M00028, r=-0.31; Methionine biosynthesis, M00017, r=-0.28), gene expression (Aminoacyl−tRNA biosynthesis, M00359, r=-0.29; Aminoacyl−tRNA biosynthesis, M00360, r=-0.27; RNA polymerase, M00183, r=-0.30; Ribosome, M00178, r=-0.29; Ribosome, M00179, r=-0.30), and energy production (Coenzyme A biosynthesis, M00120, r=-0.27; NAD biosynthesis, M00115, r=-0.32; Pantothenate biosynthesis, M00119, r=-0.27) correlated negatively with monocyte counts, and the abundances of genes encoding proteins involved in tyrosine degradation (M00044, r=-0.31), and teichoic acid transport system (M00251,r=-0.30) correlated negatively with basophils. The abundances of genes involved in the transport of nickel and/or cobalt (M00246, r=0.37; M00245, r=0.36) positively correlated with iron (Additional File 8: Figure S3).

These correlations indicated that alterations in the microbiota taxa and function may be linked to specific physiological perturbations.

The metabolites in the urine may be generated by the host and/or the gut microbiota. By metabolome profiling of the urine, we detected 10890 positively charged and 9416 negatively charged metabolites, which were clustered into 1042 modules (more than 3 metabolites in each module) based on their co-abundance using the R package WGCNA (Pedersen et al., 2016). To assess their clinical relevance, we performed a correlation analysis between urine metabolites and clinical parameters. A large number of urine metabolites correlated with blood biomarkers, compartmentalized into distinct clusters exhibiting positive or negative correlations (Figure 3 and Additional File: Figure S4). These urine metabolites demonstrated opposing correlation relationships with two sets of blood biomarkers. The metabolites that correlated positively with one set of blood biomarkers including follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), luteotropic hormone (LH), glycated albumin (GA), brain natriuretic peptide brain natriuretic precursor (proBNP), high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDLC), vitamin B12 (VB12), calcifediol, beta-collagen degradation products, osteocalcin, total propeptide of type I procollagen (tP1NP), fibrinogen, and alkaline phosphatase (ALP), tended to correlate negatively with blood parameters related to liver function (URIC, creatinine [CREA], ALT, GGT, AST, TBIL, and direct bilirubin [DBIL]), blood pressure, lipid metabolism (apolipoprotein B [APOB], apolipoprotein E [APOE], TRIG), and glucose metabolism (C peptide, insulin, and glucose), and vice versa (Figure 3 and Additional File: Figure S4). Among the phenotype-associated metabolites, those that correlated negatively with markers of liver dysfunction (e.g. URIC, CREA, ALT, GGT) included phenols, steroids, and possible food-derived compounds and metabolic intermediates (e.g. compounds structurally similar to fragomine, L−aspartyl−L−phenylalanine cycloheptanecarboxylic acid and, (R)−mevalonate, L−trans−5−hydroxy−2−piperidinecarboxylic acid, 20,26−dihydroxyecdysone), whereas metabolites that correlated positively included molecules that were possible metabolic intermediates or bioactive compounds (e.g. compounds structurally similar to ethyl cellulose, epomediol, 7−aminomethyl−7−carbaguanine, imipenem,S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine), suggesting the physiological involvement of those metabolites and related metabolic pathways. Thus, the urine metabolomic patterns reflected selective physiological features.

To integrate data on the gut microbiome, the urine metabolome and the phenome, we performed three rounds of pairwise Spearman correlations, retaining triangular correlations for p<0.05 (Figure 4). Compartmentalized by their direction of correlation with clinical parameters, we found microbe-metabolite pairs showing positive correlations (which we termed disease-related microbes/metabolites) and negative correlations (which we termed health-related microbes/metabolites) with blood biomarkers where elevated levels have been associated with diseases (Figure 4). The correlation analyses indicated that for liver dysfunction-associated parameters (e.g. GGT and ALT), the disease-related bacteria included Clostridium bolteae (MGS0007), Tyzzerellanexills(MGS0415), Ruminococcusgnavus(MGS0160), Blautiahansenii(MGS0787), and Atopobiumparvulum(MGS1482), whereas the health-related bacteria included Eubacteriumeligens(MGS1432, MGS0507, and MGS1459), Faecalibacteriumprausnitzii(MGS1310), and Ruminococcuslactaris(MGS0445). These bacteria shared a collection of correlated health-related or disease-related metabolites; the disease-related metabolites included molecules structurally similar tocinncassiol D2 glucoside, ethyl tiglate, and dihydroferulic acid 4-sulfate, and the health-related ones included those similar to phenylacetaldehyde, 3-methyl-quinolin-2-ol, 6-methylsalicylate, p-methoxycinnarnaldehyde, cassaidine, lithocholate 3-o-gluronide, and gentisate aldehyde (Figure 4). Blood levels of APOE and/or TRIG correlated positively with the abundance of the disease-related bacteria Ruminococcusgnavus, Blautiahansenii, and Atopobiumparvulum,which in turn correlated with a series of urine metabolites. These included the health-related metabolites structurally similar to phenylacetaldehyde, 3-methyl-quinolin-2-ol and lithocholate, and the disease-related metabolites similar to cinncassiol D2 glucoside and ethyl tiglate.

Next, we applied the same inter-correlation approach to microbial modules, urine metabolites and blood biomarkers (p<0.05, q<0. 1). A few modules significantly correlated with URIC (e.g. modules in carbohydrate transport and metabolism, M00171, M00169, M00172, M00491, M00194, M00200, M00206, and M00201), and these modules correlated with the health-related metabolites (e.g. metabolites structurally similar to lithocholate 3-o-gluronide, methoxycinnarnaldehyde, or phenylacetaldehyde) and the disease-related metabolites (e.g. metabolites structurally similar to ethyl tiglate, dihydroferulic acid or imipenem).

Taken together, the results suggested that certain microbiome features, urine metabolites, and clinical parameters co-vary across treatment-naïve subjects.

Biological entities, such as microorganisms, exist in communities and interact with each other (Girvan et al., 2002). The interaction may be directly or indirectly via biomolecules. To unravel the structure of the interactive relationship between the gut microbiota, urine metabolites and clinical parameters, we modeled correlations with a previously reported algorithm based on edge betweenness (Girvan et al., 2002). After pruning the loose connections, two large communities emerged (Figure 5A). The largest community was densely weaved between 200 MGS and 33 metabolite groups (with 99.1%/1040 edges), partially linked to five blood biomarkers (with 0.2%/3 edges between MGS and phenotypes, and 0.7%/6 edges between metabolites and phenotypes, Figure 5B). This community represented a huge cluster of microbe-metabolite interactions, demonstrating the extensive linkage between the gut microbiota and the urine metabolome. The second-largest microbial community was formed by triangular correlations between 41 MGS, 53 metabolite groups and 23 blood biomarkers (with 5%/14 edges between MGS and phenotypes, 67%/181 edges between metabolites and phenotypes, and 28%/75 edges between MGS and metabolites), which was less dense than the first community (Figure 5C). In this community, entities from the three systems were all connected, where changes in one data set resulted in variations in the other two. The majority of inter-system correlations were positive, except that a metabolite structurally similar to diethyl L−malate correlated negatively with blood variables including GGT, URIC, TRIG, blood viscosity, testosterone (T), triiodothyronine (T3), ferritin, hematocrit, monocytes, red blood cell count (RBC), hemoglobin (HB), gender, alcohol consumption and smoking, and with one MGS (MGS0544), and that a metabolite structurally similar to 5−amino−4−imidazole carboxylate correlated negatively with CREA, URIC and T, indicating antagonistic or inhibitive relationships. These modeled communities demonstrated close host-microbiome interactions and trans-omics connections, especially between the gut microbiota and the urine metabolome.

Carotid atherosclerosis is usually asymptomatic with high health risks, and an easily accessible biomarker for this disease is lacking (Tolle et al., 2015). In our cohort, the carotid atherosclerosis cases were identified based on ultrasound examination of the carotid arteries. We first compared the clinical parameters in groups with or without carotid atherosclerosis. Several variables differed significantly between individuals with and without carotid atherosclerosis. Principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) of the gut microbiota composition failed to distinguish between the microbiota of individuals with and without carotid atherosclerosis (Additional File: Figure S7), and the same was seen for microbial gene counts and α-diversity (Additional File: Figure S8A). Mann–Whitney U test identified a few MGS including Prevotellacopri and Prevotellabivia that differed in abundance between individuals with and without carotid atherosclerosis (p<0.05), but none of them passed the false discovery rate of q<0.1 (Additional File: Figure S8B). After gene mapping to both KEGG modules and GMM (Vieira-Silva et al., 2016), we found several functions altered in the relative gene abundance in the microbiota of carotid atherosclerosis individuals (Additional File: Figure S9). These included the reduction in the abundance of genes involved in methanogenesis and the enrichment of genes involved in the metabolism of low molecular mass carbohydrates in carotid atherosclerosis (Additional File: Figure S9). We also attempted to pinpoint the carotid atherosclerosis-related microbial features using a classification model. However, the 5-repeat 10-fold cross-validation random forest model performed better on blood biomarkers (AUC=0.87) than on MGS composition (AUC=0.54, Figure 6A), indicating a more marked deviation associated with carotid atherosclerosis in the blood profile than in the microbiota. However, since the blood-based discriminators (such as hypertriglyceridemia, APOB, TRIG, LDLC, and HbA1c) are common denominators for metabolic diseases, these are poor biomarkers for carotid atherosclerosis on their own. These results suggested that the gut microbiota in carotid atherosclerosis subjects exhibited only minor alterations, and is not useful on its own as a disease biomarker.

Urine has also previously been used as an easily accessible biomarker for several diseases (Bouatra et al., 2013). In search of potential urine biomarkers for carotid atherosclerosis, we likewise conducted feature selection using the 5-repeat 10-fold cross-validation random forest. The model classified individuals with and without carotid atherosclerosis with an area under the curve (AUC) of 0.72 based on selected urine biomarkers (Figure 6B). Notably, the mere inclusion of the top important metabolite group ME71 (structurally similar to 20, 26-dihydroxyecdysone) in the classification model reached an AUC of 0.78 (Figure 6C, the left panel). This group of metabolites was significantly lower in individuals with vs without carotid atherosclerosis (Figure 6C, the right panel). However, the variation of ME71 within each group suggests the need for further validation of its use as a biomarker for carotid atherosclerosis.

In the context of the diverse clinical phenotypes in our cohort, we integrated multi-omics data by characterizing inter-domain correlation relationships and further modeled the correlations into communities. The results showed close interactions between the blood profile, the urine metabolome and the gut microbiota, especially that the urine metabolome and the gut microbiota appeared to covary.

In a previous study, potential microbial biomarkers for atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease were identified based on 218 cases and 187 controls (Jie et al., 2017). However, our study indicates that carotid atherosclerosis is only associated with minor alterations of the gut microbiota. Further studies are needed to identify possible associations between the gut microbiota and carotid atherosclerosis, with adjustment of confounding factors and larger sample size. Notably, our findings suggest that the urine metabolome may contain promising biomarkers for carotid atherosclerosis, and the potential of the metabolite (ME71, structurally similar to 20, 26-dihydroxyecdysone, 2026E) as a carotid atherosclerosis marker warrants further validation. 2026E is less reported. But its end metabolites, 20-Hydroxyecdysone, have revealed many potential beneficial health effects including the wound-healing, immunoprotective and anti-osteoporosis effects in many studies (Buniam et al., 2020). 20-Hydroxyecdysone ameliorates metabolic and cardiovascular dysfunction in high-fat-high-fructose-fed ovariectomized rats (Buniam et al., 2020).

Our results provide evidence that changes in clinical features related to the disease can be manifested as quantitative changes in multiple body systems including the blood profile, the gut microbiome, and the urine metabolome. These multiple systems are intertwined into closely linked networks. The precise definition and accurate classification of health and disease entail a data-driven, multi-omics and integrative approach for ultimate identification of the most consistent and reliable biomarkers for a given disease.

The datasets presented in this study can be found in online repositories. The names of the repository/repositories and accession number(s) can be found below: http://ftp.cngb.org/pub/CNSA/data1/CNP0000048/.

The studies involving human participants were reviewed and approved by Medical Ethics Committee of Chinese PLA General Hospital. The patients/participants provided their written informed consent to participate in this study. Written informed consent was obtained from the individual(s) for the publication of any potentially identifiable images or data included in this article.

K-LH, QF, and R-JL designed the study. R-JL, C-LL, and Z-GX recruited subjects, collected samples, and contributed metadata. K-LH, LM, KK, YH, XX, H-MY, JW, and H-JJ supervised the project. R-JL, Z-YJ, X-LY, H-JJ, R-LF, FL, YG, H-HX, H-ZZ, BT, and J-HZ interpreted the data, prepared the display items and wrote the manuscript. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.

This research was supported by the National Key Technologies R&D Program for New Drug of China (2018ZX09J18109-004), and by the Shenzhen Municipal Government of China (JSGG20160229172752028 and JCYJ20160229172757249).

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fcimb.2021.708088/full#supplementary-material

