Adaptation of gut microbiome and host metabolic systems to lignocellulosic degradation in bamboo rats

Bamboo rats (Rhizomys pruinosus) are among the few mammals that lives on a bamboo-based diet which is mainly composed of lignocellulose. However, the mechanisms of adaptation of their gut microbiome and metabolic systems in the degradation of lignocellulose are largely unknown. Here, we conducted a multi-omics analysis on bamboo rats to investigate the interaction between their gut microbiomes and metabolic systems in the pre- and post-weaning periods, and observed significant relationships between dietary types, gut microbiome, serum metabolome and host gene expression. For comparison, published gut microbial data from the famous bamboo-eating giant panda (Ailuropoda melanoleuca) were also used for analysis. We found that the adaptation of the gut microbiome of the bamboo rat to a lignocellulose diet is related to a member switch in the order Bacteroidales from family Bacteroidaceae to family Muribaculaceae, while for the famous bamboo-eating giant panda, several aerobes and facultative anaerobes increase after weaning. The conversion of bacteria with an increased relative abundance in bamboo rats after weaning enriched diverse carbohydrate-active enzymes (CAZymes) associated with lignocellulose degradation and functionally enhanced the biosynthesis of amino acids and B vitamins. Meanwhile, the circulating concentration of short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) derived metabolites and the metabolic capacity of linoleic acid in the host were significantly elevated. Our findings suggest that fatty acid metabolism, including linoleic acid and SCFAs, are the main energy sources for bamboo rats in response to the low-nutrient bamboo diet.

Lignocellulose, as the most abundant biomass component on earth, composed of cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin, is hydrophobic and difficult to enzymatically degrade [1]. Bamboo is a low-nutrition food with about 70–80% of its composition being lignocellulosic components [2, 3]. In general, mammals lack enzymes that breakdown complex lignocellulosic carbohydrates [4, 5], and heavily rely on the complementary action of the lignocellulose-degrading enzyme repertoire of their microbial symbionts [6, 7]. Bamboo rats and giant pandas are two famous specificity bamboo-eating animals and the understanding of their adaptations and mechanisms for digesting lignocellulose-based diet evokes enormous interest.

Bamboo rats serve as an excellent model to study the utilization of lignocellulose due to their specialized bamboo-eating dietary characteristics. Here, we explored the degradation of recalcitrant lignocellulosic materials by complementary and synergistic cooperation between the host and their gut microbiome. We performed a study, which involved stages from the unweaned period to the specific bamboo-eating period in bamboo rats, and integrated multi-omics measurements including microbiomes from several gut segments, serum metabolome, and the host transcriptome to identify lignocellulose digestion mechanisms. In addition, similarities and differences in the gut microbiome response to dietary switches in bamboo rats and giant pandas were compared.

We grouped samples according to the dietary stage of the bamboo rats and giant pandas (Fig. 1a, b; Tables S1 and S2) and compared their gut microbial compositions and associated functional profiles. Clusters of gut microbiome were observed to be closer in the unweaned giant pandas and bamboo rats based on Bray–Curtis dissimilarities at the OTU level, whereas huge differences were evident after these animals started consuming bamboo-based diets (Fig. 1c). Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) effect size (LEfSe) was employed to assess the microbiome attributes that differed significantly by dietary status. Our analysis revealed that the family Bacteroidaceae and genus Bacteroides were enriched in the milk diet stage of both the bamboo rat and the giant panda (Kruskall–Wallis test, p < 0.05, LDA > 3.5) (Fig. S1a, b; Table S3). After switching to the lignocellulosic diet, microbial families including Muribaculaceae, Lachnospiraceae, Ruminococcaceae, and Desulfovibrionaceae were enriched in the gut of the bamboo rats, whereas the phylum Proteobacteria, and the families Streptococcaceae and Clostridiaceae were observed to be significantly elevated in the gut of the giant pandas (Fig. S1a, b; Table S3). Notably, the gut microbiomes of captive and wild pandas were quite different at the OTU, CAZyme, KO, and COG levels (PERMANOVA, p < 0.05) (Fig. 1c, d, Fig S1c, d), and the microbial compositions and CAZy family profiles of wild pandas appeared closer to those of the weaned bamboo rats (Fig. 1c, d).

The within-sample diversities based at the OTU and gene levels were calculated for the duodenum, cecum, and colon of the bamboo rats. In general, OTU and gene diversities of the gut microbiome in the S2 stage were higher than in the S1 stage (Fig. 2a and Table S4). The OTU diversity in the hindgut was lower than that of the foregut, but gene diversity in the hindgut was higher than that of the foregut (Fig. 2a and Table S4). PCoA plot based on Bray–Curtis dissimilarities showed that their gut microbiomes separated into three distinct clusters (PERMANOVA, R2 = 0.06, p < 0.05) (Fig. 2b). Moreover, non-metric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) analysis of the genes (PERMANOVA, R2 = 0.08, p < 0.05), CAZymes (PERMANOVA, R2 = 0.08, p < 0.05), KOs (PERMANOVA, R2 = 0.12, p < 0.05), and COGs (PERMANOVA, R2 = 0.17, p < 0.05) also showed clearly different clusters between the S1 and S2 stage samples (Fig. S2). Our findings indicate that substantial changes in gut microbial composition and function occur after diet conversion.

In addition, we also found functional changes in vitamin and amino acid synthesis in the gut microbiome of bamboo rats that accompanied the food conversion. Biosynthesis of vitamin B family (VB1, VB2, B3, VB7, and B9) and amino acids (including arginine, BCAAs and AAAs) were enhanced, while retinol and vitamin B6 metabolism were decreased in the S2 stage (Wilcoxon rank sum test, p < 0.05) (Fig. S3).

A total of 2530 metabolites (1431 and 1099 metabolites for positive and negative polarity mode, respectively) were detected as blood circulating metabolites from the 24 bamboo rats. Partial least-squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) was used to reduce the dimensionality of the high-dimensional metabolome data. The score plot showed a clear separation between each group (Fig. 4a). Accordingly, we compared the differences in metabolites between the groups in the two dietary stages (Fig. 4b). Overall, 91 shared differential metabolites (SDMs), including 52 for positive mode and 39 for negative mode, were identified between the two dietary stages (VIP > 1.0, FC > 2.0 or FC < 0.5, p value < 0.05) (Fig. 4b).

We then assessed the correlations between these SDMs and the dietary patterns to explore potential biomarkers at the different stages. In this study, the SDMs conformed to correlation analysis (Spearman r > 0.7, FDR p < 0.05), and ROC curve estimation (AUC > 0.9) were selected as the potential biomarkers for the specific dietary stages (Table S6). Metabolites that were potential drug components or hormones were excluded. Finally, 27 and 12 potential biomarkers were identified in the S1 and S2 stages (Fig. 4c). For example, 12(13)-DiHOME, the terminal product of linoleic acid metabolism, was observed to robustly correlate with bamboo-based diet (Spearman r = 0.87, FDR p < 0.0001). We classified these metabolites according to their database annotation status (KEGG, HMDB, and LIPID MAPS database) and the attributes of their metabolic derivatives. Specifically, some bile acid derived metabolites (glycocholic acid, 1β-hydroxycholic acid, sulfoglycolithocholic acid, and taurohyocholic acid), and amino acid derived metabolites [roseotoxin S, DL-α-aminocaprylic acid, saccharopine, α-glutamyl-4-hydroxyproline, and ε-(γ-glutamyl)-lysine)], were abundant in the S1 stage (Fig. 4c, d). On the other hand, some glucose derived molecules such as p-cresol glucuronide, 5′-O-β-D-glucosylpyridoxine, 17-β-estradiol-3-glucuronide, and estriol 16-glucuronide were significantly elevated in the S2 stage (VIP > 1.0, FC > 2.0 or FC < 0.5, p value < 0.05) (Fig. 4c and e).

In order to further explore the mechanisms of host response to diet switch, we attained transcriptomes from 36 samples from 3 tissues (liver, duodenum and colon) across 4 ages (15d, 30d, 45d, and 80d). These tissues are known to be critical for metabolic performance and nutrition utilization. About 92.2% of transcripts represented the available vertebrata conserved orthologs, which indicates that the transcriptomes were well assembled and relatively complete (Fig. S4). Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified in the liver, duodenum, and colon of the bamboo rats across the 4 ages. KEGG pathway and GO enrichment analyses were performed for the DEGs in each pair groups (Figs. 5a, S5). Concretely, pathways related to carbohydrate digestion and absorption (hydrolase activity acting on glycosyl bonds) were enriched in the duodenum in the S2 stage (FDR p < 0.05) (Figs. 5a, S5). Moreover, nutrients absorbed by the intestine at the two dietary stages were different. For example, pathways related to the digestion and absorption of proteins, minerals and fats were enriched in the S1 stage, while pathways related to metabolism and absorption of vitamins and carbohydrates were abundant in the S2 stage (FDR p < 0.05) (Fig. 5a).

Diverse KEGG pathways such as linoleic acid metabolism, arachidonic acid metabolism, retinol metabolism, and gluconeogenesis were enriched in the S2 stage (FDR p < 0.05) (Fig. 5a). Linoleic acid metabolism was also observed to be the most enriched KEGG pathway, based on serum metabolites, which strongly correlates to the bamboo-based diet (Spearman r > 0.6) (Fig. 5b). Arachidonic acid, a product of linoleic acid metabolism, had an elevated level in the S2 stage (Fig. 5c). However, only linoleic acid correlated strongly to bamboo-based diet (Spearman r = 0.65) (Fig. 5c). In the liver, cytochrome P450 family members CYP2C, CYP2J, CYP2E1, and CYP3A4 showed significant upregulation in the S2 stage, which facilitate efficient conversion of linoleic acid to the end product 12,13-DiHOME (Fig. 5d). Our results revealed that the source and end products of linoleic acid metabolism were significantly elevated in the S2 stage, which might be associated with adaptation of the bamboo rats to lignocellulosic diet.

We next explored the associations of gut microbiome and serum metabolome in bamboo rats that might facilitate lignocellulose utilization. We assessed the effect of duodenum, cecum and colon microbiomes on the serum metabolome, using the Mantel test (Fig. 6a). Overall, the microbiomes of the hindgut (cecum and colon) were more tightly coupled with serum metabolome than the foregut (duodenum) (Fig. 6a). For example, the correlations between the duodenum CAZymes profile and serum metabolome were weak with an extremely low effect size (Mantel test, r = 0.05, p > 0.05; r = 0.04, p > 0.05 for positive and negative metabolome modes, respectively), while only the colon microbiome, both in taxonomy profile and function profile, was significantly associated with serum metabolites (Mantel test, p < 0.05) (Fig. 6a). This indicates that colon microbial metabolism and associated products contributed most to the serum metabolome.

To identify co-variation between the gut microbes and serum metabolites, we used an integrative approach to analyze the colon microbiome (based on the OTU level) and serum metabolome (Fig. 6b). Microbes closely related to host metabolites reflected two categories; (a) the Muribaculaceae family, which was predominant in the S2 stage, and (b) a group of co-occurring microbes (i.e., families Lachnospiraceae and Ruminococcaceae) with abundant metabolic functions (Fig. 6b). As expected, short-chain fatty acid (SCFA)-derived metabolites, including butyl acrylate and butanoate-derived molecules, displayed strong significant positive correlation with the second group of co-occurring microbes (ρ > 0.6). Biomarkers of bamboo-based diet (Fig. 4c), namely 5-amino-6-(D-ribitylamino) uracil, margaric acid, and p-cresol glucuronide, were positively correlated with Muribaculaceae (ρ > 0.6). Notably, some polyunsaturated fatty acids (linoleic acid and arachidonic acid) had weak correlations with the gut microbes (ρ < 0.6) indicating that they were mainly derived from food and lacked a microbial origin.

Multi-omics covering stages from milk diet to bamboo diet revealed that the bamboo rat is well adapted to lignocellulose-based food. The cooperation between their gut microbiomes and their own metabolic systems is displayed in Fig. 7.

In conclusion, we systematically explored the utilization of lignocellulose in bamboo rats for the first time, using a multi-omics approach with data from gut digesta, blood, and tissue samples throughout their different dietary periods. Our study reveals that the diversity of Bacteroidetes involved in the utilization of lignocellulose in bamboo rats is different from ruminants and giant pandas. We comprehensively characterized the bacterial species and functional genes associated with lignocellulose degradation in the intestine of bamboo rats, and highlighted the importance of fatty acid metabolism (i.e., linoleic acid from food and SCFAs from gut microbiome) on a low-nutrient bamboo diet. Further assays such as the isolation of functional bacteria and in vitro or in vivo tests are needed to draw causality relationships. Our study not only provides novel insight into the complex mechanisms for lignocellulose digestion in the non-ruminant bamboo rats, but also provides data to support the future bio-utilization of lignocellulose involving specific bacteria.

All protocols and studies involving animals were conducted in accordance with the guiding principles of the Animal Care and Use Committee of South China Agriculture University (permit number 2021g007).

Data from captive and wild giant pandas, which cover different dietary periods, including 230 16S rRNA gene sequencing datasets (accession no. PRJNA524253 and PRJNA358755) [10, 20] and 88 shotgun metagenomic sequencing datasets (accession no. PRJEB24780, PRJCA000366, and PRJNA356809) [3, 17, 20], were download from the Sequence Read Archive (SRA) database (Table S2).

Barcode and primer sequences were removed from the raw reads using Cutadapt (v1.18) [59]. OTU clustering were performed by usearch (v11, -cluster_otus) [60]. Non-redundant reads were compared with the reference Gold database to remove chimera sequence (usearch, -uchime2_ref). The filter of sequences that were not assigned to bacteria, OTU estimation and taxonomy annotation were achieved by alignment against the SILVA database (v132) through the QIIME platform [61]. RDP classifier with 97% sequence identity was used for taxonomic classification.

Co-occurrence network analysis was performed for the S1 and S2 stages, separately, with co-occurrence patterns between the microbes assessed by calculating the correlations based on the cumulative sum scaling normalized OTU tables. Spearman’s rank coefficients (r) between the OTUs were calculated in a pairwise fashion, and significant and robust correlations (FDR  p < 0.01, |r| ≥ 0.6) were used to construct the networks [64]. The R packages vegan, hmisc and igraph were used for network statistical analyses [65, 66]. Network visualization was performed by Gephi software with the layout algorithm of Fruchterman-Reingold [67].

Raw RNA-seq reads were trimmed to remove adapter sequences and excluded low quality reads with a score cutoff < 30, using fastp (v0.19.7) [68]. Sequences that mapped to microorganisms including bacteria, viruses, archaea, and fungi were filtered. Due to the absence of a high-quality genome for Rhizomys pruinosus, we generated a de novo assembly of all the high-quality reads from the 36 samples using Trinity (v2.3.2), with default parameter (except -min_kmer_cov = 2) [69]. Bowtie (v1.0.0) [70] was used to map the reads from each sample. The bam format files were delivered to Corset (v1.07) [71] to cluster and remove redundant transcripts. Transcripts with maximum expression TMM > 1 were retained. Open reading frames (ORFs) were predicted for all transcripts by Transdecoder (v5.5.0) [72]. Transcripts with poorly supported protein-coding evidence (ORF length < 50 amino acids) were discarded. Completeness of the assembled transcripts was assessed by BUSCO (v3.0.2) based on conserved euarchontoglires and vertebrate orthologs [73]. Transcriptome annotation was performed on the predicted protein sequences using Trinotate (v3.1.1) [74] with default parameters.

We used the R package DESeq2 (v1.30.1) [75] to obtain differentially expressed genes (DEGs) by comparing gene expression values between each group. Genes with a twofold (or greater) change and an adjusted p < 0.05 were considered as differentially expressed. KEGG and GO enrichment analyses of the DEGs were performed using an online resource (http://www.omicshare.com/) with default instructions.

Clean reads were achieved by removing the adapter and low quality sequences (quality score < 30) from the raw reads using fastp (v0.19.7) [68]. We constructed a nucleotide dataset containing the genomes of giant panda (AilMel_1.0), hoary bamboo rat (RhiPru_v1_BIUU), rat (Rnor_6.0), mouse (GRCm38.p6), Cavia procellus (Cavpor3.0), maize (RefGen_v4), and our de novo assembled transcriptomes. The clean reads were filtered by mapping reads to this merged nucleotide dataset using BWA-MEM (v 0.7.17) [76].

Megahit (v1.0.3) was used to assemble the high-quality reads [77]. To improve the assembly result for less abundant species in the gut of bamboo rats, the final metagenomic assembly results were combined with the results of each sample assembly, and the results of the two sample groups (S1 and S2) assemblies. Contigs larger than 500 bp were predicted by Prodigal (v2.6.3) and the generated coding sequences with length < 102 bp were discarded. The initial non-redundant gene sets were clustered by CD-HIT-est (v4.7), with parameter “-c 0.95 -n 10 -G 0 -aS 0.9” [78]. The encoded protein sequences were aligned against the NCBI-NR database (November 2018) on the basis of DIAMOND (v0.8.28.90, diamond blastp -evalue 10 -max-target-seqs 250) by CARMA3 (carma -classify-blast -type p -database p) [79, 80]. The genes classified as “eukaryota” and “unknown” were excluded from the non-redundant gene set, and the final gut microbial gene catalog of bamboo rat included 2.76 M genes.

For functional annotation, the protein sequences were aligned against the KEGG (release 79) [81], eggNOG (v4.5) [82] and CAZy (available November 2018) [83] databases. KEGG and eggNOG annotations were aligned against the corresponding databases using DIAMOND (v0.8.28.90), by taking the best hit with the criteria of E value < 1e−5. Annotation of CAZymes families was aligned against the CAZy database using the hmmscan tool of HMMER (v3.2.1), by taking the best hit with the threshold of E value < 1e−18 and coverage >0.35 [84].

The species origin of the genes coding for CAZymes was identified according to the following pipeline [85]: similarity of the predicted assembled gene segments to known species was estimated by alignment against NCBI-NT (Jul 9, 2021), using BLASTn (v2.11.0, default parameters except that -evalue 1e-10 -outfmt 6 -word_size 16); and result hits >90% identity and >70% alignment coverage were used as the critical value for species assignment. For the genes with multiple best-hits, the species annotation with the highest frequency and the highest average similarity was defined as the annotation of the gene.

Sequenced-based abundance profiling was performed as previously described [86]. For the calculation of relative gene abundance, the high-quality reads from each sample were aligned against the gene catalog by BWA-MEM with the criteria of alignment length ≥50 bp and identity >95%. Copy number of each gene in one sample was defined as the quotient of the number of mapped reads and the length of the gene. The species and function profile were calculated by summing the relative abundance of genes belonging to each category per sample. Overall differences in the genes, CAZymes, KOs, and COGs were evaluated by NMDS or PCoA analysis based on Bray–Curtis dissimilarity values, using the phyloseq and vegan packages in R [66, 87].

Basic metabolomic data handing including statistical analysis, Pattern Hunter analysis, biomarker analysis, and enrichment analysis were performed with MetaboAnalyst (v5.0) [88]. To reduce baseline noise, the features were excluded if their relative standard deviation were higher than 25% in the QC samples or near-constant throughout all samples detected by interquartile range. Data normalization was achieved by log transformation and uv scaling (mean-centered and divided by the standard deviation of each variable). For screening differential metabolites, we considered the variable importance of projection (VIP) value of the first principal component of the partial least-squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA), fold change (FC) and statistical significance of the variables calculated by t-test. Differential metabolites were defined if VIP > 1, FC > 2.0 or FC < 0.5, and p value < 0.05. Correlation analysis based on Spearman correlation coefficient (r) was performed against a given pattern consistent with the dietary types (S1 or S2 stage). The metabolites with significant and robust correlation (FDR p < 0.05, |r| ≥ 0.6) were used for KEGG enrichment analysis. Classical univariate ROC (receiver operating characteristic) curve analysis was performed to generate the ROC curve. The excellent predictive performance was evaluated by calculating the area under the ROC curve (AUC) > 0.9 [89].

Mantel tests were used to quantify the covariation between different measurement types [90]. Bray–Curtis dissimilarity matrices from the OTU and CAZymes profiles, and the Euclidean distance matrix from the serum metabolite profile were obtained based on the corresponding normalized matrix. The paired matrices were then compared using the mantel function implemented the R package vegan [66]. The effect size (mantel statistical r) and significance (p value) of the Mantel test were used to quantify the covariation between the microbial profiles of different intestinal segments (duodenum, cecum, colon) and the serum metabolome.

R package mixOmics [91] was used to integrate and explore the metabolome and microbial taxonomy profile. The different types of omics datasets were processed and normalized before integration. Individual and paired analysis with the sPLS-DA (sparse PLS-DA) model was executed to test whether a set of OTUs or metabolites can distinguish the groups. To circumvent spurious associations, the optimum number of components and variables was determined with 50 × 5-fold cross-validation. The similarity values between pair of variables were calculated by the network function. Variable pairs with a high similarity measure (|ρ| ≥ 0.6) are considered as relevant and used for built networks. Networks displaying correlations between the gut microbiome and serum metabolites were generated using Cytoscape (v3.7.2) [92].

Bacterial features showing differential abundance between the different dietary stages of bamboo rat and giant panda were identified using LEfSe threshold criteria of LDA score > 3.5 and p value < 0.05. The significance in the difference of community compositions between the groups was analyzed with the permutational multivariate analysis of variances (PERMANOVA) method based on 999 permutations. Wilcoxon rank sum tests were performed to assess the differences in the alpha diversity and functional profiles of the gut microbiomes. Pattern hunter analysis with a threshold criterion of Spearman r > 0.6 and FDR p < 0.05 was used for estimating the metabolites associated with dietary stages. Mantel test with 9999 random permutations were used to assess the contribution of the microbiome of different parts of the gut to the serum metabolome, two measurement types were considered correlated if the p value < 0.05, and the absolute value of mantel statistical r indicates the degree of covariation. The p values in the multiple comparisons were adjusted by the Benjamini–Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR) method.



Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41396-022-01247-2.

