Shifts in gut and vaginal microbiomes are associated with cancer recurrence time in women with ovarian cancer







Many studies investigating the human microbiome-cancer interface have focused on the gut microbiome and gastrointestinal cancers. Outside of human papillomavirus driving cervical cancer, little is known about the relationship between the vaginal microbiome and other gynecological cancers, such as ovarian cancer. In this retrospective study, we investigated the relationship between ovarian cancer, platinum-free interval (PFI) length, and vaginal and gut microbiomes. We observed that Lactobacillus-dominated vaginal communities were less common in women with ovarian cancer, as compared to existing datasets of similarly aged women without cancer. Primary platinum-resistance (PPR) disease is strongly associated with survivability under one year, and we found over one-third of patients with PPR (PFI < 6 months, n = 17) to have a vaginal microbiome dominated by Escherichia (>20% relative abundance), while only one platinum super-sensitive (PFI > 24 months, n = 23) patient had an Escherichia-dominated microbiome. Additionally, L. iners was associated with little, or no, gross residual disease, while other Lactobacillus species were dominant in women with >1 cm gross residual disease. In the gut microbiome, we found patients with PPR disease to have lower phylogenetic diversity than platinum-sensitive patients. The trends we observe in women with ovarian cancer and PPR disease, such as the absence of Lactobacillus and presence of Escherichia in the vaginal microbiome as well as low gut microbiome phylogenetic diversity have all been linked to other diseases and/or pro-inflammatory states, including bacterial vaginosis and autoimmune disorders. Future prospective studies are necessary to explore the translational potential and underlying mechanisms driving these associations.

Ovarian cancer is the most deadly gynecological cancer (Siegel, Miller & Jemal, 2019); it kills approximately 14,000 women in the United States annually, accounting for 4.9% of all cancer-related deaths in females in the United States. In the majority of cases (>80%), ovarian cancer is not detected until stage III or later, primarily due to the nonspecific nature of ovarian cancer symptoms and lack of informative biomarkers (Torre et al., 2018; Jacobs & Menon, 2004). Early-stage (I or II) detection results in substantially greater 5-year survivability compared to late-stage diagnosis (III or IV): 70% versus 36% survival rate, respectively (Baldwin et al., 2012), highlighting the importance of discovering early-disease biomarkers.

In this study, we assessed how the vaginal and gut microbiomes vary in ovarian cancer patients with different platinum-sensitivities, with the aim of determining whether the human microbiome can be used as a biomarker of platinum-sensitivity.

Patients, who carried a diagnosis of advanced (Stage III/IV) epithelial ovarian cancer and who were classified as primary platinum-resistant (platinum-free interval (PFI) from completion of primary platinum-based chemotherapy <6 months) or platinum super-sensitive (PFI > 24 months) and were being treated at the Stephenson Cancer Center at the University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, were approached to participate in this study. Patients were approached when they either developed primary platinum-resistant disease or when they were identified as platinum super-sensitive. Patients who had already been diagnosed with primary platinum-resistant disease or as platinum super-responders but had moved on to additional therapy, as well as patients on active anti-cancer therapy or in surveillance, were also included in this study. Patients were excluded if: (1) they were taking antibiotics at the time of sample collection or within 14 days prior to sample collection, or (2) they had active vaginal bleeding or known entero-vaginal fistulae. Samples were also collected from five individuals who were referred for ovarian cancer treatment at the Stephenson Cancer Center but ultimately had benign tumors; these served as a non-chemotherapy exposed control group. Sample collection periods and treatment procedures are outlined in Fig. S1. A brief summary of demographic and medical treatment history for participants in this study (n = 45, median age 62.2, age range 33–83) is provided in Table 1. This study was approved by the University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center Institutional Review Board (February 22nd, 2016, reference #6458) and all participants gave written informed consent for their participation in the study.

Note:

Number of individuals belonging to each study group per clinical/lifestyle variable. The percent of individuals within each study category belonging to each metadata variable are presented in parentheses. Metadata variables that are significantly different between study groups are represented by & and Table S1 presents the p-value for each metadata variable.

All patients were treated initially with platinum and taxane chemotherapy for a planned six to eight cycles. These regimens included paclitaxel and carboplatin given every 21 days, paclitaxel given weekly with every 21st day carboplatin, or intraperitoneal administration of either cisplatin or carboplatin with intravenous and intraperitoneal paclitaxel. In patients with platinum resistant disease, standard of care options after recurrence included pegylated liposomal doxorubicin (PLD), weekly paclitaxel, gemcitabine, topotecan or bevacizumab given as monotherapy or in combination therapy. Patients were also screened for eligibility for clinical trials. Patients with a PFI > 24 months had not recurred at the time of study participation and were followed every 6 months with surveillance of Ca-125 values and exams. For those who had recurred beyond 24 months, treatment options included several platinum-based doublets including carboplatin and PLD given every 28 days, carboplatin and paclitaxel given every 21 days or carboplatin and gemcitabine given on a day one and day eight or day one and day 15 schedule. Each patient completed a minimum of six cycles of treatment and could undergo more cycles as long as the patient was responding and tolerating therapy.

Samples were collected during standard of care exams in the gynecologic oncology clinic at the Stephenson Cancer Center in Oklahoma City, OK. Catch-All Sample Collection Swabs (Epicentre) were used to collect vaginal and fecal samples. Vaginal swabs were collected from three sites per individual: vaginal introitus (VIT), mid-vagina (MDV), and posterior fornix (VPF), and then placed into a dry sample collection tube. Fecal samples were collected via a rectal digital exam, after which any stool collected was placed on a Catch-All swab and placed in a dry collection tube. Two swabs were collected from each site (bilaterally from the vaginal sites and sequentially for the rectal samples). Each participant completed a quality-of-life survey regarding their medical treatment history, antibiotic use within the past year, vitamin consumption, socioeconomic status, and other lifestyle metadata (Table S1).

DNA was extracted from the left-side vaginal swab and first fecal swab from each patient, using the MoBio PowerSoil DNA Isolation Kit (now Qiagen DNeasy PowerSoil Kit), following manufacturer’s protocols with the addition of a ten-minute incubation at 65 °C prior to the initial bead-beating step, as recommended in the Manual of Protocols for the Human Microbiome Project (McInnes & Cutting, 2010). A quantitative PCR (qPCR), using the SYBR Green PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) and primers targeting the V4 region of the bacterial 16S rRNA gene (Caporaso et al., 2011), was conducted; dilutions of Escherichia coli DNA corresponding to known 16S rRNA gene copy numbers were used as quantification standards for the DNA extracts. DNA extracts were amplified in triplicate, using Phusion High-Fidelity DNA polymerase (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and Illumina-compatible primers 515F and 806R (targeting the V4 region of the16S rRNA gene) with error-correcting Golay barcodes incorporated into the 806R reverse primer (Caporaso et al., 2011). PCR products were pooled in equimolar concentrations, purified with the MinElute PCR purification kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA), then size-selected between 300 and 450 basepairs using a PippenPrep, quantified using KAPA Biosystems Illumina library quantification kit, and sequenced across multiple runs of an Illumina MiSeq (500 cycles paired-end sequencing, v2 reagent kit).

AdapterRemoval (v2) (Schubert, Lindgreen & Orlando, 2016) was used to filter out reads with uncalled bases, reads with Phred quality threshold <30, and reads less than 150 bp in length. Quality filtered paired-end reads were merged using AdapterRemoval (v2) (Schubert, Lindgreen & Orlando, 2016) and then demultiplexed with QIIME (v1.9), followed by removal of chimeric sequences and low-abundance (<5 total sequences) reads (Caporaso et al., 2010). The remaining sequences were used for de novo Operational Taxonomic Unit (OTU) clustering with USEARCH (v10) at 97% sequence similarity (Edgar, 2010). Taxonomy was assigned to each OTU representative using the EzBioCloud 16S rRNA gene database (Yoon et al., 2017). The resulting OTU table was rarefied to 9000 reads and downstream analysis was performed in QIIME (v1.9) (Caporaso et al., 2010). The post-rarefaction sample breakdown was: PFI > 24 (n = 23), PFI < 6 (n = 17), and benign (n = 5). Further details of the bioinformatic methods are given in the Supplemental Material.

Phylogenetic diversity and weighted/unweighted UniFrac (Lozupone & Knight, 2005) metrics were generated in QIIME (v1.9) with FastTree2 (Price, Dehal & Arkin, 2010). Tests for significance between study groups for alpha and beta diversity were performed using Kruskal-Wallis and PERMANOVA tests, respectively, in R (Team RC, 2013). Vaginal samples were classified into clusters by the dominant bacterial taxon found in each sample, as determined by Ward hierarchical clustering (Ward, 1963), and visualized as a heatmap using the gplots package in R (Warnes et al., 2016). If there were no dominant bacteria, the sample was classified as diverse. Median-unbiased estimated odds ratios were calculated to determine whether study groups had significantly different odds of dominant bacteria; reported odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals were log-transformed. Kruskal–Wallis tests with a Benjamini and Hochberg false-discovery rate adjustment were used to evaluate differential abundance of individual taxa between study groups. Odds ratios were calculated using epitools (Aragon, 2012) in R. Plots were generated using the ggplot2 (Wickham, 2016) and ColorBrewer (Harrower & Brewer, 2003) packages in R.

Samples from the different vaginal sites (VIT, MDV, VIT) that originated from the same individual showed similar taxonomic beta-diversity profiles (Figs. S2A–S2C). Sequencing failed for at least one of the three vaginal sites of eleven individuals (Supplemental Material), which presented difficulty in analyzing each vaginal site individually as the failed specimens were not limited to only one vaginal site. Due to the similarity in composition between vaginal sites in each individual and the relatively high number of samples which failed sequencing, we concatenated sequencing reads from each individual’s three vaginal samples into a single representative vaginal microbiome sample per individual, and then performed downstream analysis with this single representative sample, unless otherwise noted. Combining vaginal sites for each individual allowed us to retain a sample size of 45. Firmicutes was the most dominant phylum in the vaginal microbiome and it was found at over 50% relative abundance in 40% of individuals (Fig. S3A), while Proteobacteria, Bacteroidetes, and Actinobacteria were the next most abundant phyla and found at >50% relative abundance in the vaginal microbiome of 13.3%, 13.3%, and 6.7% of individuals, respectively. At the genus level, Lactobacillus, Prevotella, Escherichia, Gardnerella, and Streptococcus were the most dominant bacteria and accounted for 57.2% of all reads (Fig. S3B).

We did not observe significant associations between either Prevotella and clinical variables (Table S3, Fig. 2C) or the high diversity community and clinical variables (Table S3, Fig. 2D). However, Prevotella was less common in those with residual disease > 1 cm and those with a history of hormonal disease (Fig. 2C), while a highly diverse vaginal microbiome was more common in women over 60 years old and in patients with a history of hormonal disorders, such as thyroid disease (Fig. 2D); but once again, none of these associations were statistically significant (Table S3, p-value > 0.05).

The gut microbiome was colonized by typical members of the gut microbiome at the phylum (Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes, Proteobacteria) and genus (Bacteroides, Akkermansia, Faecalibacterium, Ruminococcus, and Prevotella) levels (Fig. S5A–S5B). The PFI > 24 months and PFI < 6 months groups were not significantly different with respect to fecal unweighted and weighted UniFrac beta diversity distances as tested through PERMANOVA (Fig. 4, Fig. S6A–S6C); however, similar to the vaginal microbiome samples, there was a small subset of individuals (n = 9) with a unique microbiome signature. Patients with PFI < 6 months individuals had higher odds (log OR = 1.85, 95% CI [−0.85 to 4.497], p-value = 0.12) of being in this unique/outlier fecal microbiome group. These fecal outliers have significantly lower phylogenetic diversity compared to the other fecal samples (p-value = 0.001, Fig. 5A) and have increased abundance of genera belonging to the order Clostridiales (Lachnospira (Kruskal–Wallis p-value = 0.00039), unidentified Ruminococceae genus (Kruskal–Wallis p-value = 0.001337), and Subdoligranulum (Kruskal–Wallis p-value = 0.01121)) (Fig. S7). Of the six platinum-resistant patients in this outlier subset, two also had Escherichia-dominated vaginal communities. Eight of the nine patients in this subgroup reported consuming antibiotics within the past 6 months but this was not a significantly greater proportion of individuals with recent antibiotic consumption compared to individuals outside this fecal outlier subgroup (log OR = 0.35, 95% CI [−1.44 to 3.05], p-value = 0.48).

Overall, patients with platinum-resistant disease had lower fecal phylogenetic diversity compared to patients with platinum-sensitive disease, but the difference was not significant (Fig. 5B, p-value = 0.18). Regardless of PFI, patients with ovarian cancer had significantly higher relative abundance of Prevotella in the gut microbiome compared to benign individuals (p-value = 0.028, Fig. S8). Outside of the above-mentioned associations, there were no other significant associations between the gut microbiome and platinum sensitivity or other health/lifestyle variables.

One of the major findings of this study is the inverse relationship between a Lactobacillus-dominant vaginal microbiome and ovarian cancer. In our study, fewer women than expected (24.4%) have Lactobacillus-dominated vaginal communities compared to similarly aged, healthy women (47.2%) from other studies (p-value = 0.037) (Brotman et al., 2014a; Nené et al., 2019). Lactobacillus dominance is not found in any of the Black (n = 2) or Native American (n = 4) women in our study but only eleven of the 39 white women have Lactobacillus-dominated vaginal microbiomes; therefore, ethnicity was not a driving factor in Lactobacillus abundance in this study (p-value = 0.27). These results suggest the possibility that the low abundance of Lactobacillus may be indicative of a broader relationship between ovarian cancer and the vaginal microbiome. This finding corroborates a previous study that also observed a reduced frequency of the Lactobacillus-dominated vaginal microbiome in women with ovarian cancer, particularly in women under 50 (Nené et al., 2019). A partial explanation may be that Lactobacillus-dominance, while typically viewed as a healthy state in the female genital tract, is a non-resilient ecology prone to disruption by variable factors, including changes in glycogen availability (Mirmonsef et al., 2014; Mirmonsef et al., 2015), antibiotic exposure (Melkumyan et al., 2015), and shifts in hormone abundance induced during stress responses (Witkin & Linhares, 2017). While we observed no statistical relationships between Lactobacillus dominance and platinum-sensitivity or other lifestyle/medical variables, there was a nearly significant decrease in Lactobacillus-dominance associated with taking antibiotics within the past month (p-value = 0.0515), as well as a positive association between Lactobacillus-dominance and microbial cell density (R2 = 0.278).

Prevotella is enriched in both the platinum-resistant and platinum-sensitive study groups, compared to the benign group (p-value = 0.028). Prevotella is typically only found at high abundance in the gut microbiomes of non-industrial, traditional populations (Ley, 2016) and it is associated with consumption of a plant-rich diet (Ley, 2016). Yet, some strains of Prevotella are found in the gut microbiomes of industrial populations and are linked to pro-inflammatory states in the gut microbiome (Larsen, 2017; Scher et al., 2013). Similar to decreased Lactobacillus in the vaginal microbiome of patients with ovarian cancer, the relatively high abundance of Prevotella in the gut microbiome of women with ovarian cancer indicates a notable shift in microbial composition. Studies with larger control groups are necessary to address this relationship.

Our results demonstrate an association between the vaginal and gut microbiomes and platinum-sensitivity in women with ovarian cancer. Escherichia-dominant vaginal communities are significantly more likely to be present in patients with platinum-resistant tumors but the explanatory mechanism for this relationship is currently unclear. Lab contamination and/or collection methodology does not appear to play a role in vaginal Escherichia abundance, which indicates that finding Escherichia at high relative abundance in patients with PFI < 6 months is a biological trend.

Our results call for deeper investigation into the relationship between the vaginal and gut microbiomes and ovarian cancer. A future avenue for research is a prospective, longitudinal study that tracks how the vaginal and gut microbiomes change throughout the course of ovarian cancer therapy, with an aim to disentangle how Escherichia-abundance impacts response to chemotherapy. Similarly, a study tracking Lactobacillus abundance in an aged-matched, lifestyle-matched cohort of women with and without ovarian cancer may provide insights into how microbial risk factors impact occurrence and outcomes of ovarian cancer. This work must also investigate why high L. iners abundance is found nearly exclusively in cases with < 1 cm or no gross residual disease, while other Lactobacillus species are found in cases with > 1 cm residual disease. Finally, ovarian cancer microbiome research also presents an opportunity for microbial metagenomics and metabolomics to provide a fuller picture of the vaginal and gut microbiome ecosystems in health and disease.

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

David Jacobson performed the experiments, analyzed the data, prepared figures and/or tables, authored or reviewed drafts of the paper, and approved the final draft.

Kathleen Moore conceived and designed the experiments, performed the experiments, authored or reviewed drafts of the paper, and approved the final draft.

Camille Gunderson conceived and designed the experiments, performed the experiments, authored or reviewed drafts of the paper, and approved the final draft.

Michelle Rowland performed the experiments, authored or reviewed drafts of the paper, and approved the final draft.

Rita Austin performed the experiments, authored or reviewed drafts of the paper, and approved the final draft.

Tanvi Prasad Honap analyzed the data, prepared figures and/or tables, authored or reviewed drafts of the paper, and approved the final draft.

Jiawu Xu performed the experiments, authored or reviewed drafts of the paper, and approved the final draft.

Christina Warinner conceived and designed the experiments, authored or reviewed drafts of the paper, and approved the final draft.

Krithivasan Sankaranarayanan conceived and designed the experiments, authored or reviewed drafts of the paper, and approved the final draft.

Cecil M. Lewis Jr conceived and designed the experiments, analyzed the data, prepared figures and/or tables, authored or reviewed drafts of the paper, and approved the final draft.

The following information was supplied relating to ethical approvals (i.e., approving body and any reference numbers):

The University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center Institutional Review Board approved carry out of this study (Reference #6458).

The following information was supplied regarding the deposition of DNA sequences:

16S V4 rRNA sequences are available at NCBI SRA: SAMN16074939 to SAMN16075126.

The following information was supplied regarding data availability:

16S V4 rRNA sequences are available at NCBI: project number PRJNA662091.

Bioinformatic scripts for processing the 16S rRNA V4 data are available in the Supplemental File.

