Understanding the Complexities and Changes of the Astronaut Microbiome for Successful Long-Duration Space Missions

During space missions, astronauts are faced with a variety of challenges that are unique to spaceflight and that have been known to cause physiological changes in humans over a period of time. Several of these changes occur at the microbiome level, a complex ensemble of microbial communities residing in various anatomic sites of the human body, with a pivotal role in regulating the health and behavior of the host. The microbiome is essential for day-to-day physiological activities, and alterations in microbiome composition and function have been linked to various human diseases. For these reasons, understanding the impact of spaceflight and space conditions on the microbiome of astronauts is important to assess significant health risks that can emerge during long-term missions and to develop countermeasures. Here, we review various conditions that are caused by long-term space exploration and discuss the role of the microbiome in promoting or ameliorating these conditions, as well as space-related factors that impact microbiome composition. The topics explored pertain to microgravity, radiation, immunity, bone health, cognitive function, gender differences and pharmacomicrobiomics. Connections are made between the trifecta of spaceflight, the host and the microbiome, and the significance of these interactions for successful long-term space missions.

Humans have been exploring space for the last sixty-five years and, with the creation of the International Space Station, have been living and working in space continuously for the past 21 years. Astronauts endure many physiological and psychological changes while in space because of altered gravity, radiation, and confinement, to name but a few factors. While some spaceflight side effects are well known, such as bone loss [1], muscle atrophy [2], altered ocular structure [3], cognitive decline [4], fluid redistribution [5] and immune dysregulation [6], others, such as the taxonomic and functional changes of the astronaut microbiome, have been less studied, with the impact on astronaut health even less so. Understanding how the human microbiome adapts to space travel and how this influences astronaut health, pre-, post- and in-flight, is essential in reaching our goal of long-duration human exploration in low Earth orbit (LEO) and beyond. This review will discuss changes in the astronaut microbiome as a result of spaceflight (and other stressors pre- and post-flight), how these changes may impact astronaut health, and the resulting consequences for long-duration spaceflight. We also provide recommendations for industry and government entities designing future manned missions to the Moon and Mars on how to incorporate microbiome data into their planning and ways in which the microbiome can be targeted or manipulated to ensure successful long-duration human exploration beyond low Earth orbit.

Our body consists of trillions of bacteria that are on par with the number of human cells we have [7]. The gastrointestinal tract (GIT) alone harbors 100 trillion bacteria, consisting of 1000 different species, 7000 strains and 3.3 million non-redundant microbial genes [8,9,10]. The skin bacterial communities on a typical hand consist of >150 species, with only 13% similarity amongst different individuals [11]. Other sites have simpler bacterial communities, like the healthy vagina, which is mainly composed of Lactobacillus [12]. Human breast tissue, once thought of as sterile, is now accepted as having a stable microbial population [13,14]. These microbial communities, found in and outside our body, are referred to as the “human microbiome”, a term first coined in 2001 by Joshua Lederberg to refer to the “ecological community of commensal, symbiotic and pathogenic microorganisms that literally share our body space” [15]. These microorganisms consist of archaea, eukaryotes (fungi and protists) and viruses, with bacteria making up the majority of organisms present (99%) [10]. While the terms “human microbiome” and “human microbiota” are often used interchangeably, the latter refers to the microbial taxa associated with humans, while the former refers to the collection of microbial taxa and their genes [16].

The microbial communities that colonize various parts of our body are important in promoting health, by synthesizing vitamins the host cannot make, salvaging energy from indigestible compounds, creating a competitive environment to prevent pathogen colonization, promoting maturation and regulation of the immune system, contributing to vascular development and angiogenesis or enhancing the integrity of the epithelial barrier [17,18,19,20,21,22,23]. These benefits are achieved by a delicate balance of commensals, symbionts and pathobionts that collectively make up one’s microbiome. If this balance is disrupted even slightly, a breakdown in homeostasis will occur, leading to disease [24]. Microbial differences have been documented between healthy and diseased individuals with periodontitis [25], inflammatory bowel disease [26], psoriasis [27], asthma [28], bacterial vaginosis [29], colorectal cancer [30] and breast cancer [31]. These observed microbial differences are not simply a consequence of the diseased state creating an environment that selects for certain bacteria, as studies have shown that healthy animals transplanted with feces from those with obesity [32], colitis [33] and colorectal cancer [34] then go on to develop disease. Shifts in bacterial profiles not only have consequences at the site of origin but can have distal site effects as well. For example, alterations in the gut microbiota can have effects on the brain [35,36], liver [37,38], and pancreas [39], while microbial shifts in the oral cavity can be detrimental to cardiovascular health [40].

Long-term spaceflight and especially deep-space exploratory missions represent an extreme environment for humans that demands adaptations to both physical and psychological stressors (Figure 1) [41]. As such, a large part of spaceflight research focuses on the effects of space exposure on humans, with the aim to elucidate physiological, psychological and behavioral health risks and the necessary solutions to combat them [42]. Much of the existing knowledge about spaceflight hazards derives from crewed missions in LEO, such as those onboard the International Space Station (ISS), and analog missions on Earth. Additionally, a significant amount of data have been generated by experiments carried out in ground-based facilities, simulating different space conditions. This information, however, may provide inaccurate estimates into the risks connected to deep-space missions (outside LEO), which involve more time spent in space during a single mission than that hitherto experienced by astronauts (i.e., on average 7 months). Moreover, deep-space exploration will venture beyond the protective effects of Earth’s geomagnetic field; therefore, crewmembers on upcoming missions to the Moon, Mars and beyond will be exposed to significantly higher doses of cosmic radiation.

The global radiation dose for astronauts is affected by galactic cosmic rays (GCRs) originating from outside the solar system, which include high atomic number and energy (HZE) ions and high-intensity solar particle events (SPEs) that produce pulses of heavy ion and energetic proton radiation [43]. It is estimated that a one-year stay on the lunar surface would result in absorbed doses for crews in the range from 100 to 120 mGy (milligray), whereas during a three-year Mars mission, transit and stay included, the values would increase to 450 mGy [44]. In comparison, the predicted doses for 6- to 12-month ISS missions range instead from roughly 30 to 120 mGy [44]. For reference, 4.5 Gy has been indicated as the LD50 value for human cells (median lethal dose) [45]. During SPEs, astronauts may additionally be exposed to an extremely high dose of protons (i.e., up to 1 Gy or more) that could lead to acute radiation sickness (ARS) [46,47]. Although radiation derived from SPEs is effectively absorbed by the shielding material of a spacecraft or well-designed spacesuit, not all SPEs are predictable and can therefore pose a real threat to astronauts, especially during planetary extravehicular activity (EVA), which would take place more frequently than during a 6-month ISS stay [48].

The consequences of chronic exposure to radiation, and to CGR in particular, is concerning, due to the high energy, high penetrability and ionizing nature of their most hazardous components, the HZE particles [49]. These particles are so penetrating that shielding can only partially protect against exposure and the large emission of secondary neutrons that may follow, posing an additional hazard to the crew [50]. The types of radiation encountered in space are different from terrestrial radiation, such as X-rays and gamma rays, and induce distinct patterns of DNA double-strand breaks and disease outcomes, resulting in epigenetic changes and persistently high levels of oxidative damage and tissue inflammation following exposure [51]. This is relevant because of the association of oxidative stress with the etiology of several human diseases, including cancer, cardiovascular and neurodegenerative disorders (e.g., altered sensory perception, neurovestibular problems, etc. [52]), gastrointestinal diseases [53], and the possible correlation between spaceflight and the onset of a number of diseases normally related to aging [54]. Exposure to space radiation, especially when considering that heavy ions are more effective per unit dose in causing solid cancer compared to gamma-rays [55], can therefore have a detrimental impact on the quality of life during and post flight. Visual disturbances appear to also be correlated to radiation exposure, as indicated by reports from past Apollo, Skylab and MIR missions where astronauts experienced flashes of light moving across their visual field, possibly due to alteration in perception caused by ionizing radiation [56]. An additional aspect to consider when assessing radiation-related risks are the non-targeted effects (NTEs) of radiation, which increase biological effectiveness for low doses of high linear energy transfer radiation (LET), such as HZE particles, and may lead to alterations in cell signaling and/or genomic instability of cell progeny [55,57].

Along with radiation, microgravity—a condition in which the gravity level is almost zero but not neutralized—represents another major health hazard related to spaceflight. While astronauts mostly experience microgravity during spaceflight and onboard the ISS, they do experience intermediate periods of hypergravity (e.g., 3–6 G) during launch and ascent and upon descent back through the Earth’s atmosphere [58]. Additionally, various levels of altered gravity are found on other planetary bodies, such as on the Earth’s Moon—one-sixth gravity (G)—and Mars—one-third gravity (G)—(hypogravity) [42].

Spaceflight and ground-based analog experiments have shown that altered gravity, as well as the transition through various levels of gravity, subject biological systems (i.e., humans, animals, plants) to varying levels of stress with negative consequences. Specifically, microgravity can induce cellular and molecular alterations with changes to the genome, epigenome, and proteome, connected with a range of pathologies [42]. In humans, exposure to microgravity can influence several body systems such as the neurovestibular, cardiovascular, musculoskeletal, bone metabolic and immune-hematological system [59,60]. For example, altered body fluid distribution occurs during microgravity and this headward shift of fluids, including blood, leads to a compensatory cardiovascular system change, with increased intracranial pressure, cerebrospinal pressure or inner ear fluid pressure, decreased leg volume, puffiness in the face and even long-term ocular damage [61]. According to the “fluid shift” theory, this increased pressure is the root of “space motion sickness”, a set of symptoms that impair operational performance of 60–80% of astronauts. Additional interconnected abnormalities include morphological changes in the white and grey matter of the brain following long-duration spaceflight (average of 171 days), which have been attributed to the structural neuroplasticity of the sensorimotor system, in an effort to adapt motor strategies to maintain physiological homeostasis and ensure proper behavioral output in space [3]. Lack of gravitational loading also results in muscle atrophy, especially in the lower extremities, accompanied by functional and structural alterations. While muscular loss has been linked to reduced muscular activity and hypokinesia due to limited movement inside the spacecraft, structural changes seem to be related to both a higher level of muscle protein degradation enzymes and a decrease in protein synthesis [59]. Extended exposure to microgravity also results in bone loss due to insufficient bone formation compared with bone resorption, and this reduction in bone mass and strength during spaceflight increases the risk of bone fracture, even upon return to Earth [62]. As reported for radiation, similarities have been observed between the adaptive response to microgravity in humans and aging, since both prompt the decline of almost every body system [5]. Though several phenotypic changes resemble those determined by aging under standard gravitational conditions, the magnitude and speed of some processes (bone loss, among others) is far greater (i.e., 1% loss/month) than that which is typically seen during aging. Hence, this is of critical concern when considering the effects of long-duration spaceflight [1].

In addition to the aforementioned stressors, several psychological and social issues have been demonstrated to affect the crew during extended separation from society in a closed and confined environment. They may include homesickness and loneliness, apathy, interpersonal stressors, and sexual attraction/tension [63]. A constricted living environment can lead to isolation, loss of spatial capacity, increased anxiety and depression, which can be accompanied by symptoms such as hallucinations, reduced consciousness and poor bodily coordination [64,65]. Additional psychological triggers range from external physical hazards such as space debris and vehicular malfunction to gravitational shifts and outer space radiation [65]. The ability of ionizing radiation to modulate the psycho-emotional status and, specifically, to exert an anxiogenic effect on the central nervous system was shown in rats exposed to doses related to deep-space missions [66]. In addition, diet has a critical role in both the physiological and the psychological health of space travelers. The spacecraft environment, in particular the lack of ultraviolet exposure, increased carbon dioxide levels, the spacesuit atmosphere, etc., can affect nutrition requirements for long-duration missions. Crewmembers may even experience a reduction in their food intake, dubbed “anorexia in space” which may be linked to microgravity, alterations in the circadian rhythm (continuous light environment of space missions) and “menu fatigue”, which not only affects appetite but the proper functioning of the gastrointestinal system [64]. Hence, nutritious and palatable food is necessary not only to meet nutritional requirements and avoid deficiency diseases, but also to keep astronauts psychologically healthy [67].

Excessive exposure to noise, mainly due to equipment and crew activities, may represent another stressor compromising well-being as well as sleeping patterns [68]. As a matter of fact, the duration of an astronaut’s sleep is reportedly reduced to around 6 to 6.5 h/day during missions [69]. Psychosomatic disorders (e.g., headaches, fear of illness, gastroenteric problems), consisting of distressing physical symptoms which are not fully explained by a real physical condition, have also been reported from space [64]. Similarly, post-return personality changes and psychiatric problems have been observed in space travelers [70]. Other stress factors that may arise in a multicultural crew are related to language barriers, stereotypes and cultural misunderstandings [67]. Additionally, new psychological stressors could appear in deep-space missions that were not present in missions closer to Earth, and already-known issues could be intensified, leading to stress and problematic behaviors that may interfere with a crew’s productivity and relationships [71]. For example, during a multi-year spaceflight such as that required for a mission to Mars, the crew would be confronted with no access to most of the mitigation strategies currently in place on the ISS, such as real-time communications with family and ground-based mission control and the view of Earth, that contribute to their psychological well-being [48]. Based on the “Earth-out-of-view phenomenon”, humans traveling in outer space might start feeling unconnected to Earth and to family and friends [72]. On the other hand, delays in crew–ground communication (up to 22 min on Mars) would require astronauts to operate more autonomously from mission control [73]. Furthermore, people on a Mars expedition will need to depend on local resources to generate water and fuel for the return home and thus, the psychology of this dependance is an important issue to be considered [70]. In this context, a greater likelihood of withdrawal, territorial behavior and asthenia may occur [74]. The latter is a problematic syndrome quite commonly observed during long-duration missions that produces fatigue, irritability, attention and concentration difficulties, along with heightened perceptual sensitivities, physical weakness, sleep and appetite problems, etc. [64,75].

Psychological stress, circadian rhythms, and sleep are key factors strongly connected with one another, as well as with the immune system. This is especially relevant since microbial infection is another challenge facing space travelers. The isolation of opportunistic and pathogenic microorganisms from spacecraft and space stations has been frequently reported [76,77,78] and several studies have demonstrated that spaceflight affects both the immune system (i.e., immune dysregulation) [79] and microbial physiology (i.e., enhanced virulence, biofilm formation and antibiotics resistance) [80], leading to increased risk of disease [81]. Additionally, the proximity of crewmembers to one another in the spacecraft can promote the spread of secondary infections [82]. Due to limited access to medical care during a mission, any possibility of infection should be prevented to ensure the health and safety of the astronauts and to maximize the success rate of the space mission [83].

While some of the changes induced by exposure to space conditions (e.g., reduction in some motor functions) reportedly disappear shortly or a few months after the end of LEO missions [85], it should be noted that risk assessments and mitigation for lunar visit/habitation, deep-space journey/habitation and planetary missions remain uncertain [86]. If certain medical risks, such as nutrition, infection, psychological impact and even death, appear to be common to all mission profiles, other risks are actually unique to individual scenarios [87]. For instance, risks associated with lunar missions—e.g., lunar surface operations, a lunar outpost, etc.—along with radiation, microgravity and the aforementioned psychological issues, also include exposure to hazardous materials such as rocket fuel, lunar dust (regolith), micrometeorite impact damage, and extremes of temperature [87]. Similarly, perchlorates in the Martian dust would be a concern in terms of contamination of the habitats and of inhalation of harmful particles, posing a great risk to the lung already affected by altered pulmonary deposition induced by microgravity [88]. The optimization of current and novel countermeasures will therefore be critical.

It is apparent that the space environment imposes several challenges to human physiology. Specific space environment factors, such as microgravity and radiation, are thought to also induce changes in microbiome composition (i.e., dysbiosis) [89], which may alter host–microbe interactions and adversely affect immune function and metabolism, thereby representing a risk to astronaut health, especially during long-term spaceflight missions.

A list of reviewed microbiome studies pertaining to spaceflight as well as ground-based simulations (conducted through to 2021) is provided in Table 1.

The gut microbiome, often described as the “virtual organ of the human body” [104], will play a crucial and significant role in maintaining astronaut health during space travel, as it does for humans on Earth. High microbiome diversity and richness are generally considered a hallmark of a healthy gut ecosystem; however, there is still no consensus on the actual health-related values [105]. Healthy adult humans characteristically harbor more than 1000 species of bacteria, with Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes being the dominant phyla [106]. While Bacteroidetes (recently renamed as Bacteroidota [107]) are connected with immunomodulation and augmented immune reactions through synthesis of cytokines, Firmicutes are involved in the metabolism, nutrition, and regulation of hunger and satiety, via short-chain fatty acid (SCFA) synthesis [108]. Exposure to various stressors can change the stability of the gut microbiota, impacting its composition and functions, and increasing the relative abundance of potentially harmful bacteria (e.g., opportunistic pathogens) [109,110,111,112,113].

The combination of space stressors can also impact the gut metabolome, as observed by Casero et al. (2017), where continuous exposure to space-type radiation led to functional shifts in metabolic pathways dominated by microbiome-specific enzymatic reactions [93]. Changes in small-molecule markers of microbial metabolism were also observed in the “Twins Study”, along with particularly low levels of metabolites with anti-inflammatory activity [97]. In this context, looking into the metabolome of the gut microbiota and its modulation as a result of the spaceflight environment may be promising to aid the development of countermeasures that include the use of prebiotics, probiotics and postbiotics to prevent and mitigate pathological effects in astronauts [112].

Microbiome communities residing in the nose and oral cavities and on the skin have also been investigated in relation to spaceflight-induced compositional and functional changes. Located at the entrance of the upper respiratory tract, the nasal cavity and oropharynx serve as the physical barrier to the invasion of pathogens as well as habitats for a large number of commensals and opportunistic pathogens that live in the host as part of the normal microfloa [103]. In the skin, most resident microbes behave as commensal or mutualistic under steady-state conditions and play important roles in the maturation and homeostasis of cutaneous immunity [120]. The disruption of the balance of the microbiota associated with the human respiratory tract and to the skin may result in an increased susceptibility to infection and to the overgrowth of pathogens (Figure 2). On that basis, surveillance of the microbiota structure may be crucial to counteract significant health risks during long-term flight and to guide medical treatment. Moreover, since astronaut skin is the primary source of spacecraft surface contamination, monitoring skin alterations and alterations in the skin-associated microbiome is key to managing astronaut health as well as in the maintenance of space stations, spaceships and spacecraft equipment [121].

To date, studies have revealed modifications in the skin, oral and nasal microbiome as a consequence of both spaceflight conditions and confinement in ground-based experiments. Changes at the individual level, and specifically an increase in a microbiome’s richness and diversity—i.e., alpha diversity—were reported during spaceflight in studies of the saliva microbiome [100,101], but changes at the populational level were not detected. By contrast, a decrease in alpha diversity in in-flight saliva samples was indicated by an earlier report [99], but this trend was not consistent across all four astronauts involved in the study. Mixed responses were detected in nasal and skin samples [98,103]. Individual differences in the reaction of the skin microbiota to spaceflight may be attributed to the composition of the microbial communities, but also to skin-specific properties such as moisture and pH and/or astronauts’ personal hygiene habits [98]. Concerning the nasal microbiome, changes were observed in relation to both spaceflight [98] and ground-based confined experiments [103], suggesting that the nasal flora of all crewmembers may evolve in the same direction. Microbial transfer between individuals could play a role in it, suggesting that the microbiota structure and health of the respiratory tract could be affected by living in a closed environment for a long time [103]. Aspects including microbial interactions and exchange of microbiota within the crew or with the environment have not yet been fully elucidated and further studies will therefore need to be conducted.

Space microbiology studies have suggested that microgravity is a dominant factor influencing bacterial growth kinetics and cell behavior, and that space radiation may be responsible for increased mutation rates in microbes [129]. Several in vitro studies with bacteria have reported significant in-flight responses that included increased growth rate and cell concentration [130]. Other studies indicated that microgravity is associated with changes in gene expression and virulence factors and can promote antibiotic resistance and elevated transfer rates of genetic material between cells [131,132]. Microgravity-induced changes also include increased membrane integrity and differential secondary metabolite production [133].

More studies will be needed to further our understanding of space environment-driven microbiome changes during long missions, to clarify whether the effects on communities are potentiated or dampened and what the consequences are for the host. In order to obtain a realistic overview of host–microbiome relationships, investigations should not be limited to disease-causing microbes that represent a potential risk to astronauts but shall also include mutualistic and commensal microbes. This can be crucial to learn what drives microbial fitness in the spaceflight environment and how to maintain a healthy symbiotic homeostasis [133].

Food intake is strictly connected to the composition and the functionality of the microbiome. Research has shown that changes in the diet are followed by rearrangement of the gut flora that can occur within just 24 h of initiation and have secondary effects on host immunologic and metabolic markers [157]. As such, protein consumption positively correlates with overall microbial diversity, with animal protein intake leading to increased abundance of bile-tolerant organisms such as Bacteroides, Alistipes, and Bilophila [158], whereas a diet rich in fibers tends to increase the abundance of bifidobacteria and lactic acid bacteria, known for their anti-inflammatory properties [118]. Along with the type of food, the food’s form (raw or cooked) appears to influence diet-driven host–microbial interactions, with cooking impacting the gut microbiome differently on meat versus plant-based (e.g., tuber) diets [159]. Additionally, multiple compounds with known antimicrobial effects are significantly decreased in cooked food, thus limiting their bioactivity [160]. The close relationship between diet, the gut microbiome, and health suggests that modulations in the diet can have a beneficial or detrimental impact on our health, depending on the relative identity and abundance of constituent bacterial population [161].

Providing the crewmembers with a balanced diet, possibly delivered through BLSSs and rich in fibers, is therefore of great importance to help prevent nutritional imbalances as well as to preserve a healthy gut microbiome. Due to individual differences, personalized nutritional approaches have been suggested [171]. Furthermore, probiotics-based countermeasures via the supplementation of given bacteria strains (e.g., Akkermansia, Bifidobacterium, etc.) [98,172,173] or the administration of SCFA-producing next-generation probiotics (Faecalibacterium, Roseburia, etc.) [174], have additionally been proposed.

As we have emphasized throughout the review, the human microbiome contributes to overall health through different routes, including protection against pathogens, maintenance of the immune system, proper intestinal function, and contribution to metabolic functions [79,106,175]. Competitive exclusion of pathogenic bacteria is one of the main functions exerted by the microbiome communities residing in various anatomic sites of the human body. Antagonistic interactions play a pivotal role in determining the composition of a functional antimicrobial barrier, by means of strategies that include production of antibiotics, secretion of digestive enzymes, and quorum sensing [176]. Accordingly, the establishment of new microbes can be prevented through competition for shared nutrients and other resources, with endogenous bacteria [177]. Moreover, microbial communities help strengthen mucosal barrier function and can stimulate epithelial cells to produce antimicrobial peptides and proteins (e.g., bacteriocins), thereby killing pathogenic competitors and preventing translocation [173,178,179]. In view of this, particular concern has been generated by the documented changes in the astronauts’ microbiome [97,98,100,101] and their potential effects on astronaut health and performance, in conjunction with immune system dysregulations and increased risk of pathogenic infections during spaceflight [103,180]—e.g., transient or permanent governance of pathogenic/opportunistic bacterial species, e.g., Staphylococcus spp. [181] along with enhanced HGT and decreased susceptibility of pathogens to antimicrobial agents [80]. As a matter of fact, crewmembers do experience adverse medical events of varying severity during spaceflight missions, related to infectious diseases, which include cold sores, skin and urinary tract infections, lymphadenitis and pharyngitis [182].

Although microbiome changes generally seem to rebound after returning to Earth [97], the entity and persistence of alterations induced by longer space missions (e.g., deep-space missions) and the associated risk of increased severity of infection, disease onset, and mental health impairments, are yet to be fully assessed. In the long run, compositional changes in the gut flora might even predispose astronauts to more prolonged-development diseases such as IBS, autoimmunity and even cancer [182]. The risks associated with these factors should therefore be explored in more depth.

Understanding the combined effects of spaceflight on the immune system is significant for the health and safety of crewmembers and is an important area of interest as long-term exploration flights become more common. The intense conditions that astronauts encounter in space, including radiation exposure, microgravity, changes in diet, disruption of circadian rhythm and stress, all have an effect on the immune system (Figure 2) [6,215,216,217,218,219,220]. A dysregulated immune response has been well-established during spaceflight, with many changes to immune cell parameters, such as in the distribution, function and proliferation of leukocytes [215,216,221,222,223,224,225,226,227,228,229], cytokine profiles [97,217,219,221,222,229,230,231,232,233] and neutrophil [221,234], monocyte [232,235] and NK cell function [236,237,238]. As discussed earlier, microbial physiology changes as a result of spaceflight, with one such change being increased virulence in some pathogens grown in space [139,144,239,240], which is problematic considering the dysregulated immune responses astronauts experience during spaceflight [6,97]. However, the observation that a vaccine administered in space was able to stimulate an appropriate immune response is promising for long-term missions [97]. The effect of gut microbiome dysbiosis is an essential factor to consider when reflecting on the immunity of astronauts as the microbiome has essential roles in the development and function of both the innate immune system—including regulating neutrophils [241], and macrophages [242,243], and the adaptive immune system—including influence on the function and repertoire of B cells [244], the induction of intestinal IgA [245], the differentiation of Tfh cells [246,247], and transition of antigen-activated CD8 T cells into memory cells [248]. Although there are variations in the results due to different circumstances such as spaceflight duration, sample retrieval and experimental protocols, overall, the generation, function or proportion of immune cells are affected during spaceflight, which disrupts the homeostasis required for an appropriate immune response [97,222,228].

Many immune responses and resulting medical issues encountered by astronauts during spaceflight could be linked to abnormal microbiomes, and further studies should be conducted to gain insight into the mechanisms of these microbiomes in human health and immunity.

The microbiome of the built environment is the collective of microbial inhabitants in human-constructed environments [288]. The indoor microbiome is infrastructurally unique and differs between hospitals, offices, classrooms, and homes influenced by variations in material design, ventilation, temperature, humidity, pressure, and occupants [289,290,291,292,293]. Humans leave behind a microbial footprint through shedding, exhalation, and waste, accounting for approximately 40% of the microbes found in buildings [294,295]. It has been shown that less urbanized and more confined environments with reduced outside contact are even more overshadowed by human-associated microbes [296]. The ISS is one such confined environment, a unique habitat where the only exchange with the “outside” comes from the turnover in crew members, cargo capsules and supplies, with crew members being the main source of the ISS built environment microbial community [98,99,297,298]. Of the most abundant microbes catalogued on the ISS are those pertaining to skin, respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts [98,99,299]. These include Staphylococcus, Propionibacterium, Actinobacterium, Enterobacterium, Corynebacterium, Streptococcus, Acinetobacter, and Pantoea, along with various bacteria belonging to the phylum Firmicutes [78,98,297,299,300]. The ISS microbiome has also been observed to change over time in accordance with flight and exchange of crewmembers suggesting that temporal changes in the built environment may be due to different occupants on board [297]. Earth-based studies in the inflatable lunar/Mars habitat mimicked this trend where microbial communities during complete vacancy at day 0 differed from those seen at day 30 post human occupancy [301]. Although there is ample evidence that the human microbiome can influence the built environment, microbial transfer is not unidirectional. Early microbial studies in Russian astronauts aboard the Salyut and Mir orbital stations, revealed an interchange of gut microbiota between crew members [122,302]. With new metagenomic technologies, a direct transmission between ISS surfaces and the astronaut microbiome has been observed, through either single-nucleotide polymorphism, haplotype matching and/or genomic read recruiting [303,304]. This two-way microbial transfer between the ISS environment and the astronaut suggests ISS occupants can not only help build the microbiome of the ISS, but also uptake it as their own.

The astronaut microbiota heavily contributes to the built environment of the ISS. Once transferred from host to environment, stressors such as microgravity, radiation, and confinement can alter pathogenicity, making it an infection risk for crew members should it be transferred to them from the environment. It is therefore vital to continually monitor microbial pathogenesis on the ISS to avoid crew member infections and continue studying the built environment for optimization for future space travel.

Astronaut bone loss during space flight has been an unresolved medical concern since the 1970s. Pre- and post-flight measurements of bone density in astronauts quantified with absorptiometry and quantitative computed tomography have shown an overall bone loss rate of 1–1.5% per month with areas of the lumbar spine, pelvis, and lower limbs contributing most heavily to the decline in bone density (Figure 2) [340,341,342,343,344,345]. Measurements of volumetric bone mineral density in astronaut tibias after spaceflight showed a 5-percentile reduction that is comparable to average bone loss occurring in men over twenty years and 6 times faster than the accelerated bone loss that is often seen in menopausal women [346]. These findings have made bone loss treatment and prevention a high priority for astronaut health and safety.

Gut microbiome dysbiosis has been linked to bone disease in humans with osteoporosis and osteopenia, where diseased patients showed higher microbiome diversity than their healthy counterparts, and the severity of bone loss is positively correlated with higher microbiome diversity [386,387]. Gut microbiome dysbiosis can lead to inflammation followed by intestinal permeability that allows the gut microbiome to enter circulation [388,389]. Microbes in circulation stimulate an immune response from immune cells that recognize lipopolysaccharides using Toll-like receptors. Once recognized, the immune cells then activate to produce cytokines that promote maturation of TH17 cells in the bone marrow which then stimulate osteoclastogenesis and bone resorption [390,391,392]. As we have mentioned, the stressors of spaceflight can stimulate astronaut microbiome dysbiosis [110,111,217,393,394]. One such change during spaceflight is the decrease in genera with anti-inflammatory properties in the gut microbiome and the increase in Parasutterella, known to be associated with chronic inflammation [98,115]. These microbial changes may be increasing intestinal inflammation, which signals the promotion of bone resorption. Additionally, it is worth noting that astronaut gut microbiomes have been reported to have an increased abundance in Firmicutes [81], a similar phenomenon seen in the gut microbiomes of patients with osteoporosis [374,387]. There is evidence of both astronaut bone loss and microbiome dysbiosis during spaceflight; however, research is lacking on a possible association between the two. Additional investigation on this relationship could provide easier methods of inflight bone loss treatment and prevention through dietary pre and probiotic supplementation. Combining microbiome symbiosis with exercise regimes that maintain mechanical loading may help diminish bone loss during space travel.

As space exploration expands to include more long-term missions, the health and safety of both male and female astronauts are important factors to consider. As there are many differences between the sexes, including the composition of their microbiomes, making sure that these differences are identified and evaluated is critical for understanding the impact spaceflight has on crewmembers. Microbiome diversity and composition diverge at similar ages after puberty in males and females, and high testosterone or estradiol levels result in a more diverse gut microbiome [395,396,397]. Studies have shown that microbes in the intestinal tract can impact sex hormone levels, and sex hormones have a role in shaping the gut microbiome composition [396,397,398,399,400,401,402,403]. This bi-directional relationship contributes to the gender-specific differences observed in disease, such as a greater occurrence of CaOx kidney stones [404,405,406,407,408] and earlier onset of cardiovascular disease in males [409], and postmenopausal osteoporosis [410,411] and IBS [412,413] in females. This relationship has also been implicated in ovarian cancer [414,415] and polycystic ovary syndrome [416,417]. Sex hormones have been shown to affect the immune system through interactions with the gut microbiome, including influencing the gut barrier permeability and interacting with immune cells [418,419]. Studies show that there are sex-specific differences in the immune system, which are independent of the gut microbiota and are already present in germ-free mice, suggesting that the immune system can select a gender-specific gut microbiome conformation, which also plays a part in the differential influence on the immune system observed across genders [420]. These gender-specific differences in immunity result in males being more susceptible to infections [421], and females being more susceptible to autoimmune disorders [422].

The disproportion of men compared to women who have flown to space introduces a bias to the data collected from astronauts and the available evidence limits the conclusions that can be made on the impacts of space exploration on female health. Recognizing gender-specific differences in the microbiome response to the extreme factors of space will allow for better and more personalized countermeasures and medical care to help preserve the homeostasis of the microbiome and as a result, the health of astronauts.

Even with countermeasures and preventions put in place to keep astronauts safe during long-duration missions, the extended time in space with prolonged exposure to radiation, weightlessness, and other stressors on the body will inevitably lead to medical issues that arise during flight. These ailments will need to be addressed by pharmaceutical intervention with even more robustness and rigor than in low-earth orbit, due to the inability for emergency evacuation and limited non-medicinal interventions. An excellent review by Blue et al. discusses the challenges and current understanding for NASA in supplying a pharmacy for exploration spaceflight [446].

There is still a great deal of work that needs to be carried out to understand the host–microbiome–drug response and how it affects each individual astronaut in flight and on the ground. Understanding how the astronaut microbiome composition, its collective genes, the expression of those genes and the metabolites they produce change during spaceflight and post-flight will undoubtedly help prevent serious side effects from microbe–drug interactions, but also make a positive impact on an astronaut’s response to a given drug. Opportunities for drug substitutions could be available, as multiple drugs within a drug class can be differentially affected by the gut microbiome. For example, while the H2 antagonists ranitidine and nizatidine were quickly metabolized and negatively affected by colonic bacteria, cimetidine and famotidine (also H2 antagonists) were not [464]. In human bedrest analog studies, used to mimic microgravity, on Earth, the pharmacokinetics of amoxicillin was effected [468], but not of penicillin [469,470]. Knowledge of this kind can help us to make more informed decisions of which drugs should be included in the medical toolkit for flight.

Maintaining astronaut health and performance is necessary to ensure successful long-duration missions beyond low Earth orbit. With NASA’s long-term plans to include crewed missions to the Moon and Mars, incorporating microbiome data into planning and policies will help astronauts complete these challenging missions and preserve their long-term health. In this section, we provide recommendations on how best to incorporate microbiome research when designing and planning for the next milestone in space exploration. We recommend the following:

By the end of the decade, NASA aims to establish a sustainable habitat on the Moon, followed by the next ambitious plan of human occupation on Mars. NASA, along with other space agencies, government, academia, and industry are striving to address the challenges of living in space for long periods of time. Missions to the Moon would be 1000× farther from the Earth than the International Space Station, and a mission to Mars would last at least 6 months. The 20 years of human studies conducted on the ISS have provided invaluable knowledge of how the human body adapts to the space environment, but more work is needed to understand how the human body will function and adapt to space conditions beyond LEO. One such adaptation is the human microbiome, and as discussed in this review, this plays a significant role in modulating health and disease. We have demonstrated the importance of a balanced microbiome to help maintain astronaut health in orbit and have discussed adverse events experienced by the crew during missions of varying lengths and how the microbiome (either balanced or in dysbiosis) ties into those medical events. Moreover, we have examined less well-established links between spaceflight, bone loss and the microbiome and emphasized the importance of taking into account gender differences when designing appropriate countermeasures for short- and long-term missions. In addition, we have also examined the role that the microbiome can play in altering the effectiveness of pharmaceuticals that are part of the astronaut medical toolkit in space, and the consequence of this for long-term missions. As we move forward with long-term space travel and human habitation beyond LEO, more studies will be needed that explore the astronaut microbiome, the factors governing its stability or disruption and its interaction with the host and the spacecraft environment. We hope that the literature presented in this review and the recommendations provided will help in future study design, technology and product development, and policies that center around the human microbiome, as we propel human exploration beyond anything we have seen so far.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

