“I Am I and My Bacterial Circumstances”: Linking Gut Microbiome, Neurodevelopment, and Depression

Recently, there has been renewed interest in the role played by microbiome in both human health and human disease. A correct equilibrium between the human host and their microorganisms is important for an appropriate physiological function. Extensive research has shown that microbes that inhabit the gastrointestinal tract—or gut microbiota—are involved not only in both nutritive and digestive activities but also in immunological processes. Moreover, the gut microbiome influences both central nervous system and energy homeostasis. An altered gut microbiome has been associated with the pathophysiology of different diseases, including neuropsychiatric disorders. Apparently, both environmental—diet, exposition to antibiotics, and infections—and host-genetic factors have a strong influence on gut microbiome, modulating the risk for neuropsychiatric illness. Also, early life disruption of the microbiome–gut–brain (MGB) axis has been associated with an increased risk of developing depression later in life, suggesting a link between gut microbiome, neurodevelopment, and depression. This review aims to contribute to this growing area of research by exploring the role played by the gut microbiome in neurodevelopment and in the etiology of the depressive syndrome, including nutritional, immunological, and energy homeostasis approaches.

The title of this review is a paraphrase of the maxim from Ortega y Gasset: Yo soy yo y mi circunstancia, y si no la salvo a ella no me salvo yo (“I am I and my circumstance; and, if I do not save it, I do not save myself”) (1).

Our world has an extraordinary diversity of life forms. A key aspect of them is their individuality; each creature on Earth—unicellular or multicellular—has its own characteristics. So, on our planet, it is possible to identify, in different ecosystems (Table
1), numerous animals, bacteria, plants, fungi, and archaea. Each creature plays an important and unique role in its habitat. On Earth, there are several ecosystems and all of them are characterized by complex interactions between different organisms.

If we want to understand our individuality, we should accept the importance of the innumerable creatures that are around us and to understand the interactions between the different individuals that are part of the numerous ecosystems on Earth. In general, the world that surrounds us is important to define our individuality. This situation is better expressed by the famous maxim of the illustrious philosophe José Ortega y Gasset, a well-known intellectual who wrote at the beginning of the twentieth century: Yo soy yo y mi circunstancia, y si no la salvo a ella no me salvo yo (“I am I and my circumstance; and, if I do not save it, I do not save myself”) (1). The main goal of this review is to explore the relationship between gut microbiome, neurodevelopment, and depression. Also nutritional, immunological and energy homeostasis approaches with relevance in the neurobiology of the depressive syndrome are explored. We conducted an English language literature search using the biomedical database PubMed. To improve the quality of our manuscript, we included complementary information.

For centuries, humans and bacteria have evolved together (8). We have a strong interaction with our indigenous microbiota (8, 13). From a gnotobiotic (Table
1) condition during the intrauterine life to a complex microbiome–human interaction with a begin at birth (8), bacteria in and on human bodies are influenced by both environmental and host-genetic factors (8). The constitution of microorganisms that inhabit our organism is defined by host-genetic material (9). Evidence suggests that microbiome is able to mediate host gene expression (11). Surprisingly, most of the cells in and on human body are microorganisms or microbes (14). Also, microorganisms in humans have complex genomes. For example, the gastrointestinal microbiome has a genome that is around 100 times more numerous than human’s one (15), being the products of a large number of these microorganism genes significantly important for the physiology of the host (16). Using deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) extraction from a European human fecal sample collection with 124 individuals it has been characterized the human gut microbiome (17), which has 3.3 million genes (17), being the most of them from bacteria—99.1% (17). Interestingly, bacteria have the ability to obtain genes that they need to continue to live (4). Since microorganisms that cohabit within the same environment are able to swap genes (4), the dominant bacterial population gain control over processes of swapping genetic material (4). Also, inheritance of the microbiota has been suggested (6), particularly this one associated with the mother (6), which is a stable vertical inheritance (4). It has been proposed that if we wish to have a better knowledge about ourselves, we should look at our genome, including our indigenous bacterial genome (13). In general, humans and their indigenous microbiota have co-evolved together, establishing a dynamic ecosystem.

It is important to note that it has been suggested that the first 36 months of extrauterine life are fundamental defining host–bacterial composition (28) and that the sequence of the bacterial transition during the first months of life is difficult to define (30). Environmental factors, including vaginal delivery and breast milk (6, 28), influence strongly early exposition to bacterial communities in humans (6, 28), especially to lactic acid bacteria (Table
1) (6). Also, environmental factors are able to alter the gut microbiome equilibrium (7, 28, 31). Some other environmental factors that have been reported as elements that could influence gut microbiome characteristics are factors, such as prebiotics and probiotics (Table
1) consumption, family composition, cultural practices, locality, antibiotics, and mother–infant interactions (30). Together, these data indicate that microbiome–human interaction is a story of diversity and adaptability (15). However, the whole association between microbiome and different diseases is still unknown (6).

The gut–brain (GB) axis (Table
1) is a complex system that integrates the gut with the nervous system (10, 16). A main characteristic of this system is its bidirectionality (10, 11, 16, 26, 31), where a neuro-endocrino-immunological connection is implicated (16) (Figure
1). In general, the GB axis is important regulating gastric and intestinal function and energy homeostasis (11). The tenth cranial nerve or vagus nerve, with its both afferent and efferent fibers (32), is a link between the gastrointestinal tract and the brain (32, 33). The anterior vagal trunk bifurcates into three limbs: hepatic, anterior or ventral gastric, and celiac branches (34). In the gastrointestinal tract, at the gastric level, in the lamina propria or mucosa lamina propria, in both external muscularis propria, and in the myenteric plexus are neuronal terminals (34). In the gastric mucosa, afferent fibers of the vagus nerve are able to identify the presence of ghrelin and leptin (33). Also, at the level of the small intestine, it has been noted a complex net of vagal afferent fibers (34), which has similarities to these observed at the gastric level (34). It has been suggested that afferent fibers of the vagus nerve could identify the presence of luminal contents (33, 34), being this possible by the presence of mechanosensors (e.g., serosal receptors, mucosal touch receptors, muscular tension receptors) (33, 34). Apparently, chemoreceptors of the vagal afferent fibers are reactive to different molecules, such as glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) (33, 34), interleukin-1β (IL-1β) (34), serotonin (5-HT) (33, 34), somatostatin or growth hormone inhibiting hormone (34), and cholecystokinin (CCK) (33, 34), being duodenal vagal afferent fibers reactive to both 5-HT and CCK (33), and at the level of the ileum, colon, and rectum, afferent fibers of the vagus are reactive to peptide YY and GLP-1 (33).

To date, numerous studies using probiotics have attempted to demonstrate MGB axis’ communication (16). Administration of probiotics has been associated with neurophysiological changes (16), where it seems to include the participation of different molecules, such as 5-HT, BDNF, DA, NE, and corticotropin releasing factor (16). Between the different species that are employed as probiotics to improve gastrointestinal equilibrium Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus are well-known (38). Bacterial reconstitution of B. infantis has been associated with an improved HPA axis’ response to stress in a neurodevelopmental animal model (39). Also, probiotic administration of Lactobacillum rhamnosus, for a month (40), is enough to modulate both neuronal gene expression and behavior in animals (40). In general, this information tries to expose the importance of the MGB axis at the neurobiological level (39, 40).

The immune system is an important part of the MGB axis. The immune system, including both adaptive and innate immune systems (27), mediates the communication between bacteria, gastrointestinal tract, and CNS (27). Also, a gastrointestinal microbiome is of great significance for an adequate gut immunity (41). Host’s microbiota is the main source of microorganism antigens for the host (20). In humans, during development host’s microbiota is an important element modulating the immune system maturation (20), being host’s intestinal microorganisms involved in the formation of the lymphoid tissue at the gut level (20).

Different microorganisms that are part of the gut microbiome have been linked with anti-inflammatory or inflammatory immune reactions (41). Bacteroides fragilis and Lactobacillus have been associated with anti-inflammatory responses (41). Also, protective intestinal inflammation has been linked with gut microorganisms such as segmented filamentous bacteria (41). A positive inflammatory modulation has been related to bacteria such as Clostridia (41). Apparently, indigenous microbiota has an immunomodulatory potential in gut mucosa (41), regulating both immune cells and molecules (41). Interestingly, it has been observed that there is a link between chronic inflammation and gut microbiota (21), where high level of intestinal oxygen alters normal bacterial composition and induces inflammation (21). Apparently, high level of gut oxygen drastically damages gut-microbiota equilibrium (21), reducing anaerobic population and increasing aerobic inhabitants (21). In general, the MGB axis has a strong link to the immune system.

The gastrointestinal tract is an important organ that has different functions, such as nutritional, absorptive, and homeostatic. The small intestine has numerous enzymes that mediate nutritional and digestive processes (21), being in the intestine the small segment where the most of the absorptive and digestive activities take place (21). Reabsorption of water, degradation of dietary fiber, and vitamins’ uptake occur mainly in the large intestine (21). The gastrointestinal tract has its own microbiome. Gut microorganisms are important for both homeostasis and carbohydrate metabolism in human host (9). Around 10% of host’s caloric intake has a bacterial origin (20). Gastrointestinal microbiome can be directly influenced by our habitual food (46), being diet a complex environmental factor that plays an important role shaping gut microbiota (46). Apparently, host’s feeding behavior rhythms have an impact in the gut bacterial distribution (19), being host’s circadian rhythm alterations able to trigger a change in the quantity of intestinal microorganism that normally predominates during the diurnal period (19). Complex molecules such as polysaccharides are metabolized for bacteria that inhabit the gastrointestinal tract (9), working altogether as a metabolic organ in the human body (9). Moreover, gut microbiota makes these polymeric carbohydrate molecules an energy source for the host (9). Intestinal bacteria are involved in the metabolism of macronutrients and the metabolites produced for these microorganisms are able to modulate epigenetic changes in the host (46). A diet, including a high amount of fiber, polyphenols (Table
1)—present in green tea, nuts, and fruits (46)—and omega-3 fatty acids—available in fish oil (46)—has been linked with bacterial changes—e.g., a rise in the number of both Lactobacillus and Bifidobacteria (46)—at the gastrointestinal level (46). Gut microbiota—including microorganism, such as Clostridium coccoides, Actinobacteria, Roseburia, Bifidobacteria, Lactobacillus, Escherichia coli, Peptostreptococcus, B. thetaiotaomicron, and Enterococcus faecalis (46)—is associated with the metabolism of these dietary components (46). Interestingly, alterations at the level of the gut bacterial population’s growth have been linked with the presence of a disrupted metabolic control (19). It has been suggested that the intestinal microorganisms could regulate their own homeostatic control of energy balance by using their host’s energy homeostasis mechanisms (19). An increment or reduction in the number of gut bacteria could induce a feeling of lack of food or satiety in the host (19).

In general, neuronal population from the ARC and the PVN is important regulating energy homeostasis (47). Both orexigenic and anorexigenic cells (Table
1) are present in the ARC (47). Agouti-related protein (AgRP) and neuropeptide Y (NPY) are expressed for the first kind of neurons (47), while anorexigenic nerve cells express proopiomelanocortin (POMC) (47). In the brain, orexigenic and anorexigenic neurons have projections to both hypothalamic—lateral hypothalamus, PVN, ventromedial nucleus, and dorsomedial hypothalamic nucleus—and extra-hypothalamic areas (32). An increased need for food has been associated with AgRP—by melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) related action—and NPY—by NPY receptor linked activity—(32). Both POMC and NPY neurons are known as main sites of expression of leptin receptors (49). Leptin, which body concentration is depended of adipose tissue grade (50), is a hormone with implications in both body weight and metabolism (50). Leptin has a satiety factor function through inhibition of both AgRP and NPY cells and activation of POMC neurons (32). In the case of POMC cells, it has been proposed that the effect of leptin on this kind of neurons occurs in the ARC (49, 50), where the frequency of action potentials is increased by leptin (49). As mechanism for this action, it has been proposed that leptin induces both depolarization of POMC nerve cells and decrement of gamma-aminobutyric acid release onto POMC cells (49). Also, the peptide hormone known as α-melanocyte stimulating hormone (α-MSH), an agonist of the MC4R (32), is produced by POMC neurons from the ARC (47). The NTS and the vagal system are involved increasing appetite by ghrelin action (32). Ghrelin activates orexigenic neurons and suppresses anorexigenic cells (32). In general, gut microbiota play an important role in human energy homeostasis.

Our bacterial composition, this one that we have during our adult life, starts to be acquired during our early life (42), being the mother the main element defining the characteristics of the infant’s microbiome (30). Normally, the gut is firstly exposed to microbes at birth (7). Apparently, human’s first bacteria come from mother’s vagina and excrement (4). There is some evidence to suggest that the placenta has a microbiome (51, 52). Data from metagenomic information indicate the presence of an indigenous microbiota in human placenta (51, 52). Since bacteria—such as E. coli, Staphylococcus epidermidis and E. faecalis (53)—have been isolated from meconium (Table
1) from healthy newborns (53), it is believed that there is an intrauterine contact between healthy fetus and microorganisms (53). Also, it is believed that there is a fetus–maternal–bacteria interaction (52), since it has been noted a bacterial presence in the amniotic fluid, from mothers, and meconium, from neonates, both without antibiotic contact (52). However, with little scientific experiences, very few data available and discussible methodologies, caution must be applied, and the question about a possible prenatal human microbiome is still open. In general, the physiological gut composition is not clear (30), but it is known that the gastrointestinal bacterial composition is different during childhood and adulthood (30). It is important to note that E. coli is one of the first microorganisms that inhabit the infant gut (30).

Evidence suggests that there is an important role played by gut microbiome in human brain development. However, the whole association between the MGB and human neurodevelopment is still unknown.

Human intestine formation is concluded around the 12th week of intrauterine life (57). Early during the prenatal period begins the formation of the MGB axis (57, 58). Main cells of the ENS are product of the migration of neural crest cells (57). Neural crest cells can be observed in the early gastrointestinal organ around 7–12 weeks of gestation (57). It is important to note that the interstitial cells of Cajal have a different origin (57), being of mesenchymal basis (57). It has been reported that neurons such as 5-HT enteric cells are born early during the intrauterine life (58). In general, 5-HT is an important neurotransmitter in the MGB axis (45). This molecule is susceptible of modulation via gut bacteria (45). Together with 5-HT, molecules such as TLRs and short chain fatty acids have been proposed as participants in the GB axis’ function that show a strong link to gut microbiota composition (43). In the newborn, during the first weeks of extrauterine life (58), there is a strong functional connection between both enteric neuronal cells and glial cells (58), being a critical period for alterations induced by environmental factors (58). Expression and activation of the receptor tyrosine kinase RET seem fundamental for ENS development (58). During the early development the immune system and its molecules—e.g., cytokines (58)—and cells—e.g., macrophages (58)—play an important role modulating the formation of neuronal circuits at the gastrointestinal level (58). During the neonatal period, a positive modulation of the immune system has been associated with breastfeeding (59). It seems that the basis of the MGB axis and its link with the neurodevelopment is by modulation of cells and molecules that integrate the neuroendocrine-immunological system (43).

The development of our MGB axis begins early in life, including a complex neuroendocrine-immunological modulation. It seems that stress factors, such as emotional stress and gut microbiota alterations, play an important role modulating the risk for diseases such as depression.

Neurodevelopment is an important process to understand the depressive syndrome. It is a dynamic process with a long trajectory (64), from gestation to adulthood (64). The neurodevelopmental theory of the depressive syndrome has been reviewed recently elsewhere (65). Each human brain region has its maturation time period (65), being the most relevant morphological modifications during the prenatal period, childhood, and early adolescence (65). The beginning of the human neurodevelopment is around the third and fourth week of intrauterine life (66, 67) with the neurulation as first event (66–68). It has been reported that the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex is one of the final brain regions to mature (69).

In general, the neurodevelopmental theory of depression points out that very early and early stress factors in life are able to trigger the depressive phenotype later in life (65), which is accompanied by signs and symptoms, such as hippocampal (85) and amygdala atrophy (86), emotional and behavioral changes (87–90), and minor physical anomalies (Table
1) (91). Since microbiota has the potential to influence the brain during the development (92) and changes at the level of indigenous gut bacteria could be produced by stress (92), it has been noted that the MGB axis could be linked to the pathophysiology of depression.

The evidence presented above suggests that both the communication of the MGB axis and the bacterial modulation of the neurodevelopment involve three different systems that at the same time are strongly linked: the neurological system, the endocrine system, and the immune system. But, where could be the association between the MGB axis and the etiology of the depressive syndrome? There is, in the neurodevelopment! For example, very early exposition to valproic acid during the intrauterine life has been linked to both indigenous microbial alterations and behavioral changes later in life (93). Also, it has been demonstrated that early bacterial composition modulates neurodevelopment (94), including changes at the level of genetic expression of genes associated with brain function (94). This early neurodevelopmental modulation has the effect to influence adult behavior later in life (94). Moreover, it has been proposed, after hippocampal experimental results (95), that limbic system’s neurogenesis can be modulated by indigenous microbiota (95).

It has been established that a diet rich in fast-food, such as pizza, hamburgers, and donuts, has been connected to depression (105), increasing the risk for this syndrome (105). A diet, including fish and enough vegetables and fruits, can be a protective factor for depression (106), maybe because this kind of diet has an anti-oxidative and anti-inflammatory impact (106). Also, the inclusion of probiotics could have a positive effect for depressive patients (107), being suggested an anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidative effect induced by probiotics (107). Moreover, probiotics could have the potential to modulate growth factors (107), including the increment of BDNF levels (107).

The evidence presented above suggests that the link between the MGB axis, the neuroendocrine–immune system—including energy homeostasis mechanisms—and the neurodevelopment is strong. Human neurodevelopment is a dynamic and long process that begins very early, during the intrauterine life, and continues during years, into the adulthood. These characteristics of the nervous system’s development—both its chronicity and dynamisms—make this process susceptible for alterations. Moreover, the origin of the GB axis takes place early during the prenatal period, directly after the beginning of the neurodevelopment. The GB bidirectional connection is present early in development, playing this network a key role modulating the formation of the brain. Numerous peripheral neurochemical signals together with intestinal microorganisms—which are host’s energy homeostasis elements—and a vagal communication are active regulator of both metabolism and immunity, mainly via the limbic system. Since the gastrointestinal tract has the first contact with diet elements—including the very early consumption of elements from mother’s vagina and excrement at birth—and diet is an important element defining human’s bacterial composition, then the interaction of host–bacteria via MGB axis is important regulating the neurodevelopment. The immune system regulates gastrointestinal bacterial composition. Very early nervous formation in the gastrointestinal tract is modulated for both immune cells and molecules. The origin of a depressive syndrome could be possible only in a disrupted brain. Apparently, the MGB axis plays an important role in the pathophysiology of depression. Gut microbiome modulation by environmental stress factors seems to contribute, together with genetic risk factors, to the development of this illness. Probably, these risk factors, which are potentialized by the combination of one or more other risk factors, induce a neuroendocrine–immune dysfunction that is the basis of the alterations observed in depressed subjects. The strong communication between the gastrointestinal system and the brain via the GB axis is present very early in the human development. This axis has a characteristic bidirectionality that seems to be attractive as antidepressant therapeutic target, being drugs that are able to induce changes at the inflammatory cascade proposed as antidepressants. Also, it has been recognized that gut microbiota play an important role in inflammation. Since gut bacteria have an important effect at the level of the GB axis and they are involved in both inflammatory and anti-inflammatory human functions, microbiota modulation by diet, probiotics, and drugs has been proposed recently as treatment strategy to improve the symptoms associated with the depressive syndrome. Antibiotics are environmental factors in the industrialized countries that induce important microbiota changes (108). However, interesting data have suggested that antibiotics such as minocycline have psycho-modulator effects (109), including antipsychotic and antidepressant functions (109). Apparently, these effects are associated with the anti-inflammatory, anti-oxidative, neuromodulator, and neuroprotective actions induced by minocycline (109). By an international systematic review and meta-analysis, it has been reported that anti-inflammatory drugs improve depressive symptoms (110). Interestingly, it has been reported that drugs, such as mood stabilizers, antipsychotics, and antidepressants, have anti-inflammatory effects (109). Moreover, an improvement of the pathways associated with the inflammatory cascades has been proposed as drug target in the treatment of depressed patients (111). Also, as results from different host–microbiota studies both innovative drug targets and new therapeutic strategies have been proposed with the objective of manipulate the human microbiome. These include: intestinal oxygen as therapeutic target (21), direct manipulation of human microbiota by fecal microbiota transplantation (21), alteration of microbiota products by diet (21), and improvement of drugs’ metabolism by microbiota’s modification (21).

A better perception of the significance of the MGB axis in the etiology of depression will help us to obtain a better understanding about the pathophysiology of this syndrome. Also, it opens the possibility to offer better treatment strategies to our patients. This will be possible only if we accomplish to decipher the genetic, anatomical, functional, and behavioral characteristics of the human microbiota. The most important limitation in the area of the MGB axis’ research lies in the fact that there is very little knowledge about the gut microbiome. There is necessary more scientific research that helps us to understand the relationship between the different microorganisms that inhabit the gastrointestinal tract. With the objective to understand the role played by microbiome in both human health and human disease, there are born different research consortiums around the world such as the “International Human Microbiome Consortium”1 (117), the Irish “Eldermet Project”2 (118), the German Verbund OptiMD im Forschungsnetz für psychische Erkrankungen or “OptiMD Consortium”3 (119), the international project “Metagenomics of the Human Intestinal Tract” or “MetaHIT Project”4 (120), and the American “NIH Human Microbiome Project”5 (121). In general, current scientific information is not able to explain the entire physiology of the MGB axis (122). Recently, it has increased the scientific research trying to elucidate the effects of gut microorganism in human behavior (122), including the link between both the vagal system and the neuroendocrine–immune system in brain function (122). There is still a wide scientific gap about the role played for the MGB axis in the etiology of different disorders, including neuropsychiatric illness. It is important to mention that the most of the scientific information about the MGB axis are product of animal research, being necessary the development of more human research to understand the host–microbiome interaction. However, it is evident that there is a strong host–microbiome connection, where environmental factors are important modulators of host’s gut microbiota. Apparently, our habits are able to modulate the MGB axis. Thus, an appropriate diet is of central importance for both a suitable neurodevelopment and an adequate mental health.

JL-O, RR, and TB contributed equally to this work.

The authors report no biomedical financial interests or potential conflicts of interest. The reviewer, SB, and handling editor declared their shared affiliation and the handling editor states that the process nevertheless met the standards of a fair and objective review.

Funding. This work was supported by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung, BMBF), Research Grant No. 01EE1401B to RR and TB.

1http://www.human-microbiome.org/.

2http://eldermet.ucc.ie/.

3http://www.optimd.de/.

4http://www.metahit.eu/.

5http://www.hmpdacc.org.

