Identification of clinical and ecological determinants of strain engraftment after fecal microbiota transplantation using metagenomics



Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) is a promising therapeutic approach for microbiota-associated pathologies, but our understanding of the post-FMT microbiome assembly process and its ecological and clinical determinants is incomplete. Here we perform a comprehensive fecal metagenome analysis of 14 FMT trials, involving five pathologies and >250 individuals, and determine the origins of strains in patients after FMT. Independently of the underlying clinical condition, conspecific coexistence of donor and recipient strains after FMT is uncommon and donor strain engraftment is strongly positively correlated with pre-FMT recipient microbiota dysbiosis. Donor strain engraftment was enhanced through antibiotic pretreatment and bowel lavage and dependent on donor and recipient ɑ-diversity; strains from relatively abundant species were more likely and from predicted oral, oxygen-tolerant, and gram-positive species less likely to engraft. We introduce a general mechanistic framework for post-FMT microbiome assembly in alignment with ecological theory, which can guide development of optimized, more targeted, and personalized FMT therapies.

Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) infuses the microbiota of healthy donor feces into the intestinal tract of a patient in the clinical attempt to treat a microbiota-associated disease.1 Although there are several mechanisms by which FMT might work,2 much focus has been devoted to resolve disturbances of the gut microbial ecosystem, which are often referred to as “dysbiosis.”3 FMT has been validated in randomized controlled trials as an efficient treatment for recurrent Clostridioides difficile infection (rCDI), with a success rate of ∼90% that surpasses those of conventional antibiotic treatments.4,5 For the inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) ulcerative colitis, FMT has been less effective in inducing remission (24%–32% versus 5%–9% for placebo), but clinical response rates surpassed those reported in phase III clinical trials for several biological agents (golimumab and vedolizumab).2 Modest benefits have also been reported for the treatment of insulin sensitivity in subjects suffering from obesity and metabolic syndrome with FMT.6 In addition, two recent trials suggest a potential role for FMT in cancer therapy, demonstrating re-induction of a response to anti-PD-1 immunotherapy in ∼30% of immune checkpoint inhibitor (ICI)-refractory melanoma patients (n = 25) after FMT from patients who had previously responded to ICI.7,8 FMT is currently being tested for numerous other microbiota-associated infectious, inflammatory, and metabolic diseases. Yet, the mechanism of action of FMTs and their specific short- and long-term effects on the recipient microbiota remain poorly understood, even for established clinical indications.9,10 Furthermore, FMT represents an intriguing experimental approach to establish causality for the association of the human microbiota with specific pathologies, which are currently mostly studied using fecal transplantation into rodents, which are limited in their ability to replicate the human setting.11

In this study, we characterize post-FMT microbiome assemblies at the strain level in patients who present with a range of disease and treatment backgrounds. We develop generalizable models to predict and control FMT outcomes, determine the relationship between post-FMT microbiota assembly and clinical response, thereby defining the opportunities and limitations of FMT-based precision microbiota therapies and outlining clinical strategies to optimize them.

To compare the effect of FMT on fecal microbiota composition in patients with different medical conditions, a comprehensive meta-cohort was assembled of metagenomic shotgun sequence data from FMT-treated patients and donors, including 1,322 samples from 254 complete cases (Table S1). This FMT meta-cohort (Figure 1A) includes patients treated for recurrent C. difficile infection (rCDI, three studies), the IBDs ulcerative colitis (2 studies) and Crohn disease (one study); metabolic syndrome, type 2 diabetes mellitus, or obesity (MetS, three studies); drug-resistant Enterobacteriaceae carriage (MDR, two studies); or immune checkpoint inhibitor-refractory melanoma (ICI; two studies). Post-FMT samples were relatively evenly distributed between patient groups over the first 4 months after FMT (Figure S1A). For comparison, a control cohort of healthy individuals from several unrelated fecal microbiome studies was included (see STAR Methods). There were substantial differences between FMT study protocols, including the use of bowel lavage and antibiotic treatment (ABx+/−), the FMT application type (by nasoduodenal or colonic endoscopy, enema, or capsule), as well as the number of FMTs received (which varied between a single and up to 41 applications). All rCDI patients were treated with antibiotics as part of their therapeutic regimens, while each of the ICI, IBD, and MDR groups included at least one study in which antibiotics were used as a bowel cleansing strategy to deplete the resident microbiota and prepare patients for donor microbiota engraftment (Figure 1A). This meta-cohort reflects the current state and heterogeneity of patient populations and disease backgrounds that have been experimentally treated with FMT and provides an opportunity to identify the shared mechanistic and ecological foundation of post-FMT microbiome assembly.

To further characterize dysbiosis in the FMT meta-cohort, pretreated and naive patient and donor samples were separately compared based on taxonomic and functional microbiota parameters. rCDIABx+ patient samples consistently exhibited significantly decreased ɑ-diversity, increased taxonomic distance relative to healthy controls, and elevated dysbiosis scores compared with ICIABx−, IBDABx−, and, with the exception of one study, MetSABx− cohort patients (Figure 2 generalized linear mixed model, p ≤ 0.001). However, IBDABx+ patients from one study (GOR25) exhibited a dysbiosis state comparable to rCDI patients after broad-spectrum (vancomycin, paromomycin, and nystatin) antibiotic pretreatment (Figure 2). A similar trend was observed in MDR patients, although these patients were difficult to classify, as they included patients with previous antibiotic treatments, following 48 h of antibiotic discontinuation (PAU26) or received antibiotics specific for only gram-negative bacteria (HUT, colistin and neomycin;27). Dysbiosis was also characterized by increased cumulative relative abundances of oral and oxygen-tolerant species in rCDIABx+, IBDABx+, and MDRABx+ patient samples (Figure 2, see STAR Methods for details on species classification). Dysbiosis signatures were resolved or at least improved in rCDI patients and absent from all other patient populations after FMT. Thus, microbiota-associated diseases besides rCDI that have been experimentally treated with FMT are characterized by low levels of dysbiosis, but dysbiosis is induced after antibiotic treatment.

The pretreatment microbiome of FMT recipients was dominated by species that were shared with their donors and that, on average, accounted for >75% cumulative relative abundance (Figure 3A, inlet). In order to determine the origins of specific members of the post-FMT patient microbiota, as well as the relative contributions of donor and recipient-derived, as well as newly detected strains, a subspecies taxonomic microbiota profiling was carried out with the SameStr tool.22,28 SameStr defines strains as unique subspecies lineages that are shared between related microbiome samples with the potential for strain persistence or transfer, as opposed to more widely shared subspecies lineages that could also be present in unrelated microbiomes.22 This analysis allowed us to unambiguously assign post-FMT patient strains to recipient (shared strains between pre- and post-FMT patient metagenomes), donor (shared strains between post-FMT patient and donor metagenomes), or other sources (newly detected strains, neither shared with pre-FMT patients nor donor metagenomes). Here, we analyzed strain-resolved transmission of microbes using data from 250 FMT cases (FRI = 9, ALM = 16, ERE = 10, CHA = 37, BOR = 5, OSU = 39, ZAR = 15, BOU = 10, GOR = 23, KAa = 32, KAb = 21, XAV = 8, PAU = 9, HUT = 16), excluding samples from patients who had been exposed to post-FMT antibiotic treatment (OSU = 9, ZAR = 5, PAU = 4).

In summary, donor strain engraftment after FMT appears clinically expandable, including for different medical conditions, using antibiotic microbiota disruption to induce dysbiosis in preparation for FMT, as well as other FMT protocol parameters.

In order to gain a conceptual understanding of the factors that determine donor microbiota engraftment after FMT in individual patients, we wanted to determine the effects of both ecological microbiota and clinical FMT parameters on post-FMT patient microbiota assembly. As ecological parameters, recipient and donor microbiota (ɑ/β) diversity, and as clinical parameters, patient pretreatment (ABx, lavage) and FMT modalities (no. of FMTs) were used as input variables for a generalized linear mixed model (GLMM) to estimate donor-derived strain fractions after FMT per patient (Figure 4A, Tables S4 and S5). Gradient-boosted decision trees (xgboost) with 5-fold cross-validation were used to capture non-linear associations in the data and confirm the GLMM-based findings (Figure S3).

In summary, post-FMT microbiota assembly appears to be driven both by the recipient (ɑ/β-diversity) and donor (ɑ-diversity) microbiota, as well as the FMT procedure, i.e., resident microbiota depletion before FMT (by ABx treatment and lavage) and repeated exposure of the patient to the donor microbiota (multiple FMTs).

As the previous model estimated the community-wide (ɑ/β-diversity) determinants of donor strain engraftment for individual patients, we next sought to compare the engraftment probabilities for individual strains from different bacterial taxa in a separate GLMM. This second model outlines the taxonomic and functional boundaries for donor strain engraftment, i.e., whether strains from specific taxa or with taxon-specific properties are more or less likely to engraft after FMT. For this GLMM, we used the same set of variables as described above, but in combination with relative abundance and other species features, such as Gram stain, oral habitat, spore formation, or oxygen tolerance, as estimated using functional databases (see STAR Methods). Species properties were aggregated at the genus level to account for the inconsistent prevalence of species in different studies and donors and to provide us with a single, statistically robust, generalizable model to estimate donor strain engraftment.

In conclusion, the engraftment of specific donor strains appears to be less dependent on microbiome (ɑ/β-diversity) and clinical (ABx, lavage) parameters, than on associated species properties, such as (oral, spore-forming, oxygen-tolerant) lifestyle and (recipient and donor) relative abundance.

To explore the potential of FMT personalization, we assessed the effects of different, simulated donor species relative abundances and recipient/donor pairings on donor strain engraftment. First, donor strain engraftment probabilities were re-estimated for each FMT case based on the real input variable set, except that the species relative abundance in the donor was replaced with the highest or lowest species relative abundance that was detected in any of the other donors from the meta-cohort (Figure 5B). In this experimental setting, donor microbiota compositions were not qualitatively altered, i.e., only the relative abundance of the donor strain that was already present in the original sample was modified. Donor strain engraftment for many genera was predicted to become substantially more or less likely, in particular for genera from the phylum Firmicutes (Figure 5B). For example, while the genus Ruminococcus carried a median donor strain engraftment probability of 1.75% across the entire FMT meta-cohort, it was estimated that this probability could be reduced to 0.23% or increased to 58.9% with the highest and lowest detected cumulative relative abundance of Ruminococcus species in any of the other FMT donors, respectively. These simulations are noteworthy, as they suggest increased potential for the engraftment of specific strains from in vitro-supplemented donor samples.

Next, the total number of engrafted donor strains was re-estimated for all possible recipient/donor combinations from the meta-cohort. These predictions are informative, as the comparison of predicted and actual donor strain engraftment numbers in the subset of true recipient/donor combinations suggest a very good fit of our GLMM to the underlying data (r = 0.94, p < 0.0001). Across all simulated recipient/donor pairs, the predicted total number of engrafted donor strains per patient varied in a range of log2(±5)-fold between the worst and best-engrafting donors relative to the actual donor (Figure 5D). Donors that performed poorly in one recipient (<10 donor-derived post-FMT strains) were predicted to produce substantially larger numbers of engrafted strains in other patients (>50 donor-derived post-FMT strains) or vice versa (examples shown in Figure 5D). In general, differences between recipient/donor pairs accounted for more variation in the predicted number of engrafted donor strains than differences between donors (Figure 5D), suggesting that recipient/donor matching may be more important to enhance donor strain engraftment than the use of “super-donors.” Our simulations indicate potential for personalized FMT applications, based on recipient/donor pairings, which should be further clinically tested.

Cure rates of ∼90% after FMT have been reported for rCDI in patients after repeated antibiotic treatment failure,9 which, based on our models, would induce dysbiosis in patients before and increase donor strain engraftment after FMT. In line with this expectation, rCDI patients from the meta-cohort exhibited large (>50%) and consistent donor-derived strain contributions to the post-FMT microbiota (Figure 3C). All rCDI patients resolved symptoms after the treatment, suggesting that the FMT outcome in this patient population may be dependent on donor microbiota engraftment, although the lack of fecal metagenomes from failed rCDI treatment cases prevented a systematic analysis of this relationship.

Between responders and non-responders from the two analyzed IBD studies, consistent differences regarding donor microbiota engraftment could neither be detected across nor within any of the studies or their subgroups (Figure 6). Further, none of the ICI or IBD studies showed a significant difference in ecological microbiome parameters, such as α/β-diversity or dysbiosis scores (Figure S8). The impact of donor microbiota engraftment on the clinical response to FMT therefore remains unclear and may be disease-dependent. The available data indicate that untargeted FMT with the goal to maximize donor microbiota engraftment may be more relevant for the treatment of rCDI than IBD or ICI-refractory melanoma, which may rather benefit from targeted FMT strategies with the goal to induce engraftment of specific donor species or strains.

FMT shows potential as a therapeutic tool for microbiome-associated pathologies and can be used as an experimental approach to establish causality for alterations of the human gut microbiota that have been associated with disease. However, the relationship between donor microbiota engraftment and FMT outcomes in treated patients has not yet been comprehensively characterized, compared, and correlated with patient parameters, FMT modalities, and clinical outcomes. Moreover, the ecological principles that govern the post-FMT microbiota assembly process are poorly understood. Our analyses identify clinically modifiable factors as targets for FMT outcome optimization and differentiate between two distinct therapeutic goals: (1) to maximize broad, untargeted engraftment of the donor microbiota after FMT with antibiotic patient pretreatment, with likely clinical benefits for the treatment of rCDI; and (2) to increase the engraftment probability of specific donor strains by increasing the relative abundance of the corresponding species in the transplant sample or matching a recipient to an optimal donor. The second goal offers the prospect of developing personalized FMT applications for the treatment of different microbiota-associated pathologies in a framework of precision medicine.

In summary, our findings characterize the contribution of donor-derived strains to the post-FMT patient microbiota across a diverse set of patient, microbiome, and clinical conditions. They suggest a major impact of adjustable patient pretreatment modalities on donor strain engraftment and present generalizable predictive models for patient and strain-specific donor microbiota engraftment that are in agreement with ecological theory. They further illustrate the theoretical potential for personalized FMT applications through fecal supplementation with select strains and recipient/donor matching to increase the engraftment probability of specific strains. With this work, we lay the groundwork for future developments of precision microbiota modulation therapies.

Most clinical trials that were included in the analysis involved small patient numbers, which were sampled at different and inconsistent time points. Similarly, the control dataset of fecal metagenomes from healthy individuals was significantly larger than the patient or donor datasets from the FMT meta-cohort. Although our models identified strong and distinctive associations, these were partially based on study and patient subsets from the meta-cohort, and the temporal trajectories of the post-FMT assembly process were not characterized in detail. However, the use of a heterogeneous, but extensive, meta-cohort was also instrumental in the development of robust predictive generalized linear mixed models and the identification of what appear to be the universal drivers of post-FMT microbiota assembly. Our predictions for donor strain engraftment in other recipient/donor combinations or with fecal samples supplemented with bacterial cultures should be experimentally tested in follow-up clinical trials, as our retrospective study design did not allow for independent validation of our simulated FMT outcomes. Contributions of non-bacterial microbes, such as fungi and viruses/phages, to the post-FMT microbiome assembly, which may be clinically relevant,48,49 as well as the impact of different antibiotic regimens on overall patient microbiota displacement and the engraftment of specific donor strains, should also be investigated. Quantitative information about absolute fecal microbiota abundance and the microbial density of the processed samples was not available, but will be needed to determine the impact of variable fecal bacterial densities in patients and donors on the detection of oral species and donor-derived strain fractions in post-FMT patients with different disease backgrounds. Finally, fecal microbiome analysis is generally unable to resolve the biogeography of microbial population dynamics along the gastrointestinal tract and distinguish, for example, between small and large intestinal donor strain engraftment that would exert different influences on the host and microbiota-associated diseases.



Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, W. Florian Fricke (w.florian.fricke@uni-hohenheim.de).

This study did not generate new unique reagents.

The objective of this study was to characterize the microbiota of FMT-treated patients with different medical conditions (“meta-cohort”) and their donors and to apply strain-level microbiota profiling in order to determine donor-derived strain contributions to post-FMT microbiota assembly. This information was used to inform predictive models to describe the post-FMT microbiota assembly process and to determine the role of recipient and donor microbiota features, taxonomic and ecological microbiota parameters, and clinical modalities of patient preparation and FMT for donor strain engraftment.

We assembled a comprehensive meta-cohort of available metagenomics data from clinical FMT trials, including 254 distinct clinical cases in which FMT was used to modulate the microbiota of patients with different medical conditions (Figure 1A). Published across thirteen distinct studies, FMT was used to treat recurrent Clostridioides difficile infection (rCDI),14,16,21 type 2 diabetes mellitus, obesity and metabolic syndrome (MetS),13,50,51 the inflammatory bowel diseases Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis (IBD),25,29,52 to eradicate multidrug-resistant Enterobacteriaceae carriage (MDR),26,27 and to induce response to anti–PD-1 immunotherapy in immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy-refractory melanoma patients (ICI).7,8 Fecal metagenomic shotgun sequence data were included from a total of 1322 samples obtained from patients before and (often multiple times) after FMT (Figure S1A), as well as from stool donors (Table S1). Metadata were obtained from the supplementary information provided with each publication or from the authors.

Clinical response information was obtained from the original publications and defined as follows: For ICI patients (see Figure 1B in both Baruch et al. and Davar et al.), responders (R, BOU = 3, ZAR = 3) experienced an objective response to treatment as per Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (BOU: iRECIST,53 ZAR: RECIST v1.154), indicated by a tumor regression of at least 30% compared to baseline, whereas non-responders (NR, BOU = 6, ZAR = 9) showed progressive disease with an increase in tumor size of at least 20%. For IBD patients, responders (R, GOR = 8, KAa = 9, KAb = 8) went into remission (Mayo score55: ≤2), all other IBD patients were classified as non-responders (NR, GOR = 15, KAa = 23, KAb = 11).

To compare microbiota composition metrics against a healthy control cohort, fecal metagenomic shotgun sequence data from subjects that had not reported conditions that would suggest extensive medication or strong microbiota perturbations were obtained through the curatedMetagenomicsData package.56 For each subject, sequence data downloaded from NCBI’s Sequence Read Archive were concatenated in case of multiple available accessions. We additionally collected preprocessed MetaPhlAn3 species-level taxonomic relative abundance profiles that were made available with bioBakery 3.57 In sum, 739 samples from nine publicly available datasets (Table S1) were used for the reference cohort.58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66

All raw paired-end metagenomic sequence reads were processed with KneadData v0.6.1 to trim sequence regions with base call quality below Q20 within a 4-nucleotide sliding window and to remove reads that were truncated by more than 30% (SLIDINGWINDOW:4:20, MINLEN:70). To remove host contamination, trimmed reads were mapped against the human genome (GRCh37/hg19) with Bowtie2 v2.2.3.67 Output files consisting of surviving paired and orphan reads were concatenated and used for further processing.

Taxonomic analyses were carried out to provide an overview of sample microbiota compositions and to generate the marker gene alignments that served as input for the strain-level analysis with SameStr. Preprocessed sequence reads from each sample were mapped against the MetaPhlAn clade-specific marker gene database (mpa_v30, 201901, Table S2) using MetaPhlAn3 v3.0.7.57 Relative abundances of species-level taxonomic profiles were centered-log ratio (clr) transformed and used for principal component analysis with FactoMineR v2.4.68 Density ridgeline plots were generated with the ggridges package v0.5.369 in R v3.6.1.70 Shannon Index and Bray-Curtis dissimilarity were determined with vegan v2.5.7 (diversity function71), and the UniFrac distance with phyloseq v1.28.0 (UniFrac function72) using the phylogenetic tree published along MetaPhlAn3. Functional metadata on bacterial species (Table S5) were aggregated from different publications,73,74 the List of Prokaryotes according to their Aerotolerant or Obligate Anaerobic Metabolism (OXYTOL 1.3, Mediterranean institute of infection in Marseille), bacDive,75 FusionDB,76 The Microbe Directory v2.0,77 and the expanded Human Oral Microbiome Database.78 For each sample, the cumulative relative abundance of taxa that were associated with oxygen tolerance or an oral habitat was determined (Figure 2). The Microbial Dysbiosis Score was calculated as the log-ratio of the cumulative relative abundance of taxa which were previously positively and negatively associated with pediatric Crohn’s Disease.23

To track bacterial strains in distinct biological samples, we used the SameStr tool from our group,22 which leverages the clade-specific MetaPhlAn markers to resolve within-species phylogenetic sequence variations. Briefly, MetaPhlAn3 marker alignments were converted to single nucleotide variant (SNV) profiles, extensively filtered, merged, and compared between metagenomic samples based on the maximum variant profile similarity (MVS) to detect strains that were shared between samples. In contrast to StrainPhlAn, which uses the major allele at every position in the alignment (consensus sequence), SameStr’s MVS-based approach evaluates the co-occurrence of all four possible nucleotide alleles between overlapping alignment sites of two samples, including polymorphic sites (≥10% allele frequency), which can result from multiple strains representing the same species. This allows for the detection of sub-dominant shared strains or coexisting recipient and donor strains from the same species. Shared strains were called if species alignments between metagenomic samples overlapped by ≥ 5 kb and with an MVS of ≥99.9%. Additional documentation of SameStr is available at https://www.github.com/danielpodlesny/SameStr.

To detect significant differences in patients and donors relative to healthy controls (Figure 2) with respect to microbiota composition (ɑ/β-diversity), dysbiosis and bacterial species lifestyles (oral habitat, oxygen tolerance) generalized linear mixed-effects models (GLMMs) were used, which were calculated with the glmer function (binomial distribution, logit link, 'Oxy. tolerant (%)', 'Oral habitat (%)', 'Spore forming (%)') in lme4 v1.1.2779 or the lmer function (Gaussian distribution, 'Dysbiosis (Score)', 'Shannon Index', 'Dist. to Ctrls') from lmerTest v3.1.3.80 For each study and metric, the sample type (pre-FMTABx-, pre-FMTABx+, post-FMT, donor, control) was incorporated as a fixed effect, using samples from the control cohort as a reference. Only post-FMT patient sample data were included that were collected at least five days after FMT. We controlled for study effects in the control cohort and repeated post-FMT patient sampling by including study and case as random effects. Multicollinearity was assessed by calculating the variance inflation factor with the performance package v0.7.2 (multicollinearity function81). The resulting model outputs are tabulated in Table S3.

For each post-FMT patient sample, recipient and donor-derived taxa were determined based on shared species and strains with pre-FMT recipient and donor samples. Recipient or donor-derived or coexisting strains were identified as shared exclusively between post-FMT and pre-FMT patient, or between post-FMT patient and donor, or between post-FMT and pre-FMT patient and donor samples, respectively. Analogously, recipient or donor-derived species were exclusively shared between post-FMT and pre-FMT patient, or between post-FMT patient and donor samples, respectively. In several cases, multiple available samples from the same donor or individual samples from multiple donors that were used for pooled FMTs were combined. For Wilson et al. (OSU), individual donor samples that the authors had combined in batches for FMT were combined. For Li et al. (BOR), which included data from a single donor sampled at three distinct time points without providing information about their specific use for distinct patients, donor samples were combined, as described in the original publication. For Kump et al. (GOR), which included repeated FMT, all available sequence data for each donor were combined across treatment rounds. Ng et al. (CHA) did not disclose sample metadata in the publication, including information about patient/donor pairing and patient assignments to different treatment groups (FMT alone, FMT with lifestyle intervention, or sham treatment), and this information was not made available upon requests to the authors. For this study, concatenated sequence files of all five donor samples were used and sham cases identified and excluded based on the lack of shared strains with any post-FMT sample (see Figure S5). In case of pooled donor sequence data, mean values of all relevant microbiota metrics (e.g. ɑ/β-diversity) were used in our models. Baruch et al. (BOU) published fecal metagenomes from patients before but not after antibiotic pretreatment. To include this dataset in our models, we imputed pre-FMT microbiota metrics with the mean values that were observed in all antibiotically pretreated patients. We also tested our model without the BOU data, which had only a minor effect on the model predictions (Figure S5).

Generalized linear mixed-effects models (GLMMs) were used to estimate the effects of recipient and donor microbiota parameters and clinical modalities on the post-FMT microbiota assembly process. Separate GLMMs were used to determine the role of these parameters for donor-derived strain fractions in individual patients after FMT (Figure 4) and of these and additional, species-specific parameters for the engraftment of individual donor strains (Figure 5).

The GLMM for the engraftment of individual strains (binomial distribution, logit link) closely fit the underlying data, both for predicted donor strain engraftment events of individual genera and aggregating total numbers of engrafted strains (r = 0.94, p <.0001). Therefore, we used the model to simulate FMT outcomes for other recipient/donor pairs from the meta-cohort. For these simulations, species-level taxonomic compositional profiles of recipient and donor samples, as determined with MetaPhlAn3, were used as input for the GLMM and the predicted total number of engrafted donor strains (based on individual predictions for each donor strain) were aggregated for each patient and time point and compared to actually detected numbers from the real recipient/donor pairs by calculating (log2) fold-changes (Figure 5D).

The code for SameStr, including documentation, examples and notebooks, is available at Github (https://www.github.com/danielpodlesny/SameStr).

Conceptualization and methodology, D.P., J.W., and W.F.F.; writing of the original draft, D.P., J.W., and W.F.F.; review & editing, D.P., J.W., and W.F.F.; software, validation, and formal analysis, D.P.; resources, M.D., S.P., N.O.K., and G.G.; data curation, D.P., M.D., S.P.; funding acquisition, W.F.F.

The authors declare no competing interests.

Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrm.2022.100711.





