Candida tropicalis Infection Modulates the Gut Microbiome and Confers Enhanced Susceptibility to Colitis in Mice

We previously showed that abundance of Candida tropicalis is significantly greater in Crohn’s disease patients compared with first-degree relatives without Crohn’s disease. The aim of this study was to determine the effects and mechanisms of action of C tropicalis infection on intestinal inflammation and injury in mice.

C57BL/6 mice were inoculated with C tropicalis, and colitis was induced by administration of dextran sodium sulfate in drinking water. Disease severity and intestinal permeability subsequently were evaluated by endoscopy, histology, quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction, as well as 16S ribosomal RNA and NanoString analyses (NanoString Technologies, Seattle, WA).

Infected mice showed more severe colitis, with alterations in gut mucosal helper T cells (Th)1 and Th17 cytokine expression, and an increased frequency of mesenteric lymph node–derived group 2 innate lymphoid cells compared with uninfected controls. Gut microbiome composition, including changes in the mucin-degrading bacteria, Akkermansia muciniphila and Ruminococcus gnavus, was altered significantly, as was expression of several genes affecting intestinal epithelial homeostasis in isolated colonoids, after C tropicalis infection compared with uninfected controls. In line with these findings, fecal microbiome transplantation of germ-free recipient mice using infected vs uninfected donors showed altered expression of several tight-junction proteins and increased susceptibility to dextran sodium sulfate–induced colitis.

C tropicalis induces dysbiosis that involves changes in the presence of mucin-degrading bacteria, leading to altered tight junction protein expression with increased intestinal permeability and followed by induction of robust Th1/Th17 responses, which ultimately lead to an accelerated proinflammatory phenotype in experimental colitic mice.



Based on its biological effects, we hypothesized that C tropicalis infection may alter the gut microbiome community and that the resulting dysbiosis may predispose the host to developing IBD. We, therefore, investigated how C tropicalis infection affects the severity of dextran sodium sulfate (DSS)-induced colitis in C57BL/6 (B6) mice. Furthermore, we used 16S ribosomal RNA analysis to characterize the fecal microbiome of the experimental mice before and after C tropicalis challenge to determine whether fungal infection could lead to dysbiosis. We report herein that the bacteria Akkermansia muciniphila and Ruminococcus gnavus were more and less abundant, respectively, in the gut of infected mice. Mechanistically, we showed that germ-free (GF) mice transplanted with fecal material from mice infected with C tropicalis showed altered expression of several tight-junction proteins and increased susceptibility to DSS-induced colitis. Finally, we showed that the expression of several genes affecting intestinal epithelial homeostasis in isolated colonoids was altered after C tropicalis infection compared with uninfected controls.

We first hypothesized that oral inoculation with C tropicalis would alter susceptibility to experimental colitis in mice. We tested our hypothesis by analyzing the severity of DSS colitis in B6 mice that were pretreated with oral gavage of either C tropicalis inoculum (infected group) or phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) (control group). Uninfected mice, spared DSS treatment, were used as the negative control.

We found that all mice survived during the period of DSS administration. In contrast, during the consequent 2 weeks (recovery phase), mice infected with C tropicalis showed a significantly increased mortality rate compared with uninfected mice (95% CI, 1.038–11.24; P < .05) (Figure 1A). In line with these clinical findings, histologic analysis of mice colons also showed that infected mice had significantly more severe colitis compared with controls (P < .05), as was indicated clearly by increased mucosal damage and cell infiltration in infected mice (Figure 1B and C). Untreated mice with DSS (both uninfected and infected) showed no sign of colitis, mucosal damage, or cell infiltration in the mucosa. Finally, the harmful effect of C tropicalis was corroborated further by our endoscopic study, which showed that infected mice had a significantly increased thickness of colonic mucosa and a higher percentage of intestinal erosions (P < .001, vs uninfected controls). Moreover, untreated mice with DSS (both uninfected and infected) showed no sign of erosion, ulcers, or bleeding, as shown by the presence of visible submucosal blood vessels, a typical sign of normal mucosal thickness (Figure 1D and E). To verify if C tropicalis effectively colonized the gut of the infected mice, the fecal fungal burden was assessed daily after the last day of inoculation. The colony forming units (CFUs) were present in the stool of the infected mice for up to 4 days after the last inoculum (Figure 1F). Mice had no culturable fungus after day 4 (day 5–7 after infection) and before the induction of DSS colitis. To evaluate whether the increased susceptibility to DSS colitis that we observed was a specific effect of C tropicalis, we induced DSS colitis in a separate group of mice that were inoculated with the nonpathogenic yeast Saccharomycopsis fibuligera (serving as a negative control group). Indeed, histologic and endoscopic analysis showed that mice inoculated with S fibuligera did not show significant differences in terms of colitis severity when compared with the control PBS-inoculated group (P = NS for both) (Figure 2).

Next, to examine the immunologic basis for the aforementioned proinflammatory effect of C tropicalis infection during acute chemical colitis, we characterized the colonic mucosal immunophenotype from infected and uninfected mice after 14 days of DSS recovery. By measuring cytokine expression in colon samples, we detected a significant increase of tumor necrosis factor (Tnf) (P ≤ .05), interferon (Ifn)-γ (P < .05), and interleukin (Il)17 (P < .02) (Figure 3A–C) in C tropicalis–infected B6 mice (vs uninfected controls). On the other hand, Il4 (P < .02) and Il13 (P < .02) were decreased significantly in the infected mice (Figure 3D and E). In addition, we detected a trend toward increased expression of Il33 in the infected group, although not to a statistically significant level (Figure 3F). Furthermore, when colon samples harvested from infected and uninfected mice were cultured for 24 hours, protein levels of TNF (P < .02), IFNγ (P < .001), and IL17 (P < .001) were increased significantly in the infected mice compared with the controls (Figures 3G–I). Conversely, we did not find any significant difference in protein levels of IL4 and IL13 (Figures 3J and K). Moreover, we detected a trend toward increased production of IL33 in the infected group, although not to a statistically significant level (Figure 3L).

Taken together, these data strongly suggest that infection with C tropicalis renders B6 mice more susceptible to acute chemical colitis, an effect that is associated with alterations of the mucosal immunologic microenvironment toward Th1/Th17 dominant immunity.

Because innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) have been reported to play a role in immune defense against candidiasis,10,11 we also investigated the effect of infection with C tropicalis on the mucosal populations of ILCs (Figure 4A). Our flow cytometry analysis showed that GATA Binding Protein 3 (GATA3)+ group 2 ILCs (ILC2s) (gated on CD127+ Lin-) were increased significantly in the mesenteric lymph nodes (MLNs) of infected mice as compared with the uninfected group (Figure 4C). In contrast, we did not observe any significant differences in the other major ILC populations, namely T-bet+ ILC1s and Retinoid-related orphan receptor gamma t (RORγT)+ ILC3s in the MLNs (Figure 4B and D). Furthermore, flow cytometry analysis showed that T-bet+ ILC1s, GATA3+ ILC2s, and RORγT+ ILC3s were not significantly different in the colons of the 2 groups (Figures 4E–G).

The increased susceptibility of C tropicalis–infected mice to DSS colitis that was shown earlier may be owing to a direct stimulatory effect of this pathogen on the mouse mucosal immune system. Nevertheless, another possibility is that C tropicalis expansion acts indirectly by affecting the composition of the gut microbiome, which, in turn, may invariably shape mucosal immunologic responses and modify susceptibility to acute chemical injury.

Figure 5B shows the microbiome differences between the 2 groups of mice (infected vs uninfected); it is shown that administration of C tropicalis was associated with specific alterations at the genus and species level. In particular, R gnavus was significantly less abundant in infected mice (P < .05). In contrast, A muciniphila was significantly more abundant in infected mice as compared with controls (P < .02). Furthermore, A muciniphila was confirmed to be the bacterial species that was affected the most by C tropicalis administration because it is persistently shown in 6 different operational taxonomic units that were tested (P < .05) (Figure 5C). Finally, bacteria belonging to the genus Lactobacillus showed a trend for decreased abundance in the infected group, although this did not reach statistical significance (P = NS).

One possibility for the increased susceptibility of C tropicalis–infected mice to DSS colitis could be that infection with this fungal strain creates a proinflammatory environment per se at the intestinal mucosa. To address this hypothesis, we studied B6 mice that were inoculated only with C tropicalis without subsequent DSS treatment. As a negative control, we used B6 mice without C tropicalis inoculation. Histologic analysis showed that neither group developed signs of colonic damage (Figure 6A). Furthermore, we characterized the colonic mucosal immunophenotype of infected and uninfected mice by measuring cytokine expression in colon samples, and did not detect any significant differences in the expression of various helper T cells (Th)1, Th2, and Th17 cytokines compared with uninfected mice (Figure 6B–F). Flow cytometry analysis confirmed the quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) data on lymphocytes isolated from MLNs (Figure 7A–C). A second possibility that was raised by our results could be that the main cause of increased susceptibility to DSS colitis was the shift that was observed in the gut microbiome of C tropicalis–inoculated mice. Because the major changes concerned mucin-degrading bacteria, we explored the possibility that infected mice showed changes in mucus production. To address our second hypothesis, we used Alcian blue stain to quantify the abundance of mucin-producing goblet cells in the colonic epithelium of the 2 groups of mice. Our results clearly showed that goblet cells were decreased significantly in colonic sections of B6 mice after C tropicalis inoculation (P < .05 vs control group) (Figure 6G and H).

Taken together, these findings indicate that the critical mechanism for the proinflammatory effect of C tropicalis during DSS colitis is not a direct immunostimulatory effect on local immunocytes, but rather the rearrangement of bacterial microflora and a corresponding deleterious effect on mucus production.

To validate our hypothesis that dysbiosis involving mucin-degrading bacteria including A muciniphila and R gnavus lead to changes in mucus production and consequently altered intestinal permeability, we characterized the colonic epithelial expression of tight junction proteins from GF mice transplanted with fecal material of B6 mice previously inoculated with C tropicalis or PBS (controls). Reverse-transcription (RT)-qPCR analysis showed that colonic epithelial cells from the experimental group were characterized by a significant decrease of Claudin (Cldn)2 (P < .02) and Cldn7 (P < .05) in the experimental group compared with controls (Figure 8A and B). On the other hand, Cldn4 (P < .02) and Cldn16 (P < .02) were increased significantly in the experimental group compared with controls (Figure 8C and D).

Taken together, these data strongly suggest that the microbiome shift promoted by C tropicalis infection leads to changes in the expression of specific tight junction proteins causing altered intestinal permeability and, as a result, the altered microflora is capable of inducing enhanced susceptibility to colitis upon fecal transplantation in GF mice.

To seek confirmation that the changes in mucus production caused by C tropicalis infection lead to altered intestinal permeability, we performed a fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-dextran (70 kilodaltons) permeability assay. Infected and uninfected B6 mice were gavaged with FITC-dextran. Relative fluorescence unit (RFU) plasma levels were measured 4 hours after the gavage. The negative control group was represented by plasma of uninfected mice that were not gavaged with FITC-dextran. We detected that RFU plasma levels in infected mice were increased significantly compared with uninfected mice (P < .05) (Figure 9A). Furthermore, because intestinal epithelial barrier dysfunction (IEBD) is considered an important risk factor for the pathogenesis of CD, we isolated crypts from the colon of the experimental mice and subsequently generated colonoids from the intestinal epithelium of mice infected and uninfected with C tropicalis to highlight the molecular mechanisms induced in the colonic epithelium as a response to C tropicalis infection. Although colons of the 2 groups had normal histologic features, such as normal villi architecture and no acute inflammation, we detected a trend toward a decreased number of developed colonoids in infected mice compared with the uninfected group, albeit this was not statistically significant (Figure 9B). To further clarify the mechanisms that determine altered intestinal permeability and potential epithelial barrier dysfunction in infected mice we used a Mouse NanoString Panel focused on 230 genes affecting intestinal-epithelial barrier function and epithelial homeostasis (NanoString Technologies, Seattle, WA). The data obtained can be visualized in the heatmap showing the clustering of genes significantly increased or decreased compared with the uninfected control group (Figure 9C). We used uninfected mice to define baseline homeostatic expression and observed differences with infected mice for 17.8% of the genes analyzed. Specifically, 30 genes were up-regulated significantly in infected mice and 11 were down-regulated (Figure 9D). Functional classification of the 41 genes that were different between infected and uninfected mice showed that the majority belonged to families of genes involved in the transcription and translation of proteins affecting the functionality of intercellular junctions. In particular, the up-regulated genes were related to the activation of the cadherin signaling pathway (P ≤ .05) and adherens junctions interactions (P < .02), such as Csnk2b, Src, Mllt4, Actb, Actg1, Ctnna, and Ctnnb1 (Figure 9E–M). A complete list of genes with significantly different expression between colonoids cultured from infected vs uninfected mice is shown in Figure 10.

In the present study, we report that intestinal infection with C tropicalis was associated with increased severity of DSS colitis in B6 mice, which was indicated by enhanced, proinflammatory Th1/Th17 immune responses. We also provide mechanistic evidence for the pathogenic mechanism of this effect by showing that infection with C tropicalis did not induce a proinflammatory mucosal immunophenotype per se in the absence of challenge with DSS. Rather, the worse outcome was mediated through intimate interactions between intestinal bacteria and fungi that take place during acute DSS-induced colitis. Such interactions include specific alterations in fecal microbiome composition that may produce downstream weakening of the mucus barrier and that render the microbiome of C tropicalis–infected mice capable of transferring disease susceptibility to GF mice upon fecal transplantation.

In conclusion, we provide evidence for a deleterious effect of C tropicalis infection on the severity of DSS colitis in mice and propose a pathogenic model that involves both microbiome shifts and rearrangements of the mucosal immunophenotype. In particular, fungal inoculation does not affect mucosal immunity per se but weakens the function of the defensive mucosal barrier by facilitating expansion of microbiome components with mucin-degrading properties, most prominently A muciniphila species. Eventually, this is followed by induction of dominant mucosal Th1/Th17 responses and expansion of ILC2s, all of which culminate in an accelerated proinflammatory phenotype in C tropicalis–infected mice. Based on our discoveries, we speculate that interkingdom interactions may deeply affect the immune system of IBD patients and may underlie disease flares as a result of generation of a proinflammatory environment. Deeper understanding of such interactions will further elucidate IBD pathogenesis but also may offer unique treatment opportunities for these devastating diseases.

B6 mice (Mus musculus) were propagated in the Animal Resource Center at Case Western Reserve University (CWRU). All mice used in this study were between 15 and 18 weeks of age and were age- and sex-matched among experimental groups.

All mice had ad libitum access to water and standard laboratory rodent diet P3000 (Harlan Teklad, Indianapolis, IN) throughout the experiments. Harem breeding was set up by co-housing one 8-week-old male with two 8-week-old females. All procedures were approved by the CWRU Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee and were in accordance with the Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care guidelines. All experiments were conducted in a blinded manner, without prior knowledge of treatments and mouse groups by the experimenter. Mice were randomized to different interventions using a progressive numeric number. The code for each mouse was known only to the animal caretaker and was revealed at the end of the study.

To control for cage-to-cage variability that could be attributable to gut microbiome changes, corn bedding from each cage was collected, mixed for 3 minutes, and then an equal amount of pellets was redistributed in each experimental cage a week before the C tropicalis inoculation. At the same time, 20 mg of fecal pellets were collected from each mouse in sterile PBS. All the pellets were homogenized in PBS using glass beads of 0.5-mm diameter (11079105; Biospec Products, Bartlesville, OK) and of 1.0-mm diameter (11079110; Biospec Products). The fecal homogenate then was gavaged (200 μL/mouse, once per day for 3 consecutive days).

Induction of acute colitis was achieved by exposing mice to sterilized 2.5% (wt/vol) DSS (batch DB001-31; TdB Consultancy AB, Uppsala, Sweden) in drinking water for 7 days. Our protocol for induction of DSS colitis includes renewal of the DSS solution every 3 days. B6 mice were allowed ad libitum access to water. Mice returned to normal drinking water after 7 days of DSS and were allowed to recover for 2 weeks. Daily monitoring was performed for body weight, fecal bleeding, and the presence of loose stools.

The clinical C tropicalis strain was isolated from a fecal sample taken from a CD patient and used as the infecting fungus.4,51 C tropicalis was plated on Sabouraud dextrose agar and incubated at 37°C for 2 days. C tropicalis cells were harvested by centrifugation and normal saline (0.85% NaCl) washes. A challenge inoculum of 1 × 109/mL was prepared using a hemocytometer. Each mouse was challenged with 1 × 108 blastospores in 0.1 mL normal saline via oral gavage once per day for 3 consecutive days (n = 3). Animals were considered infected after successful dosing and inoculum confirmation in the stool. This process was performed 4 days before the administration of 2.5% DSS in drinking water. Quantification of fecal fungal burden (CFUs/mL) was determined by plating on Sabouraud dextrose agar. CFUs were calculated as log CFUs per g of feces. As control, we gavaged 2 extra groups of B6 mice with PBS or nonpathogenic yeast S fibuligera.

Colonoscopy was performed using a flexible digital ureteroscope (URF-V; Olympus America, Center Valley, PA) with an 8.5F (2.8-mm) tapered-tip design and motion range. The endoscope system included a video system center (Olympus America), a xenon light source (Olympus America), and a video recorder (MediCapture, Philadelphia, PA). Endoscopy images were obtained on an Olympus BX41 microscope (magnification, 100× and 200×; objective, 10×; eyepiece, 10×). Colonoscopy was performed on day 21 after DSS administration, and inflammation was evaluated using a previously validated endoscopic scoring system.52 Briefly, the system considers 4 different parameters to evaluate colonic inflammation: perianal findings (diarrhea, bloody feces, or rectal prolapse); wall transparency (based on the ability to see the blood vessels of the colonic mucosa); intestinal bleeding (spontaneous or induced by the endoscope because of the mucosal friability), and focal lesions (edema, erosions, and ulcers). Subscores for each parameter ranging from 0 (normal colonoscopy) to 3 (maximum severity of colonic changes) were used to evaluate colonic inflammation and to assess the potential presence of tumor lesions. The sum of these subscores was used to define colonic health as follows: healthy (0–1), mild colitis (2–4), moderate colitis (5–7), and severe colitis (8–13). Mice were anesthetized by isoflurane, USP (Butler Schein Animal Health, Dublin, OH) before performing endoscopy; no colonoscopy preparations, such as fasting or laxatives, were required.

Colons from infected and uninfected mice were removed, flushed of fecal contents, opened longitudinally, and placed in Bouin’s fixative. Tissues were embedded in paraffin and stained with H&E. Inflammation was evaluated by a trained pathologist in a blinded fashion using a previously described scoring system.53 Briefly, scores ranging from 0 (normal histology) to 3 (maximum severity of histologic changes) were used to evaluate 4 individual histologic subindices for the following: (1) active inflammation (infiltration with neutrophils); (2) chronic inflammation (lymphocytes, plasma cells, and macrophages in the mucosa and submucosa); (3) percentage of re-epithelialization; and (4) percentage of ulceration.

Colon samples from each mouse were collected and subjected to physical homogenization (with 100 mg of 1.4-mm ceramic beads, 4000 rpm), and total RNA was isolated using an RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). Reverse transcription was performed using the High Capacity RNA-to-complementary DNA Kit (Applied Biosystems, Carlsbad, CA). qPCR amplification of complementary DNA samples was performed using clear 96-well plates (Roche, Branchburg, NJ) and the Roche 480 LightCycler SYBR Green (Roche) run template settings (hot start 95°C for 10 minutes, 40 amplification cycles; 95°C for 15 seconds; 60°C for 30 seconds; and 72°C for 30 seconds); β-actin was used as a housekeeping gene.

The following primers were custom designed and synthesized by Integrated DNA Technology (Coralville, IA). For mouse work, we used the following: β-actin: forward primer, 5’-CAGGGTGTGATGGTGGGAATG-3’; reverse primer, 5’-GTAGAAGGTGTGGTGCCAGATC-3’; Tnfα: forward primer, 5’-GCGGTGCCTATGTCTCAG-3’; reverse primer, 5’-GCCATTTGGGAACTTCTCATC-3’; Ifn-γ: forward primer, 5′-TGAGCTCATTGAATGCTTGG-3′; reverse primer, 5′-ACAGCAAGGCGAAAAAGGAT-3′; Il17: forward primer, 5’-GCTCCAGAAGGCCCTCAGA-3’; reverse primer 5’-CTTTCCCTCCGCATTGACA-3’; Il4: forward primer, 5′-GCTAGTTGTCATCCTGCTCTTC-3′; reverse primer, 5′-GGCGTCCCTTCTCCTGTG-3′; Il13: forward primer, 5’-GGGAGTCTGGTCTTGTGTGATG-3’; reverse primer, 5’-TTGCTTGCCTTGGTGGTCTC-3’; Il33: forward primer, 5′-TCCTTGCTTGGCAGTATCCA-3′; reverse primer, 5’-TGCTCAATGTGTCAACAGACG-3′.

Colon samples were collected from both infected and uninfected mice (0.1 g/sample) and cultured in complete RPMI 1640 medium for 24 hours. Supernatants subsequently were collected for TNF, IFNγ, IL4, IL13, IL17, and IL33 analysis by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN). All enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays were performed according to the manufacturer's instructions.

MLNs were collected and crushed through a 40-μm nylon mesh. To analyze ILCs and lymphocytes, single-cell suspensions of MLNs were incubated, respectively, with live/dead Fixable Violet and live/dead Fixable Blue Dead Cell Stain Kit (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, WA) to determine cell viability, washed with fluorescence-activated cell sorter buffer, followed by incubation with fluorescently conjugated antibodies for 20 minutes at 4°C, and then with fixation/permeabilization buffer (eBioscience, San Diego, CA) for 30 minutes at 4°C in the dark. Cells then were washed with permeabilization buffer and stained with a combination of fluorescently conjugated antibodies for 30 minutes at room temperature, to detect intracellular proteins. The following antibodies were used to detect ILCs: mouse lineage antibody cocktail with antibodies raised against CD3 (clone 145-2C11, 100301; BioLegend, San Diego, CA), Gr-1 (clone RB6-8C5, 108401; BioLegend), CD11b (clone M1/70, 101207; BioLegend), B220 (clone RA3-6B2, 103211; BioLegend), Ter-119 (clone Ter-119, 116207; BioLegend); CD11c (clone N418, 14011482; eBioscience), CD45 (clone 30-F11, 14045182; eBioscience), GATA-3 (clone TWAJ, 1:50, 12996642; eBioscience), IL7Rα (clone A7R34, 135011; BioLegend), RORγT (clone AFKJS-9, 12698882; eBioscience), and T-bet (clone eBio4B10, 12582582; eBioscience). The following antibodies were used to detect lymphocytes expressing cytokines: mouse lineage antibody cocktail with antibodies raised against CD3 (clone 145-2C11, 553067; BD Biosciences, Mississauga, Ontario, Canada), TNF (clone MP6-XT22, 506313; BioLegend), IFNγ (clone XMG1.2, 505842; BioLegend), IL4 (clone 11B11, 3120520; Sony, Bothell, WA), IL17A (clone TC11-18H10.1, 3134610; Sony), and IL13 (clone 13A, NBP1-43239APC; Novus Biologicals, Centennial, CO). Flow-cytometric acquisition was performed on a FACSAria sorter (Mississauga, ON, Canada). Data subsequently were analyzed using FlowJo_V10 software (Tree Star, Ashland, OR) by gating on live cells based on forward vs side-scatter profiles, then gating on singlets using forward scatter area vs height, followed by dead-cell exclusion and then cell subset-specific gating. CountBright absolute counting beads (Thermo Scientific) were used to determine absolute cell number of ILCs by flow cytometry, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. ILCs were characterized by gating on CD45+ live cells, and then looking for a population positive for CD127 and negative for lineage markers CD11b (myeloid cells), Ter-119 (granulocytes), CD11c dendritic cells (DCs), Ly-6g (neutrophils), B220 (B cells), and CD3 (lymphocytes). From the CD127+ lineage- population, we gated on GATA3+ cells (ILC2), RORγT+ cells (ILC3), and cells negative for GATA3 and RORγT that were positive for T-bet (ILC1). Lymphocytes were characterized by gating on CD3+ live cells.

After 3 days of fecal homogenization, 1 fecal pellet from each mouse was collected and stored at -80ºC. A week after the fecal homogenization, 1 group of B6 mice was infected with C tropicalis through gavage (1 × 106 U/100 uL PBS), and the control group was gavaged with PBS (100 μL). A second sample of fecal pellets from each mouse then was collected 6 days after the infection of the experimental group. Stool samples were analyzed by 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing investigating the gut microbiome. Metagenomic DNA was extracted from fecal aliquots thawed on ice and resuspended in 600 mL DNA stabilization buffer (Stratec Biomedical, Birkenfeld, Germany) and 400 mL phenol/chloroform/isoamyl alcohol (25:24:1 by volume; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). Cells were mechanically lysed (3 × 6.5 m/s for 40 s) with 500 mg, 0.1-mm glass beads (Roth, Goshen, IN) using a bead-beater (MP Biomedicals, Solon, OH) fitted with a cooling adapter. After heat treatment (95°C, 8 min) and centrifugation (16,000 × g; 5 min; 4°C), 150 mL supernatant was incubated with 15 mL ribonuclease (0.1 mg/mL; Amresco, Cleveland, OH) at 37°C and centrifuged (550 3 × g; 30 min). DNA was purified with the NucleoSpin Genomic deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) Clean-up Kit (Macherey-Nagel, Düren, Germany), following the manufacturer’s instructions. Concentrations and purity were determined with the NanoDrop and Qubit system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and stored at -20°C. Preparation of amplicon libraries (V3–V4 region) and sequencing were performed as described in detail previously.54 After purification with the AMPure XP system (Brea, CA), sequencing was performed in paired-end mode (275 bp) with pooled samples containing 25% (vol:vol) PhiX standard library in a MiSeq system (Illumina, Inc, San Diego, CA) prepared according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Raw reads were processed with the Integrated Microbial Next Generation Sequencing pipeline (Munich, Germany),55, 56, 57 based on the UPARSE approach.58 In brief, sequences were demultiplexed, trimmed to the first base with a quality score less than 3, and then paired. Sequences with less than 350 and more than 500 nucleotides and paired reads with an expected error greater than 3 were excluded from the analysis. Remaining reads were trimmed by 10 nucleotides on each end to prevent analysis of the regions with distorted base composition observed at the start of sequences. The presence of chimeras was tested with UCHIME (San Francisco, CA).59 Operational taxonomic units were clustered at 97% sequence similarity, and only those with a relative abundance greater than 0.5% in 1 or more samples were kept. Taxonomies were assigned an 80% confidence level using the RDP (East Landsing, MI) classifier,60 the SILVA database (Bremen, Germany) applying SINA (Bremen, Germany),61 and EzBioCloud (Seoul, Republic of Korea).62

We used GF B6 mice to assess the effect of the microbiome on DSS-induced colitis severity after FMT using gut microbiome isolated from mice previously inoculated with C tropicalis or PBS. All mice were caged using the GF-grade nested isolation (NesTiso, Rensselaer, NY) caging system63 and maintained on nonedible Aspen bedding (Walton Hills, OH). Mice were fed autoclaved GF-grade 40 to 50 kGy irradiated pellet food (PMI Nutrition International, LLC (St. Louis, MO); Labdiet, Charles River (Garfield Heights, OH); Vac-Pac Rodent 6/5 irradiated (St. Louis, MO), 5% kcal% fat) and water (double-autoclaved) was given ad libitum. Each mouse received daily oral gavages (0.1 mL/10 g of body weight; 107 CFUs/100 μL) for 3 consecutive days. Seven days after the fecal transplant, acute colitis was induced in the 2 groups by administration of 2.5% DSS in drinking water for 7 days. Colitis severity in the fecal microbiome transplanted mice was assessed at the end of experiments using histologic and endoscopic analysis. Protocols on animal handling, housing, and transplant of fecal microbiome into GF mice were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee and the Institutional Review Board at CWRU, following the National Research Council Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. Measures to control for bedding-dependent microbial bias/overgrowth were implemented in all experiments, as previously described.63

FITC-dextran (70 kilodaltons) and acid-citrate-dextrose solutions were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Mice were fasted for 6 hours before the test. Then, mice were administered a dose (150 uL/mouse) of FITC-dextran in sterile 1× PBS (80 mg/mL) through gavage technique. After 4 hours, blood was collected in a capillary tube by nicking the tail of the mouse in its proximal region. Acid-citrate-dextrose solution was added 15% vol/vol as an anticoagulant. Then, all blood samples were centrifuged at 5000 rpm for 10 minutes. Plasma was collected in a new 1.5-mL tube and kept in the dark at 4°C. Plasma then was diluted 1:10 in PBS and transferred to a black, opaque-bottom, 96-well plate. A volume of 100 uL was transferred into each well. PBS was used as blank. Readings of RFUs were measured by a SpectraMax i3x (San Jose, CA) spectrophotometer in triplicate and averaged. Fluorescence was determined at 530 nm with excitation at 485 nm.

Mice were killed and colon was collected, cut open, and placed on a Tissue Culture-Treated (TC) dish with a small amount of Hank’s balanced salt solution (GIBCO, Gaithersburg, MD) to keep it moist. The tissue samples then were incubated in a digestive solution containing 3 mL Hank’s balanced salt solution with Ca2+/Mg2+, 150 μL DNase (10 mg/mL; Sigma-Aldrich), 30 μL collagenase (100 mg/mL; Sigma-Aldrich), and 300 μL dispase (STEMCELL Technologies, Vancouver, Canada) for 1 hour at 37ºC at 150 rpm. The cells of each colon sample then were filtered with a 100-μm strainer and collected into a flow cytometry tube. Then, the cells were incubated with 10 μL rat anti-mouse CD16/CD32 antibody (553142; BD Biosciences, Franklin Lakes, NJ) in 6 mL flow cytometry buffer containing EDTA (0.5 mol/L) and HEPES (Sigma-Aldrich) for 10 minutes on ice. After that, each sample was incubated with 5 μL Allophycocyanin (APC) anti-mouse CD326 epithelial cellular adhesion molecule (Ep-CAM) antibody (118213; BioLegend) on a shaker for 1 hour on ice in the dark. Positive cells then were sorted through BD Biosciences Aria and processed for subsequent qRT-PCR analysis.

Mice were killed and colon was collected, cut open longitudinally in a Petri dish with cold PBS without Ca2+/Mg2+ (Sigma-Aldrich), vigorously washed using forceps, and cut in 2- to 5-mm pieces. Next, the pieces were collected in a 50-mL Falcon tube filled with 30 mL Dulbecco′s Phosphate Buffered Saline (DPBS) plus 120 μL ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid 0.5 mol/L (Sigma-Aldrich) and incubated for 45 minutes at 4ºC. Subsequently, colon pieces were collected in 4 fractions of 25 mL DPBS. The 4 fractions were inspected under a microscope (10× objective) to identify the fractions enriched in crypts and with low level of debris. The chosen fraction was spun down (450 × g for 10 minutes at 4ºC). The supernatant was removed and the pellet was resuspended in 150 μL Intesticult (STEMCELL Technologies) and 150 μL Matrigel basement membrane matrix (Corning, Inc, Corning, NY). Aliquots of 40 μL of this solution then were plated in a prewarmed 48-well plate (VWR, Radnor, PA) into the center of the well and incubated for 10 minutes at 37ºC, allowing the Matrigel to polymerize. Finally, 350 μL Intesticult was added in each well of the plate. Colonoids were cultured for 10 days and passaged once after 6 days. Total RNA was extracted on day 10 and gene expression was measured by NanoString analysis.

Total RNA was extracted from colonoids of uninfected and infected mice after 10 days of culture. Extracted RNA was incubated with a custom panel of 250 bar-coded probes (NanoString Technologies) specific for genes associated with intestinal-epithelial barrier function and epithelial homeostasis (NanoString Technologies). Genes were selected from Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) Pathways for tight junction (map04530), regulation of actin cytoskeleton (map04810), colorectal cancer (map05210), most with significant overlapping membership in adherens junction (map04520), focal adhesion (map04510), Wingless-related integration site (Wnt) (map04310), and other pathways. NanoString technology is characterized by high reproducibility and sensitivity. As criteria of differential expression, we used the following: >2-fold change and P ≤ .05. Six biological replicates per condition were evaluated. Standard NanoString protocols were followed. Reporter probes, hybridization solution, sample, and capture probes were mixed together and hybridized overnight at 65ºC. After hybridization, samples were transferred and processed in the NanoString nCounter Prep Station. The Prep Station washed away excess probes and purified the target/probe complexes using magnetic beads. Briefly, the hybridization solution containing the target-probe complexes is mixed with magnetic beads complementary to sequences on the capture probe. This process is followed by a washing step to remove the excess reporter probes. The target-probe complexes then were hybridized to magnetic beads complementary to sequences on the reporter probe. A final washing step was performed to remove excess capture probes. The purified target/probe complexes were deposited in a cartridge, laid flat, and immobilized for data collection. Data were analyzed by ROSALIND (freely available at https://rosalind.onramp.bio), with a HyperScale architecture developed by OnRamp BioInformatics, Inc (San Diego, CA). Read distribution percentages, violin plots, identity heatmaps, and sample Minimum Data Set plots were generated as part of the QC step. Normalization was performed by dividing counts within a lane by the geometric mean of the normalizer probes from the same lane. The NormqPCR R library64 was used to select normalizer probes using the geNorm algorithm. Fold changes and P values were calculated using criteria provided by Nanostring. Clustering of genes for the final heatmap of differentially expressed genes was performed using the Partitioning Around Medoids method using the Flexible Procedures for Clustering R library,2 which takes into consideration the direction and type of all signals on a pathway; the position, role, and type of every gene; and so forth. Hypergeometric distribution was used to analyze the enrichment of pathways, gene ontology, domain structure, and other ontologies. The topGene Ontology R library (Buffalo, NY)65 was used to determine local similarities and dependencies between GO terms to perform Elim pruning correction. Several database sources were referenced for enrichment analysis, including Interpro (Stoneham, MA),66 NCBI (Bethesda, MD),67 MSigDB (San Diego, CA),68 REACTOME (Toronto, ON, Canada),69 and WikiPathways (Maastricht, Netherlands).70 Enrichment was calculated relative to a set of background genes relevant for the experiment.

Experiments were conducted at a minimum in duplicate. Univariate and multivariate analyses were conducted using the collective data from replicated experiments. When the data fulfilled the assumptions for parametric statistics, comparisons of continuous data across experimental groups were conducted using Student t tests. Alternative nonparametric tests were used for data with unfulfilled distributional assumptions regarding the normality of the data. Data were expressed as SEMs, and 95% CIs were reported when appropriate. An α level of .05 was considered significant. All analyses were conducted with GraphPad software (San Diego, CA).

All authors had access to the study data and reviewed and approved the final manuscript.

All experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at Case Western Reserve University and conducted following the Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care guidelines.

Luca Di Martino (Conceptualization: Lead; Formal analysis: Lead; Investigation: Lead)

Fabio Cominelli, MD, PhD (Funding acquisition: Lead; Supervision: Lead; Writing – original draft: Lead)

Conflicts of interest The authors disclose no conflicts.

Funding This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grants DK042191, DK055812, DK091222, and DK097948 (F.C.), DK125526 (L.D.M.), and R01AI145289-01A1 (M.G.).

Data Transparency The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

