International Cancer Microbiome Consortium consensus statement on the role of the human microbiome in carcinogenesis

In this consensus statement, an international panel of experts deliver their opinions on key questions regarding the contribution of the human microbiome to carcinogenesis.

International experts in oncology and/or microbiome research were approached by personal communication to form a panel. A structured, iterative, methodology based around a 1-day roundtable discussion was employed to derive expert consensus on key questions in microbiome-oncology research.

Some 18 experts convened for the roundtable discussion and five key questions were identified regarding: (1) the relevance of dysbiosis/an altered gut microbiome to carcinogenesis; (2) potential mechanisms of microbiota-induced carcinogenesis; (3) conceptual frameworks describing how the human microbiome may drive carcinogenesis; (4) causation versus association; and (5) future directions for research in the field.

The panel considered that, despite mechanistic and supporting evidence from animal and human studies, there is currently no direct evidence that the human commensal microbiome is a key determinant in the aetiopathogenesis of cancer. The panel cited the lack of large longitudinal, cohort studies as a principal deciding factor and agreed that this should be a future research priority. However, while acknowledging gaps in the evidence, expert opinion was that the microbiome, alongside environmental factors and an epigenetically/genetically vulnerable host, represents one apex of a tripartite, multidirectional interactome that drives carcinogenesis.

Data from longitudinal cohort studies are needed to confirm the role of the human microbiome as a key driver in the aetiopathogenesis of cancer.

The last decade has seen a surge in the number of studies of the gut microbiome and cancer, facilitated by next-generation sequencing platforms, ‘omics’ technologies and advanced bioinformatics approaches. In contrast to the human genome which is inherited, largely static and which consists of approximately 20 000 genes, the human microbiome is acquired, changes dynamically throughout life and contains approximately 10 to 20 million non-redundant genes.1 The human microbiota was once viewed as comprising either pathogens, causing infectious disease, or passive bystanders. In appreciating the beneficial functions of commensal microorganisms, we have departed from this dichotomy to embrace a novel, subtler paradigm in which host microorganisms contribute to both physiology and pathology. Commensal microorganisms, by definition, do not harm their host. Similarly, pathogens are defined by their ability to cause disease. However, we now appreciate that there is a large and poorly defined middle ground occupied by ‘pathogens’ coexisting with a disease free-host (eg, Helicobacter pylori) and the so-called ‘commensals’ that may contribute to disease under certain conditions. This article is principally concerned with the latter cohort, which may be considered dynamic symbionts—a group of organisms whose symbiotic nature may vary along a spectrum from mutualism and commensalism to parasitism and amensalism. For simplicity, we will refer to this group of dynamic symbionts as the human microbiome (figure 1).

The International Cancer Microbiome Consortium (ICMC) was established in 2017 in recognition of the emerging significance of the human microbiome in oncology. The ICMC comprises academic and clinical experts in oncology and the microbiome and its aim is to promote education and international research collaboration. In its inaugural meeting, ICMC hosted a 1-day roundtable discussion to draw together current research and establish an expert consensus regarding the role of the human microbiome in carcinogenesis.5 Key topics (figure 2) were identified and debated before generating the written document, which was subsequently revised by experts to produce the final consensus.

The aim of this consensus statement was to perform a qualitative assessment of the current evidence relevant to the hypothesis that the human microbiome plays a causative role in the aetiopathogenesis of cancer. Discussion and conclusions were weighted towards bacteria (as opposed to viruses or fungi) because bacteria accounted for most of the available data. Discussion was not restricted to the gut and all cancer types were considered, though again, the gut microbiome and colorectal cancer (CRC) feature prominently because of biases within the literature. Given that our aim was to convey current expert opinion on a novel area of science, as opposed to a specific clinical question, a structured, iterative, ‘pseudo-Delphi’ methodology was employed rather than a formal Delphi methodology. This structured approach is summarised in figure 2. The core participants (AJS, JLA, CAM, JMK and JRM) identified contributors based on their expertise in the microbiome, surgical and medical oncology (upper and lower GI cancer, urological cancers and oncogynaecology) and bioinformatics and invited them to contribute to the consensus by personal communication. Some 18 experts from Canada, China, Europe and the USA agreed to form the expert panel. In stage 1, panel members agreed, by email, on six key topics for discussion centred on the theme of the microbiome and carcinogenesis. In stage 2, panel members were assigned to each of these topics according to their expertise and led the debate and discussion on each topic during a 1-day face-to-face roundtable discussion which was recorded and minuted. In stage 3, the core participants reviewed the discussion and distilled it into five key questions to be addressed in the consensus statement. These key questions reflect the roundtable discussion rather than the a priori identified topics directly and were chosen because of their perceived interest to the academic and clinical community and their depth of discussion during the face-to-face meeting:

Extensive quotes from the discussion are available (see supplement) while selected quotes are included in figures alongside the discussion pertaining to each key question (figures 3–7). In stage 4, the core participants drew on the roundtable debate and suggested literature to draft statements and supporting discussion in response to each key question. Statements were distributed electronically to the expert panel who rated the strength of evidentiary support and their personal level of agreement with each statement according to Likert scales (figure 2, stage 5). Some 16 (out of the 18 present at the panel discussion) experts responded and statements were assigned the modal response (number given in brackets, see supplement for full responses). Panel members also had the opportunity to revise the content of the consensus statement. During stage 6, the expert panel reviewed and revised the manuscript to arrive at consensus over multiple iterations.

Table 1 How does the concept of dysbiosis relate to carcinogenesis?

We suggest that such a functional approach is of more utility in discussing normality and dysbiosis. With respect to the aetiopathogenesis of cancer, we propose that dysbiosis should be considered a persistent departure of the host microbiome from the health-associated homeostatic state (consisting of mutualists and commensals), towards a cancer promoting and/or sustaining phenotype (parasitism or amensalism). This dysbiosis is specific to the individual and thus can only be defined by prospective longitudinal analysis. For example, based on the current literature, the health-associated gut microbiome can be said to have several core features. It is diverse, resilient to short-term environmental pressures and has sufficient plasticity to adapt to the benefit of the host in the face of longer term pressures.11 The health-associated microbiome should synergise with the host to drive beneficial immune responses12 and metabolic mutualism.13 Finally, the microbiome should have a tumour-suppressant effect on the host.14 15 Departure from these core features can be considered dysbiotic and may have the potential to incite or sustain cancer. It should be noted that the health-associated microbiomes of other niches will have different core features.

Table 2 Whatare the broad molecular mechanisms by which the human microbiome may be involved in the aetiopathogeneis of cancer?

In addition to the immune system, metabolism is the second key level at which the host and the microbiota interact.13 The human microbiome is replete with genes which influence the metabolism of dietary vitamins and nutrients, xenobiotics and host-derived compounds such as bile acids. Bacterial metabolism appears to be a crucial cofactor that underpins the observed associations between diet and various cancers.35 Pertinent to CRC, gut bacterial fermentation of dietary fibre to SCFA, such as butyrate, is believed to play an important role in suppressing oncogenesis via its anti-inflammatory and antiproliferative effects.15 In contrast, bacterial metabolism of bile acids and proteins can result in the formation of carcinogenic aromatic amines and sulphides.35 The microbiome also plays a substantial xenometabolic role which includes the formation of ultimate carcinogenic end products, acetaldehyde production from alcohol for example.36 However, the effects of microbial metabolites are likely to be context dependent on host factors. For example, microbial butyrate production has been suggested to induce CRC in mice deficient in the MSH2 gene (which codes a protein playing a key role in DNA mismatch repair) by driving hyperproliferation of colonocytes.37

Table 3 Whatare the conceptual frameworks that best describe the promotion of carcinogenesis by rhe human microbiome?

Although these models account for key observations from mechanistic studies and investigations of the on-tumour microbiome, they perhaps fall short of addressing the aetiopathogenesis of cancer at the macrolevel. For example, how do environmental exposures, such as diet, contribute to cancer risk? What is the impact of host genetic factors? Are these independent risk factors for cancer development or do they act in consort with the microbiome? In consideration of these questions, we propose a broad framework for modelling the role of the microbiome in the development of cancer based on the concept of the interactome. In this model, we consider carcinogenesis to be the ultimate outcome from harmful, tripartite, multidirectional interactions between the microbiome, the environment and the epigenetically/genetically vulnerable host. The relative contributions of these three apices will vary among cancer subtypes. In the case of CRC, for example, it seems likely that the microbiota is necessary, but not sufficient for carcinogenesis; a hypothesis supported by chemical (environment)47 or genetic (vulnerable host)48 rodent models of CRC that display significantly attenuated or no tumour development in germ-free settings. Bacterial driver functions (such as toxin, hydrogen sulphide or (reduced) butyrate production) are the key transducers of environmental cues (such as diet) that can incite carcinogenesis in a vulnerable host (eg, specific TLR genetic polymorphisms). Progression of a neoplasm may depend on continued exposure to environmental stimuli, maladaptive/adaptive changes in microbiome function and/or host response.

Table 4 Isthe relationship between the human microbiome and the aetiopathogenesis of cancer causative or associative?

In contrast, a causal relationship between the human symbiotic microbiome and the development of cancer is not firmly established. The nature of the microbiome presents several challenges for proving causation. The microbiome—including the virome, mycobiome and other organisms—is orders of magnitude more complex than a discrete risk factor such as smoking or colonisation by a single organism. The microbiome is dynamic, changing with age, environmental exposures (eg, diet, antibiotics and some surgeries) and the development of cancer itself. While a causal relationship has been posited for numerous cancer types, the role of the gut microbiome in colorectal carcinogenesis has received the most attention and offers the strongest evidence. We have already summarised the mechanistic evidence supporting causation. Parallel evidence comes from murine studies in which germ-free mice chemically or genetically predisposed to intestinal neoplasia, develop fewer tumours compared with conventionally housed counterparts, while carcinogenesis can be potentiated by exposing mice to specific bacteria or stool from patients with CRC.26 54 Human studies have demonstrated that the CRC microbiome differs from that of nearby normal tissue with reduced diversity and altered community structure with lower relative abundance of potentially protective taxa (eg, butyrate-producing Roseburia) and increased abundance of taxa with potentially procarcinogenic phenotypes (eg, Fusobacterium, Bacteroides, Campylobacter, Escherichia and Porphyromonas).43 44 55–57 However, it is currently unclear whether this altered community structure is a risk factor for CRC development or rather evolves secondarily to the unique tumour microenvironment. Studies have shown a linear relationship between microbiome composition and tumour stage, moving through the adenoma-carcinoma sequence, and also with other histological tumour features such as lymphovascular and perineural invasion.41 42 These findings are at least consistent with causation but could also be argued to reflect changes in the tumour microenvironment. However, uninvolved, normal colonic mucosa from patients with CRC also demonstrates taxonomic differences (eg, abundance of sulfidogneic Bilophila wadswothia) compared with healthy mucosa from controls suggesting a microenvironment-independent underlying field change.58 Nonetheless, direct evidence supporting causation in a human population is lacking as current studies have been cross sectional with single-time-point sampling—there are no prospective, longitudinal data from large cohort studies. The evidence for other cancer types and microbiome niches is generally weaker than that for the gut microbiome and CRC and is therefore also unproven.

Table 5  Whatare the key directions for future research to develop our understanding of the role of the microbiome in carcinogenesis?

Microbiome science has captured the imaginations of scientists, clinicians and the public alike but often blinds consumers with complex ‘omics’ methodologies while simultaneously failing to deliver on its translational potential. This has precipitated criticism of the entire field63. Reporting guidelines have become de rigueur in many aspects of basic and clinic research and the panel would welcome the application of similar frameworks to microbiome research. Transparent reporting of experimental and analytical methods alongside detailed metadata is essential to facilitate reproducibility.

In this consensus statement, we have reflected on current expert opinion regarding the crucial question of whether the human microbiome plays a causative role in the aetiopathogenesis of cancer, with a focus on CRC. While cancer causation by specific microorganisms (such as H. pylori) is beyond doubt, proving causation for the human microbiome in the broader sense is more challenging. There are plausible mechanisms and ample parallel or supporting evidence from in vitro, murine and cross-sectional human studies. However, direct evidence from large longitudinal cohort studies is lacking and should be a key focus in the future. Until then, the expert panel considers that the case in support of a causative role for the human microbiome in the aetiopathogenesis of cancer remains unproven, but a majority nevertheless agrees with the hypothesis. The panel considers the microbiome to be one aspect of an interactome with an epigenetically/genetically vulnerable host and the environment. However, the host genotype is largely fixed and evidence suggests that the microbiome may be a key player in modulating/mediating the response to environmental pressures. In this context, the microbiome presents a very exciting opportunity to better understand cancer and how it might be prevented.

Contributors: AJS, JA, CAM, JMK and JM planned the consensus statement and organised the ICMC roundtable discussion, proposing broad topics for discussion. AJS, JA, CAM, JMK, JM, DC, CJ, RB, JA, SJO, HRG, JT, JY, DJH, HV, JB and DWR contributed to active discussion during the roundtable event. AJS, JA, CAM, JMK and JM drafted the manuscript. DC, CJ, RB, JA, SJO, HRG, JT, JY, DJH, HV, JB, PWO and DWR revised the manuscipt. JMK and JM act as guarantors of the content of the manuscript.

Funding: The roundtable discussion was funded by Cancer Research UK (Award C42378/A25637). The Division of Integrative Systems Medicine and Digestive Disease at Imperial College London receives financial support from the National Institute of Health Research (NIHR) Imperial Biomedical Research Centre (BRC) based at Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust and Imperial College London. This article is independent research funded by the NIHR BRC, and the views expressed in this publication are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the NHS, NIHR, or the Department of Health.

Competing interests: None declared.

Provenance and peer review: Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.

Correction notice: This article has been corrected since it published Online First. The ninth author’s name has been corrected.

Patient consent for publication: Not required.

