Host Genetics and Gut Microbiome: Perspectives for Multiple Sclerosis

As a complex disease, Multiple Sclerosis (MS)’s etiology is determined by both genetic and environmental factors. In the last decade, the gut microbiome has emerged as an important environmental factor, but its interaction with host genetics is still unknown. In this review, we focus on these dual aspects of MS pathogenesis: we describe the current knowledge on genetic factors related to MS, based on genome-wide association studies, and then illustrate the interactions between the immune system, gut microbiome and central nervous system in MS, summarizing the evidence available from Experimental Autoimmune Encephalomyelitis mouse models and studies in patients. Finally, as the understanding of influence of host genetics on the gut microbiome composition in MS is in its infancy, we explore this issue based on the evidence currently available from other autoimmune diseases that share with MS the interplay of genetic with environmental factors (Inflammatory Bowel Disease, Rheumatoid Arthritis and Systemic Lupus Erythematosus), and discuss avenues for future research.

Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is a chronic inflammatory demyelinating disease that causes demyelination of oligodendrocytes in the Central Nervous System (CNS) [1]. MS is today the leading cause of non-traumatic disabilities in young adults in Europe [2] with a prevalence of over 2 million cases worldwide [3]. Epidemiology studies have shown a sex difference in the prevalence and progression of the disease: MS has a 2:1~3:1 female to male ratio [4]. The relapsing form of MS is more frequent in young women [5] while in men MS shows higher incidence at older ages and a more severe progressive course [6].

Although genetics account for ∼30% of disease susceptibility and first-degree relatives of patients show susceptibility for MS [15,16], MS is not an inheritable disease. Susceptibility and protective alleles have been identified in the Region of the Major Histocompatibility Complex (HLA, Human Leukocyte Antigens) and in several genes related to the immune response [17,18]. Among environmental factors, the most recognized as linked to the risk of developing MS disease are Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) infection [19,20], smoking habitude [21] and vitamin D deficiency [22]. Recently, great attention has been paid to gut microbiome composition [23] and several studies have tried to identify which microorganisms may promote or counter its pathogenesis and progression [24,25]. Interactions between environmental factors and genes are considered to determine the remaining 70% of disease risk. How these complex networks of interactions ultimately drive disease susceptibility remains to be elucidated.

It is known that the rate of MS recurrence in families is 20%, and concordance between monozygotic twins is 24–30% while between dizygotic twins is only 3–5%, which is comparable to that of normal brothers [26,27]. Before the era of genome-wide association studies (GWAS) the only genetic factor implicated in MS susceptibility was on the HLA region on the short arm of chromosome 6 that extends for about 4 Mb. In particular, a strong association was observed with the DRB1*15.01 allele, which confers a threefold increase in risk [28]. Further studies identified other associations with different HLA loci independently of the DRB1*1501: the allele HLA-DRB1*0301 and the allele HLA-DRB1*1303, which confer an MS risk, and the protective allele HLA-A*0201 and a variant that tags HLA-DPB1*0301 [29]. In the last ten years, international GWAS studies analyzing large datasets have identified 200 loci involved in susceptibility to the disease separate from the HLA region. This discovery was mainly due to the contribution of three international studies in 2011 [18], 2013 [30], and 2019 [31]. In particular, with the latest GWAS study published in 2019 [31], in which 39,000 individuals from nine different populations were tested and 331,536 Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) analyzed, the number of statistically independent associations with MS susceptibility have been increased to 233. Of these, 32 were within the HLA region, one in chromosome X, and 200 in the autosomal non-HLA region. The genome-wide and suggestive effects jointly could explain about 48% of the estimated heritability. This study confirmed the enrichment for MS susceptibility loci in many different immune cell types and tissues, but on the other hand, it did not find enrichment in tissue-level CNS profiles. Analyzing data generated from human induced Pluripotent Stem Cells (iPSC)-derived neurons as well as from purified primary human astrocytes and microglia, the authors observed that enrichment for MS genes is seen in human microglia but not in astrocytes or neurons. Despite these efforts in identifying these associated variants and loci, and although several signals are near genes involved in immunologic processes, the effector mechanisms for most associations remain unknown.

The remaining fraction of the risk commonly known as “missing heritability” is likely due to still unknown common variants characterized by much smaller effects, below the detection limits of the GWAS studies conducted so far. Some authors have proposed that a substantial portion of the missing heritability lies in genetic interactions between known variants, the so-called phantom heritability [37]. Similarly, gene–environment interactions, cis/trans-regulators of allelic expression, unidentified rare and penetrant semi-private variants, population and/or disease heterogeneity, the neglect of the analysis of sex chromosomes, and hidden epigenetic effects may all contribute to the missing heritability.

All microorganisms, including bacteria, archaea, fungi, and viruses, exist in an ecosystem called a microbiota, and the collective genomic, protein, and metabolite content of all the microbes in this given ecosystem is called a microbiome [38]. The human microbiota colonizes virtually every surface of the human body exposed to the external environment: skin, urogenital tract, respiratory tract, and digestive tract, but more than 95% of the microbiota is located in the large intestine. Here, about 1014 different populations of microorganisms live, with a number of genes at least 100 times larger than the number of human genes in the body [39]. This large number of intestinal microbes has evolved over a long period of time, becoming an inseparable part of the host and playing an important role in maintaining the health of the body.

Gut microbiota and host develop an intimate mutualistic relationship. Normal gut microbiota is involved in specific functions in host nutrient metabolism: it derives its nutrients from host dietary components and produces source of energy for the host; many taxa are able to synthetize short chain fatty acids (SCFA) such as butyrate, propionate and acetate from fermentation of carbohydrates that escaped proximal digestion and indigestible oligosaccharides [44]; it contributes to lipid and protein metabolism, by suppressing the inhibition of lipoprotein lipase activity in adipocytes, and through microbial proteinases and peptidases acting in tandem with human proteinases [45]; it is also involved in synthesis of vitamin K and several components of vitamin B. Gut microbiota functions also include xenobiotic and drug metabolism, maintenance of structural integrity of the gut mucosal barrier, immunomodulation, and protection against pathogens.

Changes in the composition of the gut microbiota accompany the individual from infancy, through adolescence and adulthood, to old age [46]. The first traces of microbial colonization have been identified in utero, amniotic fluid and placenta although this remains controversial [47,48,49]. However, the large-scale colonization of the human intestine by microbes begins at birth [48,50]. The first differences in microbial composition are observed between caesarean and natural delivery. Natural childbirth exposes the newborn to vaginal bacteria, mainly Lactobacillus, while Caesarean section favors contact with the skin, where Actinobacteria mainly reside [40,48,50]. Further changes are introduced by the type of feeding (for example breastfeeding or formula feeding and then weaning) [40]. After the first year of age, an infant microbiota resembles that of a young adult and stabilizes, but its composition is continuously influenced by endogenous and exogenous factors such as genetics, sex, diet and drugs. [40,51]. Finally, aging directly acts on the composition of the microbiota with a decrease in microbial diversity and a decrease in Bifidobacteria and Firmicutes of the genus Clostridium [50].

Antibiotics can strongly affect the components of gut microbiota: adult gut microbiomes seem not to be resilient to repeated antibiotic administration; furthermore, antibiotics taken early in life could deeply impact the gut microbiome composition, resulting in predisposition to obesity, asthma, inflammatory bowel disease and other disorders such as autoimmunity [57].

An increasing number of studies have suggested that gut microbiota and CNS communicate constantly during life stages, connecting the emotional and cognitive centers of the brain with peripheral intestinal functions [46,58,59] via the microbiome–gut–brain axis that consists of molecular pathways, belonging to the endocrine, immune, nervous, and metabolic systems, interacting with each other [46,60,61,62]. The gut microbiota interacts with the CNS by producing various metabolites ranging from sugars and SCFA to neurotransmitters including serotonin, γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), norepinephrine and dopamine [63]. Furthermore, it stimulates the peripheral immune system by inducing the release of cytokines and chemokines which, in addition to locally regulating bacterial concentrations, can infiltrate the blood and lymphatic system and therefore have effects on the CNS [63]. Moreover, it can interact with the CNS by stimulating the vagus nerve [63]. Conversely, biochemical changes in the central nervous system can alter the microbial composition and immune cell responses in the gut microbiome through the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis [63].

Specific bacteria preferentially induce specific CD4+ T subtypes. For example, segmented filamentous bacteria (SFB) induce the differentiation of Th17 cells in the ileum, while strains of Clostridia and Bacteroides fragile favor the differentiation of Tregs in the colon. [71]. Gut-induced Th17 cells can became pathogenic under specific stimuli, such as high IL-23 production, salt, or long chain fatty acids. They can migrate to the draining lymph nodes of target organs, such as the CNS, contributing to autoimmune disease through cross-reactivity between microbial peptides and self-antigens (model of molecular mimicry). Alternatively, microbiota-specific Th17 cells migrate towards the lymph nodes and lower the activation threshold of self-reactive effector T cells (T cell threshold model) [71], inducing a harmful immune response to self-antigens.

The first evidence of the involvement of gut microbiota in MS comes from experiments on the EAE, the most commonly used model for MS, which resembles the inflammation and demyelination processes of the human counterpart. Specific components of gut microbiota have the capability to promote or prevent EAE. A first study by Berer et al. [72] showed that a germ-free environment has been associated with a milder EAE disease course. This result was not surprising as germ-free mice show extreme defects in immune system development, but clearly demonstrates the essential role of commensal-mediated immune system development in this disease. GF EAE mice have lower levels of the proinflammatory cytokines IFN-γ and IL-17A, both in the gut and the CNS, and display an increase in Treg cells [73]. Of further note, gut microbiota influences blood-brain barrier (BBB) permeability in mice. Germ-free mice have disrupted BBB tight junctions when compared to pathogen-free adult mice. The permeability is overcome by colonization of the germ-free mice with conventional gut flora. This observation suggests that early colonization by microflora may be essential in the development of normal BBB function [74].

Moreover, dietary metabolites may influence systemic autoimmune response. SCFA improved the course of EAE by long-lasting imprinting of gut-derived Treg cells, while long-chain fatty acids (LCFA) exacerbated EAE disease and induced expansion of Th17 cells in the gut [78].

Studies in MS are still at the early stage of development and limited to case-control examinations of the gut microflora in MS patients versus healthy controls (Table 1). Although changes in some commensal bacteria have been consistently detected in different microbiota studies in MS, the results vary between different studies. These discrepancies may reflect differences in the ethnic, genetic, lifestyle, and dietary backgrounds of the patient cohorts analyzed. However, some peculiarities have been highlighted in the intestinal microbiota of subjects with MS compared to controls.

Conversely, MS subjects showed increased immunoreactivity to the Epsilon toxin (ETX) produced by Clostridium perfringens [86], indicating prior exposure to ETX. ETX’s tropism for the BBB and binding to oligodendrocytes/myelin makes it a stimulating candidate for nascent lesion formation in MS [86]. Metanobrevibacters are methanogenic archaea that can induce dendritic cell activation and pro-inflammatory effects on cells with adaptive immunity [24]. Changes in the abundance of Akkermansia, Acinetobacter and Bifidobacterium have been associated with impaired ability to promote the differentiation of Tregs, or with the ability to promote Th1 cell differentiation in PBMC cultures [80,84]. Higher incidence of EAE after MS fecal transfer in GF mice has been observed [80] but the roles of single taxa remain debated. For example, the effect of Akkermansia on MS is controversial: studies from multiple cohorts found an increase of Akkermansia muciniphila in MS gut microbiotas [80,84]; by contrast, Akkermansia showed anti-inflammatory properties in EAE after fecal transplant from EAE-peak to EAE-susceptible mice, expanding Treg cells by a mi-RNA dependent mechanism [87]. According to these observations it is evident that the number of hypotheses that link specific microorganisms to MS pathogenetic mechanism is constantly growing.

Associations between the human genome and microbiome composition have been extensively studied in recent years. Microbiome and host genetics are strictly correlated [88]: the first plays a role in human health and disease by influencing the host’s traits, disease susceptibility, and treatment response; the second influences microbiome composition [89]. In particular, studies on twins demonstrated that the gut microbiomes of monozygotic (MZ) twins are significantly more similar than those of dizygotic (DZ) twins, indicating that host genetic factors are involved in modulating gut microbiome composition [88,90]. The first study by Goodrich et al. [91] was performed on a large cohort of MZ and DZ twin pairs (977 individuals), which allowed them to assess the impact of genotype and early shared environment on gut microbiota. This study was fundamental for the further and larger study on the Twins UK cohort (416 twin pairs). This new study in 2016 demonstrated significant heritability of overall microbiome composition [92]. Several heritable taxa have been identified: the family Christensenellaceae has been demonstrated to have the highest heritability; however, the archaea family Methanobacteriacae, the phyla Firmicutes, Actinobacteria, Tenericutes, and Euryarchaeota were shown to be more heritable, while the highly abundant Bacteroidetes phylum shows very little heritability. In a Canadian cohort, 20 bacterial taxa were found to be heritable and included five taxa reported in the UK cohort [93]. These results indicated that some bacteria are affected by host genetics in the overall human population, whereas variation of the overall composition of the gut microbiome is determined by environmental factors.

In the last decade many microbiome genome-wide association studies (mGWAS) have been conducted, performing both 16S RNA sequencing and whole-metagenome sequencing to identify hosts’ genetic polymorphisms that interact with the microbiome and influence its architecture and functional diversity [88,89,90,94]. Associations between microbiome and variants located in genes involved in immunity and metabolism have been found from these studies, despite the relatively small sample sizes of healthy subjects (Table 2) [89].

To conclude, SNPs identified as having significant associations with microbial taxa did not overlap between the studies and replication of mGWAS results has been poor, apart from the association with LCT locus and the abundance of Bifidobacterium. This can possibly be explained by different statistical and technical methods, multiple-testing corrections and intrinsic sample features (lifestyle, diet, demographic and environmental conditions of subjects). However, the enrichment of microbiome-associated variants with immunity and metabolism related genes remains consistent among the studies. In addition, previous mGWAS have been conducted on a reduced number of individuals, mostly in Europe and North America. Future studies should consider larger cohorts in order to increase the power of these association studies, and including not only Western populations. In fact, the association of host genetic variants with microbiomes may be dependent on ethnicities, environment or intra-individual features, so studying diverse populations will help to identify these interactions.

As illustrated above, gut microbiome deeply influences the induction of immune responses. This influence and its interaction with host genetics could play a fundamental role in the development of autoimmunity, especially in those diseases in which genetic factors interact with environmental ones (smoking, diet, air pollution, hormone fluctuation, etc.) as risk factors, such as Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD), Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA), Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE) and MS. These diseases share a common genetic architecture [30,102,103], increased pathogenic Th17 cells [104,105,106] and mechanisms related to gut dysbiosis [107,108,109]. As currently there are no studies correlating host genetic factors and microbiome in MS, in this review we describe this relationship in the abovementioned diseases, concluding with a brief report of a first study in EAE.

The role of host genetics has been investigated in several animal models due to better control of genetics and environmental factors. Mouse models are considered a powerful model for evaluating host–microbiota interactions applicable to humans for two main reasons: high genetic similarity and similarity to humans at the microbial taxonomic level. For example, genetic background (i.e., BALB/c or C57BL/6J) has shown to be a stronger determinant than gender on the mouse microbiome [125], and the relative abundance of several heritable microbial taxa such as Lactobacillus johnsonii was identified as being affected predominantly by host genetics [126]. In the context of MS, a first study assessing the role of gut microbiome and host genetic interaction was recently performed on EAE [127]. Montgomery et al. demonstrated potent effects of host genetics on both EAE susceptibility and gut microbial composition predating disease onset. By using a genetically diverse mouse model representing 29 unique host genotypes, they studied EAE by microbiome sequencing and targeted microbiome manipulation. They identified specific gut bacteria and their metabolic functions associated with lower or higher EAE susceptibility across multiple host genotypes, implicating short-chain fatty acid metabolism as a key element conserved across multiple host genotypes: Lactobacillus reuteri was found as a commensal species capable of exacerbating EAE [127]. These results demonstrate the existence of complex interactions between host genetics and gut microbiota that modulate susceptibility to CNS autoimmune disease, providing insights into microbiome-directed strategies aimed at lowering the risk for autoimmune disease.

Research in the past decade has illustrated a close relationship between a host’s microbiome and health, which leads to questions about how these microbiotas form and whether host genes play a role. To date, the impact of host genetics on the composition of the gut microbiome remains unclear. Several studies in mouse models and humans support the idea that host genetic components can regulate gut microbiome composition: twin studies have shown that overall microbiome composition and many individual taxa are heritable. However, other studies in humans provide evidence for the dominant role of the environment in shaping the gut microbiome, while host genetics plays a negligible role. Although much effort has been invested, a clear trend indicating a role of the host genetics in the gut microbiome has not been identified, probably due to inconsistencies and unevenness between the studies’ results, low sample sizes and environmental factors [128].

Despite relatively strong epidemiological associations, the role of the microbiome in MS remains complex and unclear. It is now widely accepted that the gut microbiota plays a crucial role in the gut–brain axis, thus controlling CNS diseases, and dysbiosis is present in MS patients; however, we are very far from the identification of a particular gut microbiome signature in MS. This is mainly due to differences in geographical cohorts, sequencing techniques, stage of disease and treatment across the studies. However, the gut microbiome has emerged as a new environmental factor that could contribute to disease risk. At the same time, genetic architecture is also known to be involved in disease susceptibility; therefore, there is a strong need to understand how and if host genetics influence gut microbiome composition. The elucidation of this interaction could help in explaining the missing heritability determined by the interactions between environmental factors and genes. Studies in this direction are in their infancy, but a collective effort in this direction would be desired, addressing critical challenges such as increased sample size, independent replication, meta-analysis in multiple populations, and environmental factors. Overall, the comprehension of host genetics and gut microbiome composition at the onset of the disease could be a challenge for the design of personalized therapeutic strategies.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

