Microbiome–microglia connections via the gut–brain axis

Microglia, the resident immune cells in the brain, are essential for modulating neurogenesis, influencing synaptic remodeling, and regulating neuroinflammation by surveying the brain microenvironment. Microglial dysfunction has been implicated in the onset and progression of several neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative diseases; however, the multitude of factors and signals influencing microglial activity have not been fully elucidated. Microglia not only respond to local signals within the brain but also receive input from the periphery, including the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Recent preclinical findings suggest that the gut microbiome plays a pivotal role in regulating microglial maturation and function, and altered microbial community composition has been reported in neurological disorders with known microglial involvement in humans. Collectively, these findings suggest that bidirectional crosstalk between the gut and the brain may influence disease pathogenesis. Herein, we discuss recent studies showing a role for the gut microbiome in modulating microglial development and function in homeostatic and disease conditions and highlight possible future research to develop novel microbial treatments for disorders of the brain.

Microglia are tissue-resident macrophages that make up ∼5–15% of total brain cells and have several well-defined functions in the central nervous system (CNS; Pelvig et al., 2008). During early development, microglia actively regulate neuronal cell numbers and synaptic refinement, ultimately shaping neural circuitry (Sierra et al., 2010; Paolicelli et al., 2011; Wynn et al., 2013). To sustain brain homeostasis, microglia constantly survey their microenvironment through the dynamic extension and retraction of their processes (Davalos et al., 2005; Nimmerjahn et al., 2005). Upon sensing signals of infection or injury, microglia transition from a homeostatic surveillance state to an activated state, facilitating antimicrobial or tissue repair programs that restore homeostasis (Saijo and Glass, 2011).

In this review, we will highlight mechanisms by which the gut–brain axis regulates microglial identity and function during development and aging. We then discuss gut–brain communication pathways and how perturbations in the healthy gut microbiota (i.e., dysbiosis) could potentially lead to microglial dysfunction. Finally, we will highlight possible interactions of the microbiome and microglia in the context of neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative disorders exemplified by autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and Parkinson’s disease (PD), respectively.

Microglia were first discovered in the early 20th century by Pío del Río-Hortega, who pioneered exploration of microglial morphology and function (Sierra et al., 2016). Until recently, the origins and precise lineage of microglia have been subjects of significant debate in the biomedical research community. The analogous function and structure between microglia and macrophages inspired the hypothesis that these cells share a common lineage. However, the advent of new methods to study cellular lineages, including genetic tracing, transgenics, and fate-mapping analyses, defined distinct developmental trajectories and ontogenies between these two cell populations (Ginhoux et al., 2010).

Microglial development is thought to be precisely orchestrated by an intrinsic genetic program and environmental cues (Fig. 1). This process begins in the yolk sac around embryonic day 7.5 (E7.5) as microglia emerge from erythromyeloid progenitor cells, which are hematopoietic precursor cells of the mesoderm (Alliot et al., 1999; Ginhoux et al., 2010; Kierdorf et al., 2013; Gomez Perdiguero et al., 2015; Hoeffel et al., 2015; Sheng et al., 2015). The maturation and differentiation of erythromyeloid progenitors into microglia within the yolk sac requires several transcription factors, including RUNX1, JUN, PU.1, and IRF8, the expression of which coincides with that of microglial markers, including CX3CR1, CD11b, and F4/80 (Ginhoux et al., 2010; Matcovitch-Natan et al., 2016). At E8.5, microglia become mobile and begin to migrate from the embryonic yolk sac to the brain. This process of brain colonization precedes the formation of the BBB, which eventually shields microglia from potentially toxic peripheral influences throughout both fetal development and adulthood (Obermeier et al., 2013). Once in the brain, microglia are broadly distributed at varying densities and maintain a stable rate of proliferation depending on the stage of host development (Askew et al., 2017). The capacity for microglia to self-renew in their local environment, independent of hematopoietic progenitor cells circulating the bloodstream, is a defining feature of these innate immune cells (Gomez Perdiguero et al., 2015).

Transcriptomic studies suggest that after populating the brain, microglia undergo a stepwise maturation program in parallel to brain development, from early microglia (until E14) to premicroglia (E14 to the first weeks after birth) and finally adult microglia (Fig. 1; Matcovitch-Natan et al., 2016). Early microglia and premicroglia gene expression signatures are associated with cellular development, growth, and proliferation, whereas genes enriched in adult microglia are associated with immune signaling pathways (Matcovitch-Natan et al., 2016; Thion et al., 2018).

Microglia also play a role in establishing and shaping neural circuitry during postnatal stages of development, which has implications for cognitive function and social behavior (Paolicelli et al., 2011). Synaptic remodeling resulting in the removal of excess synapses eliminates redundancies in neural circuitry and improves efficiency in neural crosstalk. In a remarkable parallel to macrophage recognition of pathogens, this process has been shown to depend on several complement proteins (C1q and C3) that tag extraneous synapses for microglial engulfment (Stevens et al., 2007; Schafer et al., 2012). Furthermore, high-resolution microscopy has confirmed a physical, albeit transient, interaction between microglia and synapses on neighboring neurons (Tremblay et al., 2010).

In mice, microglia transition to an adult phenotype a few weeks after birth. The adult microglia transcriptome overlaps with, but is distinct from, other tissue-resident macrophages and is characterized by expression of microglial-specific markers, including Sall1, P2ry12, Gpr84, and Tmem119 (Hickman et al., 2013; Butovsky et al., 2014; Gosselin et al., 2014; Matcovitch-Natan et al., 2016). While microglia are heavily involved in shaping the neuronal and synaptic landscape during early development, they are more actively involved in homeostasis and immune surveillance during later developmental stages and adulthood, as suggested by up-regulation of genes involved in immune regulation (Matcovitch-Natan et al., 2016). Systematic analyses of human microglial gene expression from postmortem and surgical tissues indicate broad similarities between human and mouse microglial gene expression but also significant differences, particularly with regard to expression of genes associated with the pathogenesis of neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative diseases (Galatro et al., 2017; Gosselin et al., 2017).

In addition to their innate immune and homeostatic functions, microglia have been implicated in the pathogenesis of a broad spectrum of neurodegenerative and behavioral diseases, including PD, Alzheimer’s disease (AD), multiple sclerosis (MS), schizophrenia, and ASD (Vargas et al., 2005; Hirsch et al., 2012; Frick et al., 2013; Bilimoria and Stevens, 2015). In each case, there is evidence of immune activation, suggesting a role for microglia-driven inflammation as an etiologic factor (Perry and Holmes, 2014; Norden et al., 2015). Of particular interest, recent genetic studies have identified a large number of coding and noncoding risk alleles for neurodegenerative and behavioral diseases that affect genes highly or preferentially expressed in microglia (Lambert et al., 2013; Welter et al., 2014). Thus far, the risk alleles that have been identified are largely nonoverlapping across diseases and affect genes involved in diverse cellular processes, implying complex and poorly understood mechanisms linking microglia to neurodegeneration and behavioral disorders.

Until recently, the microbiome did not spark much attention among neuroscientists. However, recent work characterizing the extensive communication between the gut and the brain has demonstrated an active role for gut bacteria in governing several aspects of CNS physiology.

The gut microbiota affects various cells in the CNS, including microglia. Indeed, recent studies have demonstrated that microglia are sensitive to factors produced by the gut microbiota. Striking differences in the structure and function of microglia derived from specific pathogen–free (SPF) and GF mice have been observed, both at the genetic and morphological level (Erny et al., 2015). Since then, new work has defined additional factors and pathways by which gut microbes influence microglial maturation and function within the CNS.

While the womb is likely a sterile environment, new findings suggests that signals from maternal gut microbes may shape the developmental trajectory of fetal microglia close to the time of birth (Thion et al., 2018). At E14.5, embryonic microglia from offspring of GF dams display minor differences in gene expression compared with their SPF counterparts, whereas microglia collected close to birth (E18.5) demonstrate marked differences in gene expression, chromatin accessibility, morphology, and regional distribution (Thion et al., 2018). For example, microglia from E18.5 embryos from GF mothers show an increased density in various brain regions, with increased numbers of microglia exhibiting a ramified morphology, indicative of a resting state. Altered microglial morphology and density, as well as attenuated inflammatory responses, are also observed in offspring of GF dams immediately after birth, a time when microglia typically exhibit an activated phenotype (Castillo-Ruiz et al., 2018).

Interestingly, sex-related differences have been observed with regard to the influence of the maternal gut microbiota on microglial function in offspring. In male offspring of GF dams, disruption of the transcriptomic profile and morphology of microglia was greatest during the embryonic phase of development, and differentially regulated genes were mostly associated with metabolic and translational pathways (Thion et al., 2018). In female offspring, by contrast, disruption was most notable in adults, and differentially expressed genes were primarily involved in immune and transcriptional signaling (Thion et al., 2018). This suggests that input of maternal gut microbes may have a greater impact on early microglia and premicroglia in male offspring than in females. These trends might help to explain the inherent functional differences in microglia from intact male versus female mice, as well as the sex variations in incidence rates of several neurological disorders (Schwarz et al., 2012; Hanamsagar et al., 2015). The heterogeneity of microglial behavior in response to both intrinsic and extrinsic factors provides further evidence of their complexity, with the gut microbiome representing a key contributing factor in microglial development and function.

Consistent with patterns observed prenatally, microglia from adult GF mice, lacking constant postnatal input from gut microbiota, show distinct differences in density and morphology compared with those derived from SPF mice (Erny et al., 2015). Morphological variations in microglia from adult GF mice include increased cell volume, dendrite length, segment number, and branch points. Microglia from adult GF mice also display differential expression of genes associated with microglial maturation, including down-regulation of genes that regulate cell activation and immune system defense pathways, such as Mapk8, IL-1α, Ly86, Jak3, and Stat1, all of which are normally highly expressed in adult microglia (Fig. 1; Erny et al., 2015; Matcovitch-Natan et al., 2016). Concurrently, genes highly expressed in microglia during early developmental stages that promote cell proliferation and survival, including Csf1r and Ddit4, are aberrantly up-regulated in microglia isolated from adult GF mice.

Investigations into the temporal window for microbe-mediated regulation of microglial maturation has revealed the need for constant input from a diverse gut microbiota. This claim is supported by the conversion of microglia from adult SPF mice into an immature phenotype following antibiotic administration to deplete the microbiota. With the exception of indiscernible differences in microglial density, microglia isolated from antibiotic-treated SPF mice exhibit a microglial gene expression profile and morphology nearly identical to those derived from GF mice (Erny et al., 2015; Thion et al., 2018). These findings suggest that microglia are highly sensitive to perturbations in the gut microbial community during adulthood and require continual input from a complex gut microbiota to maintain homeostasis in the adult.

Despite the many unanswered questions regarding the intersection between gut microbiota and microglial physiology, there is evidence that pathways that collectively integrate the gut–brain axis influence microglial function in both homeostatic and disease conditions (Fig. 2). Gut–brain communication may influence microglia via two routes: the vagus nerve and the circulatory system.

Thousands of sensory and motor fibers from the vagus nerve connect the gut and the brainstem and serve as a conduit for neural signals. Communication through the vagus nerve is essential for signals mediating satiety, stress, and mood, and these signals are governed by changes in enteric neuron activity and the behavior of gut microbes (Goehler et al., 2005; Forsythe et al., 2014; Browning et al., 2017). Given their close physical proximity, symbiotic and pathogenic gut bacteria can directly interact with and activate the vagus nerve, thereby exerting effects upstream to the CNS. Oral inoculation with the pathogen Campylobacter jejuni or intraduodenal injection of the probiotic strain Lactobacillus johnsonii are sufficient to induce activation of vagal sensory neurons innervating the GI tract, as well as neurons in the brainstem (Goehler et al., 2005; Tanida et al., 2005). Additionally, metabolites and neuroactive substances produced by microbes activate chemoreceptors located at vagal nerve endings (Hara et al., 1999; Raybould, 2010). Indeed, the anxiolytic effects of administration of the probiotic species Lactobacillus rhamnosus and Bifidobacterium longum is absent in vagotomized mice, providing strong evidence that gut–vagal nerve interactions regulate social behavior (Wang et al., 2002; Bercik et al., 2011; Bravo et al., 2011).

Communication between intestinal microbes and vagal afferents also appears to influence microglia and the level of inflammation in the CNS (Forsythe et al., 2014). In addition to interacting with gut microbes, vagal nerves interact extensively with different components of the peripheral immune system, continuously monitoring the inflammatory state of the gut (Borovikova et al., 2000; Miao et al., 2004). Upon sensing a change in inflammation, such as increased production of pro-inflammatory cytokines, vagal afferents relay this information to the CNS and can ultimately influence the level of neuroinflammation (Goehler et al., 1999). Concurrently, vagal efferent nerves relay information about the immune status of the brain back to the gut, with increased CNS inflammation feeding back to inhibit further release of peripheral pro-inflammatory cytokines through acetylcholine-mediated signaling (Wang et al., 2003; Goehler et al., 2005). Effective vagal nerve signaling is critical for sending appropriate signals to microglia in order to modulate levels of neuroinflammation. Electrical stimulation of the vagus nerve in the presence of an immune challenge in the periphery has downstream effects on microglial behavior, including up-regulation of anti-inflammatory pathways in the brain (Frasch et al., 2016; Meneses et al., 2016; Kaczmarczyk et al., 2017). Vagus nerve stimulation combined with LPS challenge has also been reported to decrease microglial production of the pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-6, IL-1β, and TNFα in the brain, an effect no longer observed following vagotomy (Meneses et al., 2016). These findings support the role of the vagus nerve as a physical conduit between gut microbial activity and neuroinflammation.

The presence of bacteria along the GI tract is critical for the maintenance of the intestinal barrier, which facilitates the exchange of nutrients, water, and electrolytes and prevents the passage of harmful substances and pathogens from the intestinal lumen into the bloodstream (Jakobsson et al., 2015). By altering expression levels of tight junction proteins along the epithelial wall, and thus the level of bacterial infiltration in the mucosal layer, the gut microbiota can fine-tune the level of intestinal permeability (Karczewski et al., 2010; Alaish et al., 2013). The regulation of the intestinal barrier by gut microbiota shapes their role as mediators of the intestinal and peripheral immune response. Decreased strength of the intestinal barrier due to dysbiosis and other factors permits entry of pathogenic, immune-stimulating, and neuroactive substances into the systemic circulation (Kelly et al., 2015). Once in the circulation, these substances activate a pro-inflammatory immune response mediated by peripheral T cells and macrophages and compromise the integrity of the BBB (Rochfort et al., 2014). Increased circulation of BBB-permeable pro-inflammatory cytokines and neurotoxic compounds may contribute to heightened microglial activation and production of pro-inflammatory cytokines in the brain (Qin et al., 2008; Riazi et al., 2008).

Along with affecting the level of permeability along the intestinal tract, gut microbiota can influence the state of peripheral inflammation through interactions with nearby immune cells. Approximately 70–80% of immune cells in the human body are found in the gut, allowing for direct gut–immune cell interactions (Vighi et al., 2008). When microbe-associated molecular patterns produced by pathogenic invaders bind to pattern recognition receptors, such as TLRs, on host cells, they influence the production of both pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines (Fung et al., 2017). The circulation and subsequent entry of these cytokines into the brain acts locally on CNS cells, including microglia, that express the appropriate cytokine receptors, thereby influencing the state of inflammation in the brain. Indeed, increased intestinal inflammation driven by either LPS or bacterial infection correlates with elevated levels of microglial activation and release of pro-inflammatory cytokines (Riazi et al., 2008; Henry et al., 2009). These studies provide further confirmation of the intimate link between peripheral inflammation, influenced in part by the gut microbiota, and microglial activation and neuroinflammation.

Microbe-derived neuroactive metabolites are additional contributors to gut–brain crosstalk. Circulation of microbe-derived neurotransmitters, including acetylcholine (Lactobacillus), GABA (Bifidobacteria and Lactobacillus), and serotonin (Enterococcus and Streptococcus), can potentially influence microglial activation through direct and indirect means (Komatsuzaki et al., 2005; Yano et al., 2015; Pokusaeva et al., 2017). Studies have demonstrated that 90% of serotonin required for the regulation of mood, behavior, sleep, and several other functions within the CNS and GI tract is produced in the gut. Binding of serotonin to 5-HT receptors on microglia induces release of cytokine-carrying exosomes, providing another mechanism for gut-induced modulation of neuroinflammation (Glebov et al., 2015). Another microbial metabolite that influences microglia activity is tryptophan, a serotonin precursor. Metabolism of tryptophan by activated microglia produces the neurotoxin quinolinic acid, an N-methyl-D-aspartate agonist implicated in several neurological conditions including Huntington’s disease and depression (Feng et al., 2017). In a recent study using the experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) mouse model of MS, peripheral metabolism of dietary tryptophan by the gut microbiota was shown to generate metabolites that dampen the ability of microglia to induce pro-inflammatory responses in astrocytes, thereby ameliorating disease (Rothhammer et al., 2018). These findings provide further confirmation of the role of gut microbiota in influencing behavioral and physiological functions previously thought to be exclusively controlled by local factors in the brain.

More recently, the effects of SCFAs have been extended to microglia. Supplementation of drinking water with a mixture of three primary SCFAs (acetic acid, propionic acid, and butyric acid) rescued the immature genetic and morphological phenotype of microglia from GF mice (Erny et al., 2015). However, the exact SCFA signaling pathways that modulate microglial maturation have yet to be fully elucidated. SPF mice lacking the free fatty acid receptor 2 (FFAR2), a GPCR required for SCFA signaling in the gut, exhibited a microglial phenotype similar to that observed in GF mice (Erny et al., 2015). The absence of FFAR2 expression on microglia suggests that SCFAs may influence microglial maturation through signals that originate in the GI tract. However, exactly how this signal propagates to the CNS and governs microglial behavior is poorly understood. In addition to GPCR signaling, the ability of SCFAs to permeate the BBB and infiltrate the CNS suggests potential direct influences on microglia. Indeed, treatment of microglial cells in vitro with various SCFAs, including valproic acid and butyric acid, elevates levels of acetylation of histone H3 (Chen et al., 2007). This suggests that the ability of SCFAs to influence microglial behavior in vivo might occur through a combination of GPCR signaling and histone deacetylase inhibition. Together, these studies highlight the potential of gut-derived metabolites to enter the systemic circulation and exert their effects on microglia in the CNS.

Given their wide spectrum of physiological functions and myriad roles in development and homeostasis, microglia are believed to be involved in the pathogenesis of several neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative disorders. However, the factors and signals within the brain environment and the periphery that modulate microglial function and response during disease are not fully understood. The recent increase in research into gut–brain communication has created a new narrative for how the microbiome may shape microglial identity and function and how the microbiome, via microglia, may modulate the pathogenesis of neurological diseases. Accordingly, understanding the gut–brain axis will provide the foundation for potential novel therapeutic approaches in the years ahead.

Because of our increased awareness of the gut–brain axis, it has become clear that various neurological diseases, once thought to originate exclusively in the brain, are influenced by peripheral factors. The possible involvement of the microbiota in neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative diseases stems from two primary observations. First is the critical role of gut-derived factors in regulating microglial function in the healthy state, which suggests that signals originating from the gut microbiota might also drive a pathogenic microglial phenotype that promotes disease. Second, dysbiosis is observed in several neurological conditions in which microglial dysfunction is thought to be a contributing factor to disease development, including ASD and PD (Table 1; Hsiao et al., 2013; Sampson et al., 2016). This dysbiosis is potentially sufficient to markedly disrupt microglial function and subsequently facilitate disease pathogenesis. Here, we discuss an emerging role for the gut–brain axis in ASD and PD, where most work has been done to date.

Children with ASD present with a wide range of cognitive and behavioral symptoms, including delayed language development, impaired social and communication skills, and repetitive behavior, depending on where they lie on the spectrum of disease severity (Plauche Johnson, 2004). In addition, symptoms of gut dysfunction such as irritable bowel syndrome, chronic diarrhea, and/or constipation are found in 23–70% of patients with ASD (Chaidez et al., 2014). The high prevalence of GI comorbidities among ASD patients and the correlation between the level of GI distress and severity of ASD symptoms has prompted studies investigating whether the development and/or progression of ASD has microbial origins. Cross-sectional studies comparing the gut microbiota composition between healthy and ASD individuals have revealed an altered microbiota profile in patients with ASD, with several studies reporting increased levels of Clostridium and Lactobacillus along with elevated levels of SCFAs, including propionic and butyric acid (Wang et al., 2012, 2013; De Angelis et al., 2013; Kang et al., 2013). However, given the small sample size in these pilot studies, further studies with larger cohorts are warranted.

Studies of ASD and other neurodevelopmental disorders provide evidence for a potential pathogenic role for both dysbiosis and microglial dysfunction, and suggests that microglia may link early-life dysbiosis to long-lasting neurological abnormalities. Perturbations in the composition of gut microbes during early developmental stages due to maternal infection, mode of delivery, antibiotic use, and early-age infections increase an individual’s predisposition to atypical behavioral patterns. Given the requirement for constant input from the gut microbiota for normal microglial development and function, it is plausible that microbial effects on neural development and behavior may occur through changes in microglial activity (Erny et al., 2015; Thion et al., 2018). New evidence to further support this link will provide a greater appreciation for the role of a healthy gut microbiome in normal microglial and cognitive development.

PD is the second most common neurodegenerative disorder and is defined by the presence of motor symptoms including bradykinesia, rigidity, and resting tremor (Postuma et al., 2015). Pathological hallmarks of PD include death of dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra pars compacta and intraneuronal accumulation of the α-synuclein protein (Goedert et al., 2013). A complex interplay of genetic and environmental factors is thought to drive the pathogenesis of PD, eventually leading to mitochondrial and autophagic dysfunction (Shulman et al., 2011).

The presence of both microbial dysbiosis and microglial dysfunction has been characterized in behavioral (schizophrenia and depression), neuroinflammatory (MS), and neurodegenerative (AD and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis [ALS]) disorders (Table 1). Whether gut microbiota directly or indirectly affect microglia in these conditions remains largely unknown. Gradual changes in microbiota composition have been observed as normal features of aging, including changes in microbial resilience, stability, and diversity, which are features that occur alongside changes in microglial physiology with age (Zapata and Quagliarello, 2015; Buford, 2017). Similar to neurodevelopmental disorders, this trend suggests that microbiota-driven changes in microglial behavior might have a larger role in the onset or progression of neurodegenerative disorders than previously thought (Buford, 2017). Studies investigating changes in microbiome composition and microglial function in the healthy and diseased brain over time will provide additional insights into the nature of gut–brain interactions during the aging process.

Tremendous progress has been made recently in elucidating and characterizing the distinct components and signals of the gut–brain axis. However, the studies to date likely only represent an initial glimpse into the functional interplay between the gut microbiome, microglia, and neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative disorders. The advent of new tools, such as advanced next-generation sequencing methods used to study and characterize the microbiome and microglia, will facilitate further identification and characterization of mechanisms by which gut microbiota influence microglial maturation and function (Bennett et al., 2016). For example, the application of single-cell sequencing to study microglia has also paved the way for potential identification of unique microglial subsets with neuroprotective roles in the context of neurodegenerative disease (Keren-Shaul et al., 2017). These studies have shifted the narrative from the notion of exclusively pathogenic microglia to one of a more nuanced mixture of microglial subsets, including some with neuroprotective properties, enabling a greater appreciation of the multifaceted role microglia might play in driving neuropathological phenotypes and potentially accelerating the development of microglia-targeted therapies.

One of the outstanding questions is how changes in the gut microbiome might lead to an altered microglial phenotype and eventually to impaired brain homeostasis. It is unclear whether the observed disease-associated alterations in microbial communities are a cause or consequence of altered brain function and whether interventions targeting the microbiome can restore microglial function and lead to beneficial effects in neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative diseases. Signals originating from the gut microbiota and transmitted to the brain have the potential to alleviate or exacerbate disease pathogenesis, changes that may operate through gut-mediated changes in microglial behavior. Thus, continued exploration of the intersection of microbiology, immunology, and neurobiology holds immense therapeutic promise. Several different microbiome-targeted approaches, including prebiotic, probiotic, and FMT strategies, have shown promising results for a variety of GI conditions in preclinical and clinical models and could be extended to pathologies involving microglia in the near future (Fond et al., 2015; Winek et al., 2016). Further investment in gut–brain axis research may catalyze the potential of harnessing the gut microbiome for development of innovative, noninvasive, and effective therapeutic strategies for disorders of the brain.

