Near full-length 16S rRNA gene next-generation sequencing revealed Asaia as a common midgut bacterium of wild and domesticated Queensland fruit fly larvae





Gut microbiota affects tephritid (Diptera: Tephritidae) fruit fly development, physiology, behavior, and thus the quality of flies mass-reared for the sterile insect technique (SIT), a target-specific, sustainable, environmentally benign form of pest management. The Queensland fruit fly, Bactrocera tryoni (Tephritidae), is a significant horticultural pest in Australia and can be managed with SIT. Little is known about the impacts that laboratory-adaptation (domestication) and mass-rearing have on the tephritid larval gut microbiome. Read lengths of previous fruit fly next-generation sequencing (NGS) studies have limited the resolution of microbiome studies, and the diversity within populations is often overlooked. In this study, we used a new near full-length (> 1300 nt) 16S rRNA gene amplicon NGS approach to characterize gut bacterial communities of individual B. tryoni larvae from two field populations (developing in peaches) and three domesticated populations (mass- or laboratory-reared on artificial diets).

Near full-length 16S rRNA gene sequences were obtained for 56 B. tryoni larvae. OTU clustering at 99% similarity revealed that gut bacterial diversity was low and significantly lower in domesticated larvae. Bacteria commonly associated with fruit (Acetobacteraceae, Enterobacteriaceae, and Leuconostocaceae) were detected in wild larvae, but were largely absent from domesticated larvae. However, Asaia, an acetic acid bacterium not frequently detected within adult tephritid species, was detected in larvae of both wild and domesticated populations (55 out of 56 larval gut samples). Larvae from the same single peach shared a similar gut bacterial profile, whereas larvae from different peaches collected from the same tree had different gut bacterial profiles. Clustering of the Asaia near full-length sequences at 100% similarity showed that the wild flies from different locations had different Asaia strains.

Variation in the gut bacterial communities of B. tryoni larvae depends on diet, domestication, and horizontal acquisition. Bacterial variation in wild larvae suggests that more than one bacterial species can perform the same functional role; however, Asaia could be an important gut bacterium in larvae and warrants further study. A greater understanding of the functions of the bacteria detected in larvae could lead to increased fly quality and performance as part of the SIT.

The online version of this article (10.1186/s40168-018-0463-y) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

Globally, some of the most economically damaging horticultural pests are fruit flies of the family Tephritidae (Diptera). In Australia, the Queensland fruit fly, Bactrocera tryoni (Tephritidae), is a significant economic pest that causes losses due to damage of horticultural produce, while also restricting domestic and international market access [1]. Bactrocera tryoni is highly polyphagous, with females ovipositing and larvae developing in a large range of host fruits and fruiting vegetables [2–4]. The larvae and bacteria introduced into the fruit during oviposition cause the fruit to rapidly decay [5]. Although B. tryoni originated from tropical and subtropical regions of Australia, its range has expanded further down the east coast of Australia with increasing detections further inland. It is now established in New South Wales and Victoria, apart from the Greater Sunraysia Pest-Free Area [6]. Outbreaks also occur infrequently in South Australia and Western Australia [6, 7]. Severe restrictions or withdrawal of two of the most effective agrochemicals against B. tryoni, fenthion and dimethoate, requires alternative control options to be available to growers [8, 9]. The sterile insect technique (SIT) is a species-specific, sustainable, environmentally benign pest management strategy that involves mass-rearing of the target insects. The insects are irradiated to render them sterile prior to release in the field, where the sterile males copulate with wild females of the target pest population and are unable to produce viable offspring [10]. Over time and with repeated releases of sterile flies, the pest population is suppressed or may be eradicated within the release area.

In this study, we characterize the gut bacterial diversity and community composition of individual domesticated and wild B. tryoni larvae using the near full-length 16S rRNA gene amplicon NGS method, a sequencing method recently developed by Burke and Darling [45]. In addition to offering finer phylogenetic resolution, which we deemed important for our aim of identifying probiotic candidates, as it could be a species rather than family of bacteria that was present/absent in wild versus domesticated larvae, the dual-end tagging of single 16S rRNA molecules in this method also increases the ability to detect and exclude chimeras [45]. Previously, this method was employed to analyze human skin microbial communities and showed that the taxonomic profiles were shown to be highly concordant with V4 region of the 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing of the same communities and offer higher taxonomic resolution [45]. This is the first time this methodology has been applied to an ecological study. We show that domestication and mass-rearing reduce the gut microbial diversity of larvae and identify both similarities and differences in the structure of the bacterial communities of larvae from wild and artificial rearing environments. This study highlights the need to understand the impact of changes in gut microbial species and how the loss of microbial diversity during domestication may influence fly performance in SIT programs.

To characterize the gut bacterial communities of B. tryoni larvae from wild populations, B. tryoni-infested white-fleshed peaches were sourced from one tree, at each of two locations, Buxton (Bux.P) and Tumut (Tum.P), in New South Wales, Australia (Table 1). While more peaches were collected, midgut bacteria of larvae from seven peaches (peaches A-G) from Buxton and five peaches from Tumut (peaches A-E) were analyzed. Individual larvae from the respective single peach were numbered 1 to 3; therefore, larvae from Buxton peach A were called Bux.P.A1, Bux.P.A2, and Bux.P.A3. Bactrocera tryoni is one of a number of species that belong to the B. tryoni species complex, which are difficult to distinguish using molecular methods [46]. Of this species complex, generally B. tryoni and occasionally Bactrocera neohumeralis (Tephritidae) are found where the larvae for this study were collected. Adult B. neohumeralis can be morphologically distinguished from adult B. tryoni [47]; therefore, larvae from collected peaches not used in the dissections were reared out to adults for identification. In addition, the mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase subunit I (COI) gene was sequenced from DNA extracted from the larval remains after dissection, as described below, to ensure each larva belonged to the B. tryoni species complex. To identify differences between gut bacterial communities of wild and domesticated B. tryoni larvae, laboratory-reared B. tryoni colonies were sourced from Gosford Primary Industries Institute (GPII.Col) and Macquarie University (MQ.Col) and mass-reared larvae from the Elizabeth Macarthur Agricultural Institute (EMAI) Fruit Fly Production Facility (FFPF.Col). Both the MQ colony and FFPF colony originated from the GPII colony, which was reared out of infested feijoas collected from Gosford (NSW, Australia) in March 2012. Although originating from the same colony, the larvae were from different generations when dissected, reared for a duration in a different laboratory or facility, and fed different batches of diet, and the EMAI FFPF colony was mass reared. Consequently, each domestic colony analyzed in this study would have been exposed to different environmental microbes. The GPII and MQ colonies were always reared on carrot diet consisting of 0.338 L dehydrated carrot, 2.5 g sodium benzoate, 9 g citric acid, and 60 g Torula yeast per liter of water. The FFPF colony was mass reared on a lucerne chaff diet (144 L lucerne chaff, 5.6 kg Torula yeast, 11.3 kg sugar, approximately 99 L water, 307 g sodium benzoate, 250 g methyl paraben, 588 g citric acid; for 27 trays), and then a subset of flies at F54-F57 was transferred back to the larval carrot diet (recipe as above) for five generations prior to dissection and analysis in this study. The adult flies were given continuous access to hydrolyzed yeast, sugar, and water, ad libitum.

For molecular confirmation of wild larval species identity, genomic DNA was extracted from the larval remains, after dissection and midgut removal, using the QIAGEN DNeasy Blood and Tissue Kit. The COI gene was PCR amplified using MyTaq™ HS Mix (Bioline), 400 nM of the primers LCO1490 and HC02198 [49], and thermocycling conditions of 95 °C for 2 min, followed by 35 cycles of 95 °C for 15 s, 50 °C for 30 s, and 72 °C for 45 s, and 5 min at 72 °C. Purified amplicons were sequenced using the LCO1490 primer by the Australian Genome Research Facility (AGRF; GenBank accession numbers KY432531-KY432567). The sequences were trimmed using Geneious v. 9.1.14 (https://www.geneious.com/) [50] and compared against the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) nonredundant nucleotide collection using the MegaBLAST algorithm [51] available on NCBI’s BLAST web interface [52].

Midguts were centrifuged at 16,000 × g for 5 min to pellet the gut contents and aspirate the BHI-B containing glycerol. The remaining pellet was resuspended in 180 μl of lysozyme lysis buffer [20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 2 mM sodium EDTA, 1.2 Triton® X-100, 20 mg/ml lysozyme], vortexed briefly, and incubated at 37 °C for 1.5 h, with a second vortexing at approximately 45 min. DNA was extracted using the MO BIO PowerFecal® DNA Isolation Kit (MO BIO Laboratories) with the following modifications: 570 μl Bead Solution was added to the resuspended midgut and then transferred to a Dry Bead Tube. After the addition of Solution C1, the tube was heated at 65 °C for 10 min, homogenized in a FastPrep® FP120 cell disrupter (MP Biomedicals) for 45 s at a setting of 5.0, and then incubated at room temperature for 10 min. Solutions C2 and C3 (100 μl of each) were added to the sample together instead of in separate steps. To elute the DNA, 50 μl of molecular grade water (Sigma-Aldrich) prewarmed to 50 °C was added to the column, incubated for 5 min at 50 °C, and then centrifuged at 13,000 x g for 1 min. The process was repeated using the previous elution. Extracted DNA concentration was determined using the Invitrogen™ Qubit® dsDNA High Sensitivity (HS) Assay Kit (Life Technologies). DNA extraction controls included DNA extractions of the batch of PBS used in the larval dissections and of a couple of colonies of Lactobacillus plantarum and Escherichia coli cultures. Extracted DNA was stored at − 20 °C.

In order to improve the taxonomic classification of gut bacterial species, we employed a new NGS method [45, 53]. Burke and Darling [45] provide further detail on the method that we applied and how it compares to conventional V4 region 16S rRNA gene amplicon NGS on an Illumina platform. The 16S rRNA gene library was prepared following the method described by Burke and Darling [45], with the following minor modifications. In brief, each 16S rRNA gene molecule was uniquely tagged with 10 nt random sequences on both ends, fragmented, and pools of fragmented and full-length amplicons sequenced, with the random sequences from either end used to reconstruct the original sequences. Tagging occurred in two steps using polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) purified primers [45] that included a barcode sequence, random tag, and partial Illumina PE adapter sequences in addition to the 27F [54] or 1391R [55] bacterial primer sequences (see Additional file 1). Additional file 1 contains the sequences of all primers used in this study. Each sample had a unique combination of barcodes (see Additional file 2). The first step involved a 50 μl PCR containing 1.25 U Taq DNA polymerase (QIAGEN), 1X QIAGEN PCR Buffer, 1X QIAGEN Q-Solution, 250 μM dNTPs, 0.25 μM forward primer (long_forward), and 10 ng B. tryoni larval midgut DNA. A single primer extension reaction was carried out in a thermocycler using the conditions 95 °C for 1 min, 50 °C for 2 min, and 72 °C for 3 min. This was followed by an Agencourt AMPure XP (Beckman Coulter) magnetic bead-clean-up using a 0.6 volume of beads to PCR following the methods as per Burke and Darling [45]. Cleaned-size selected DNA was eluted in 35 μl molecular grade water. The second step involved a PCR as before using the reverse primer (long_reverse) and 31 μl of the cleaned-up PCR, followed by another round of Agencourt AMPure XP bead clean-up. 16S rRNA gene molecules with unique tags at both ends were then amplified in a PCR with similar conditions to the primer extension reactions but using 28.5 μl of bead-cleaned DNA and 0.25 μM of each PE_1 and PE_2 primers. PCR cycling conditions were 95 °C for 2 min, followed by 35 cycles of 95 °C for 15 s, 50 °C for 30 s, 72 °C for 2 min, and a final extension of 72 °C for 5 min. PCR products (10 μl) were analyzed on a 1% (w/v) agarose gel prior to another round of magnetic bead clean-up. As previously described, DNA was eluted in 35 μl molecular grade water. Regardless of whether there was evidence on the gel of a 1.5 kb band, 3 ng of the amplified products was pooled along with 10 μl of three PBS DNA extraction control PCR products (considered as negative controls) and 0.5 ng of E. coli PCR product. To ensure there were no traces of primers in the pooled sample, it was subjected to a clean-up using 0.6 volumes of Agencourt SPRIselect Reagent (Beckman Coulter) following the manufacturer’s instructions. The DNA was eluted in 35 μl UltraPure water (Life Technologies), and concentration of the pool was quantified using the Qubit® dsDNA HS Assay Kit.

Tagmentation, that is, fragmentation of the uniquely tagged, near full-length 16S rRNA gene amplicons using a transposase that simultaneously adds an adapter sequence for use on the Illumina platform, was performed using the Nextera DNA kit following the methods described by Burke and Darling [45], except the Nextera enzyme was diluted 1 in 100 and 1.5 ng of the pooled 16S rDNA amplicon libraries was used as template. The tagmentation reaction was split into two, and two separate PCRs were carried out to produce a pool of DNA fragments with either PE_1 (10 μM) and the Illumina Nextera i7 adapter (N704) or the PE_2 (10 μM) and the Illumina Nextera i5 adapter (S504) at the ends (see Additional file 1 for primer sequences). PCRs consisted of 1X PCR Master Mix from the KAPA HiFi Library Amplification Kit (Kapa Biosystems), N704 and PE_1 primer or S504 and PE_2 primer, 2.5 μl of each primer. PCR cycling conditions are 72 °C for 3 min, 98 °C for 30 s, followed by 12 cycles of, 98 °C for 15 s, 55 °C for 30 s, and 72 °C for 1 min, and then a final extension at 72 °C for 5 min. The tagmentation reactions underwent two rounds of magnetic bead clean-up using 0.6 volumes of SPRIselect beads and were eluted in 35 μl UltraPure water each time. The molarity of the amplified cleaned-up tagmented amplicon libraries and the near full-length pooled amplicon libraries was assessed on an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer high-sensitivity DNA chip (Agilent Technologies).

Tagged, near full-length 16S rRNA gene amplicons were combined with cleaned tagmented products at a ratio of 1:7 calculated on the molarity of the tagmented products within the range 400–1000 bp. A bioanalyzer was used to determine the amount of product within each size range. A final pool of 3.77 pM (concentration calculated from 400 to 2000 bp range) was spiked with 0.3 pM PhiX and loaded on an Illumina MiSeq flow cell following the Illumina’s MiSeq Reagent Kit v2 Reagent Preparation Guide. Paired end 250 nt reads were sequenced (i.e., 2 × 250 bp; 500 cycles).

The reconstruction of near full-length 16S rRNA gene sequences from tagged Illumina reads was performed as per the method of Burke and Darling [45]; scripts are available on GitHub in the koadman/longas repository: https://github.com/koadman/longas. Briefly, inside the A5-MiSeq pipeline, the reads first undergo adapter and quality trimming with Trimmomatic [56], then error correction with the SGA k-mer correction algorithm [57]. Next the corrected reads are assembled with the IDBA-UD algorithm [58]. Some templates resulted in two or more assembled sequences (scaffolds 0-4). The script provided in Additional file 3 was used to identify assembled sequences with only a scaffold 0 and no scaffold 1, as it was not realized at this point that there were scaffolds 0 with no scaffold 1, but scaffold(s) 2-4. Scaffold 0 sequences with scaffolds 2-4 were removed when clustering OTUs as they were < 1300 nt, and only 16S rRNA gene sequences > 1300 nt in length were used for the downstream analysis. Scripts, parameters, and mapping files used to analyze the data are provided in Additional files 4, 5, and 6. Sequences were aligned using the align.seqs.py command using the default settings [59]. The alignment was manually trimmed to remove any remaining primer sequences using the AliView alignment editor [60]. Sequences that failed to align were manually checked against the NCBI nonredundant nucleotide collection using MegaBLAST. Gaps were removed from the alignment in AliView.

To determine the level of sequence variation within one OTU, sequences that clustered to the OTU with the greatest amount of near full-length sequences, that is, OTU 808997, were clustered as described above except at 100% similarity with a minimum of one scaffold per OTU. To demonstrate the advantage of working with near full-length sequences, we also clustered the V4 region of the near full-length sequences using the same parameters.

As a means of validating the results of our high-throughput 16S rRNA gene sequencing survey, we attempted to gain a priori knowledge of the general composition of the culturable microbial community. A selection of larval midguts that were not used for the NGS study, from white-fleshed peaches of the one tree sampled in Buxton or B. tryoni domesticated colony, was plated onto a range of agar plates, including de Man, Rogosa, and Sharpe (MRS) agar plates incubated at 37 °C under 5% CO2 or anaerobic conditions, or 30 °C in aerobic conditions; Luria-Bertani (LB) agar plates incubated at 37 °C; Tryptone soya agar (TSA); and nutrient agar (NA), yeast dextrose carbonate (YDC) agar, potato dextrose agar (PDA), and glycerol-yeast agar (GLY pH 5) plates incubated at either 25 °C or 30 °C. At least two midgut samples were plated per population, from which a selection of the dominant colonies were subcultured using the same conditions at which colonies were initially isolated and underwent subsequent analyses. No larval midguts were plated from larvae sourced from the peaches from Tumut.

Isolates were Gram stained and bacterial DNA was extracted using Chelex® 100 molecular biology grade resin (Bio-Rad) from a chosen set of isolates. To determine the molecular identification of the bacterial isolates, the 16S rRNA gene from the extracted DNA was PCR amplified in a 15 μl reaction containing MyTaq™ HS Mix (Bioline), 400 nM 27F [68] and 1492R [69] primers, and 1.5 μl extracted bacterial isolate DNA. PCR cycling conditions used were 95 °C for 2 min, followed by 35 cycles of 95 °C for 30 s, 50 °C for 30 s and 72 °C for 90 s, and a final extension time of 5 min at 72 °C. Purified PCR products were Sanger sequenced by AGRF using just the 27F primer or both the 27F and 1492R primers (GenBank accession numbers KY427098- KY427111). Geneious v.5.3.6 (https://www.geneious.com/) [50] was used for trimming and aligning the forward and reverse sequences. A BLAST search, as described earlier, was performed on the trimmed forward or consensus sequences. Identity was determined by database matches with E values of 0, identity of 99–100% and 100% coverage. The isolate 16S rRNA gene sequences were also aligned using Geneious to respective representative OTU sequences to determine similarity.

Sequencing of the COI genes of the 35 wild larvae analyzed indicated that larvae belong to the B. tryoni species complex. The only other B. tryoni species complex member that may be present, B. neohumeralis, was not reared from the infested peaches collected. Only larvae that did not have any obvious signs of parasitoid attack were used in the dissections; however, B. tryoni larval parasitoids, Diachasmimorpha kraussii and Diachasmimorpha tryoni, emerged from peaches from Buxton and Tumut.

Low amounts of DNA were extracted from individual midgut samples (0.24-4.30 ng/μl in a total volume of approximately 40 μl). The amount of amplified tagged bacterial DNA after completing the first three rounds of PCR of the library preparation (5′ end tagging, 3′ end tagging, and then amplification) also differed between samples (see Additional file 8).

All of the reads derive from fragments of DNA that underwent dual molecular tagging and amplification. Insufficient depth of sequencing would cause one of two problems: (1) The same molecular tags are not observed more than once—meaning that more 16S rRNA genes were tagged than were sequenced. For the read 1 molecular tags, 80,570 were observed more than once, while only 18,926 were observed once. For the read 2 molecular tags, 95,559 were observed more than once, while 62,799 were observed once. Thus, in both cases, the molecular tag diversity had been comprehensively sampled. The tag counts are shown in Additional file 9, where a bimodal distribution can be observed: a peak at 1 corresponding to tags observed only once, due to sequencing error, and a second broader peak containing tags observed many times, corresponding to true tags. (2) Not enough reads were generated to assemble across each dual-tagged 16S rRNA gene, leading to a low fraction of the tagged genes getting full-length assemblies. In our data, 93.3% of reads map back to the assembled 16S rRNA gene sequences. This suggests that a small fraction (~ 6%) of the molecular tag clusters may have had insufficient data to complete assembly or were reads that did not assemble due to the presence of chimeric PCR products.

A total of 32,337 sequences were assembled based on the molecular tags from 5,160,368 Illumina read pairs. No assembled sequences were obtained for two larval samples (Table 2). As a result of the high number of templates tagged in the positive control, no single tagged template of the positive control had enough paired reads covering the ends of the amplicon to be confidently called as a true template. In the blank DNA extraction controls, only two templates from just one control were successfully tagged and amplified (Table 2). Assembled sequence lengths followed a bimodal distribution with a broad peak around 500 nt and a sharp peak around 1400 nt (histogram shown in Additional file 10). There was one 1711 nt sequence that matched to plant mitochondria. Some templates resulted in two or more assembled sequences (scaffolds 0-4) per tag cluster. Manual inspection indicated these were likely the result of molecular tag collisions, as discussed in Burke and Darling [45]. Typically scaffold 1-4 assembled sequences were < 1300 nt. Approximately 45.5% of the total number of assembled sequences was > 1300 nt. Complete assemblies of the near full-length 16S rRNA gene were defined as having a scaffold 0 with no matching scaffold 1-4 and a length of 1300–1500 nt. To increase the accuracy of taxonomic classification and phylogenetic resolution, only complete assemblies were analyzed. After aligning and removing primer sequences, 14,710 near full-length 16S rRNA gene sequences were included in the OTU clustering, with a differing number of near full-length 16S rRNA gene sequences obtained between samples (Table 2). Near full-length sequences were obtained for 56 larval samples and one PBS blank DNA extraction control.

OTUs were assigned at 99% sequence similarity yielding a total of 40 OTUs, after the OTU matching to plant chloroplast DNA, which was detected in eight wild larval gut samples, was removed (Table 2). Taxon status was assigned to each OTU representative sequence by comparing three different databases. The OTU with the highest number of sequences was assigned to the genus Swaminathania using the Greengenes database, but was classified as Asaia using the RDP and the NCBI Reference Genomic Sequence databases. Swaminathania and Asaia are closely related genera within the acetic acid bacteria (AAB) group; however, Asaia is a common insect symbiont [70], while Swaminathania has mostly been found in association with wild rice [71]. The sequences of two representative OTUs were either identical to other representative OTU sequences apart from their length (in one case a difference of four nucleotides) or degenerate nucleotides (a total of four), thus were considered as the same OTUs and pooled as one in the OTU table. Therefore, final number of OTUs detected in the data set was 38. The breakdown of OTUs detected in each sample is provided in Additional file 11.

The median number of OTUs in the wild larvae was four, twice that of domesticated larvae. The number of OTUs in wild versus domesticated larvae was significantly higher (p < 0.01) (Mann–Whitney U-test; one-tailed). One larva from Tumut peach D (Tum.P.D3) had the highest number of OTUs (13). Typically, when more than two OTUs were detected in a domesticated larva, the majority of sequences clustered to Asaia, and then only one or two sequences clustered to other OTUs, such as Janibacter, Propionibacterium acnes, and Methylobacterium.

Overall, only a few abundant OTUs were detected (Fig. 2). The remaining OTUs were not as common, resulting in a long right-hand tail, which was longer than what is shown in Fig. 2, as only the top 14 out of 38 OTUs are included. The majority of the most abundant OTUs were detected in wild larvae. While Asaia is dominant in both wild and domesticated B. tryoni populations, very few other OTUs were detected in both wild and domesticated populations (Fig. 2 and Additional file 11).

16S rRNA gene sequencing showed the gut bacterial community in B. tryoni larvae was predominantly comprised of Alphaproteobacteria and Gammaproteobacteria (both phylum Proteobacteria) and Bacilli (phylum Firmicutes). Four bacterial families were predominant: Acetobacteraceae, Enterobacteriaceae, Halomonadaceae, and Leuconostocaceae (Figs. 2 and
3). Whether the OTU belonging to the Halomonadaceae family is a significant species in B. tryoni gut samples is questionable, as the PBS DNA extraction control possessed the same OTU.

Rarefying our data for beta diversity analyses would exclude a large number of sequences due to the variable number of sequences we obtained between samples (Table 2) and would also reduce the statistical power of the analyses; therefore, we did not perform beta diversity analyses. However, similarities and differences among gut bacterial communities of wild and domesticated populations are evident from Fig. 3.

Asaia near full-length 16S rRNA gene sequences that clustered at 99% to the dominant Asaia OTU (OTU 808997) were clustered further into groups of unique sequences (e.g., 100% similarity OTUs) and showed greater sequence variation compared to unique sequences from the V4 region only (Fig. 4). The near full-length sequences revealed additional fine-scale diversity of Asaia in wild B. tryoni larvae, but not in domesticated larvae. The same unique Asaia sequences were generally common among larvae from the same peach, or from the same domesticated colony. Some unique Asaia sequences were only common to a few wild larvae from a specific location, for example, the Asaia unique sequence (100% similarity OTU) called de_novo527 was relatively dominant in larvae from Buxton peach A, otherwise only detected in a couple of other larvae from different Buxton peaches. Asaia unique sequence de_novo394 was only detected in larvae from Tumut peaches. The variation between unique sequences was often only a single nucleotide change. For the top four clusters of unique sequences, a large number of sequences from different samples clustered together; thus, it is unlikely that the variation seen here was due to sequencing errors. The sequence variation observed in some other cases was due to ambiguous nucleotides (Tables 3 and
4). The scripts used to extract the V4 region of these sequences changed ambiguous nucleotides to Ns, and any differences observed among the top five unique V4 sequences were due to the presence of Ns in this region.

Typically, only one morphology type was observed in colonies on agar plates from gut samples of domesticated fruit fly larvae, while several different morphological colony types were often obtained from gut samples of larvae found in the peaches from Buxton. Acid producing bacteria, as indicated by the zone of clearance in the YDC agar around colonies (data not shown), were isolated from all B. tryoni larval midguts cultured. Sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene from a selection of such isolates cultured from the FFPF larval midguts revealed that they were Asaia sp. (Table 5), and all 16S rRNA gene sequences were identical (data not shown). Isolates of dominant colony types that were sequenced from midguts of larvae collected from peaches in Buxton included Leuconostoc and Enterobacter species (Table 5). The 16S rRNA gene sequences of the Leuconostoc and Asaia isolates aligned with no mismatches, apart from sequence length, to the representative OTUs 246692 (Leuconostoc) and 808997 (Asaia), respectively. The sequences of the Enterobacter isolates had occasional nucleotide variation at the same points as the four representative OTUs (1091629, de_novo23, de_novo31, and de_novo32), which could indicate different Enterobacter species or variation within copies of the 16S rRNA gene within the species where degeneracies were detected.

Near full-length 16S rRNA gene sequences enabled taxonomic classification of some OTUs to species level, such as Acetobacter representative OTU sequences 1144799 and de_novo1 to Acetobacter orientalis (greater than 99.8% identity and 100% coverage when compared to the NCBI Reference Genomic Sequence collection). However, often it was not possible to taxonomically classify OTUs to species level as a result of closely related species possessing highly similar 16S rRNA gene sequences. For example, MegaBLAST of the Leuconostoc OTUs suggest the most likely species are Leuconostoc pseudomesenteroides, Leuconostoc mesenteroides, or Leuconostoc mesenteroides subsp. mesenteroides (> 99.6% identity and 100% coverage). Unfortunately, we were unable to determine the Asaia species detected. However, working with greater length sequences enabled the identification of possibly different species or strains within the same genus, as already discussed above for Asaia when clustered at 100% similarity. Even with clustering at 99% similarity, it was identified that Tum.P.D3 possessed near full-length sequences clustering to three different Acetobacter OTUs. This contributed to the 13 OTUs detected in that sample.

We report the first application of a new near full-length 16S rRNA gene sequencing method to investigate the microbial ecology of a pest insect of economic significance, with the aim to improve mass-rearing for pest management strategies, such as SIT. Our study revealed that gut bacterial diversity is low in wild B. tryoni larvae and even lower in domesticated larvae. By analyzing high-quality > 1300 nt 16S rRNA gene sequences of bacteria from individual B. tryoni larvae, gut bacterial diversity was explored at a finer scale than in previous tephritid microbiome NGS studies. Even with near full-length 16S rRNA gene sequence data, our ability to determine species was limited by the suitability of the 16S rRNA gene to resolve closely related taxa or availability of reference sequences in taxonomic databases. Asaia was identified as a common gut bacterium of both wild and domesticated B. tryoni larvae. Analyses of gut bacteria of individual larvae from one single fruit, compared to larvae from other fruit on the same tree or larvae from a different location, and domesticated larvae, suggest an association exists between diet (and its microbial ecosystem) and the B. tryoni larval gut bacterial community but also exists with domestication and individual pieces of fruit.

The presence of Halomonadaceae in some FFPF and MQ larvae may be due to contamination. Contamination from the DNA extraction kit and laboratory reagents is not uncommon in studies when the samples have low bacterial biomass [117, 118]. Since the starting amount of DNA extracted from the midgut was relatively low, it would not be unusual for our sequencing results to include contaminants from the molecular reagents. It is possible that bacteria belonging to the Halomonadaceae family were present in one of the reagents used in the larval dissections, storage of the FFPF and MQ larval gut samples, or the DNA extraction kit, which were dissected and extracted at a later stage compared to the other larvae. While not detected in our negative extraction controls but detected at very low levels in some samples, Propionibacterium and Janibacter are Actinobacteria that have been sequenced in blank or negative DNA extractions in NGS studies [117]. Methylobacterium have also been reported as DNA extraction kit contaminants in NGS datasets [117]. This genus was detected in nine B. tryoni gut microbiomes from both domesticated and wild larvae (Additional file 11). If these bacteria are contaminants, the already low number of OTUs detected in the domesticated larvae would be even lower.

Sequencing of near full-length 16S rRNA gene sequences and comparing individuals facilitated analysis of the composition and diversity of B. tryoni larval gut bacteria at a much finer scale than previously possible. The predominant bacteria identified belonged to only three families, suggesting selective factors define what bacteria are present in the gut of B. tryoni larvae. In contrast to domesticated larvae, the bacterial communities of wild larvae are more diverse. Higher gut bacterial variation in wild larvae could imply that some bacteria share similar functional roles and can substitute one another; however, variable functions of individual species or strains should also be considered. Gut microbiota can have considerable influence on the host. Thus, the absence of relatively abundant bacterial species found in wild larvae from domesticated larvae highlights that a greater understanding of the functional role(s) of gut microbiota, and the causes and effects of community changes in gut microbiota, is necessary to improve the effectiveness of B. tryoni SIT. The novel method used in this study identified important aspects of the B. tryoni larval gut community. The accuracy of the method has already been confirmed for more diverse bacterial communities on human skin [45]; however, our study could benefit from parallel evaluation of the method with complementary approaches to further substantiate and expand on our findings.



This project has been funded by Hort Innovation using the summerfruit industry levy with co-investment from NSW Department of Primary Industries and funds from the Australian Government as part of the SITplus initiative. Hort Innovation is the grower-owned, not-for-profit research and development corporation for Australian horticulture.

The datasets generated and/or analyzed during the current study are available in the following repositories:

Bacterial isolates 16S rRNA gene sequences: GenBank accession numbers KY427098- KY427111.

Not applicable.

A. Deutscher, M. Riegler, T. Chapman, and O. Reynolds declare that they have no competing interests. C. Burke and A. Darling have applied for a patent on the sequencing technique used to generate data for this study and are co-founders of Longas Technologies Pty. Ltd., a privately-held entity developing related sequencing technologies.

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Olivia L. Reynolds and Toni A. Chapman are joint senior authors.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (10.1186/s40168-018-0463-y) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

