Products of gut microbial Toll/interleukin-1 receptor domain NADase activities in gnotobiotic mice and Bangladeshi children with malnutrition



Perturbed gut microbiome development has been linked to childhood malnutrition. Here, we characterize bacterial Toll/interleukin-1 receptor (TIR) protein domains that metabolize nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD), a co-enzyme with far-reaching effects on human physiology. A consortium of 26 human gut bacterial strains, representing the diversity of TIRs observed in the microbiome and the NAD hydrolase (NADase) activities of a subset of 152 bacterial TIRs assayed in vitro, was introduced into germ-free mice. Integrating mass spectrometry and microbial RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) with consortium membership manipulation disclosed that a variant of cyclic-ADPR (v-cADPR-x) is a specific product of TIR NADase activity and a prominent, colonization-discriminatory, taxon-specific metabolite. Guided by bioinformatic analyses of biochemically validated TIRs, we find that acute malnutrition is associated with decreased fecal levels of genes encoding TIRs known or predicted to generate v-cADPR-x, as well as decreased levels of the metabolite itself. These results underscore the need to consider microbiome TIR NADases when evaluating NAD metabolism in the human holobiont.

Studies of healthy members of birth cohorts from low- and middle-income countries have disclosed features of a program of gut microbial community assembly that is normally completed by the end of the 2nd postnatal year. This process is disrupted in children with moderate acute malnutrition (MAM) and severe acute malnutrition (SAM), leaving them with immature communities (Subramanian et al., 2014; Raman et al., 2019). Preclinical studies indicate that disrupted microbiota development is a contributing cause and not simply an effect of malnutrition (Gehrig et al., 2019). This notion is supported by the results of a randomized controlled clinical study of a microbiota-directed complementary food (MDCF) formulation and a commonly employed ready-to-use supplementary food (RUSF) in Bangladeshi children with MAM. The MDCF produced a statistically significant greater degree of microbiota repair, change in plasma proteomic mediators and biomarkers of musculoskeletal, neurodevelopmental, and immune function, and improved ponderal growth compared with the calorically denser RUSF (Chen et al., 2021).

There have been limited studies of the biochemical activities of bacterial TIR domains; the information available is principally derived from pathogens and in vitro assays rather than in vivo analyses. In the present report, we use in vitro biochemical assays to first characterize the NADase activities and metabolic products of 152 TIR domains present in proteins encoded in the genomes of phylogenetically diverse bacterial taxa and in the developing microbiomes of Bangladeshi infants and children. In follow-up in vivo studies, gnotobiotic mice were colonized with a 26-member consortium of human gut bacterial strains encoding 42 proteins containing a total of 44 TIR domains representing the diversity of TIRs observed in the microbiome and NAD enzymatic activities observed in vitro. TIR expression and NAD metabolism were defined in these animals under conditions where dietary NAD precursor availability was deliberately varied. Differences between mice colonized with the 26-member consortium and germ-free animals were pronounced when measuring cecal levels of an isomeric variant of cyclic ADP-ribose (v-cADPR-x)—a product of TIR NADase activity observed in our in vitro assay. Follow-up colonization experiments in which subsets of the bacterial consortium were introduced into gnotobiotic mice revealed that an NADase-positive TIR domain in Bacteroides xylanisolvens was the predominant source of v-cADPR-x. The results of our in vitro screen provided a means for evaluating the representation of this and other classes of TIRs in the developing microbiomes of Bangladeshi children. These preclinical in vitro and in vivo studies, combined with their translation to a small cohort of infants and children indicate that one manifestation of disrupted gut microbiome development in children with malnutrition is perturbed NAD metabolism involving enzymatically active TIR domains represented in the proteomes of resident bacteria.

To characterize gut bacterial TIR NADase activity in vivo, we sought to assemble a collection of cultured human gut bacterial species based on the following criteria: (1) they are well represented in the developing and/or adult human gut microbiota, (2) they are known to be successful colonizers of the intestines of germ-free animals, and (3) they contain proteins that include TIR domains that are well represented in the developing microbial communities of infants and children. This latter criterion was informed by an analysis of TIR domains in the gut microbiomes of Bangladeshi infants and children. To conduct this analysis, we annotated TIR domains in a dataset generated by shotgun sequencing of fecal samples from Bangladeshi infants and children who resided in a densely populated urban slum (Mirpur) located in one of the districts of Dhaka; 212 of these biospecimens were obtained by serial sampling of 30 members of a birth cohort with consistently healthy growth phenotypes (as defined by serial anthropometry), while 66 samples were from 14 children who presented at 7–16 months of age with SAM and were then followed for 12 months after nutritional rehabilitation (Gehrig et al., 2019).

Based on these results, we assembled a collection of 26 human gut bacterial isolates (Table 1) consisting of type strains as well as strains we had cultured from the fecal microbiota of infants and children living in Bangladesh and Malawi (Blanton et al., 2016; Gehrig et al., 2019); they are prominent members of the human gut microbiota and known colonizers of the intestines of germ-free mice, containing a total of 42 different genes encoding proteins with 44 TIR domains belonging to 14 BPPS groups, including 9 of the top 10 most abundant BPPS groups in our microbiome dataset (Figures 1B and S1). The number of TIR-domain-containing proteins ranged from 0 to 4 per bacterial strain (Table 1); with two exceptions, each of these proteins contained one TIR domain. Twelve of the 44 TIR domains had NADase activity in vitro yielding “canonical” products of NAD degradation (nicotinamide, ADPR, and cADPR), as well as the two variant forms of cADPR that have only been detected in in vitro assays of TIR enzymatic activity (Tables 1 and S2; Eastman et al., 2021; Essuman et al., 2018; Wan et al., 2019).

The number of TIR domains identified in each genome, domain IDs, and the ADPR products of TIRs with in vitro NADase activity are shown.

We characterized the in vivo expression and biochemical activities of the NADase-positive TIR domains identified in the 26 bacterial strains using gnotobiotic mice. Adult (8-week-old) germ-free C57BL/6J mice were fed a defined diet containing NA, Nam, and nicotinamide mononucleotide (NMN) for 5 days (“NAD-precursor-sufficient” diet in Table S3). Half of the mice were orally gavaged with the consortium of 26 bacterial strains, and the other half were maintained in a germ-free state. One week later, 50% of the mice in the colonized and 50% of the mice in the germ-free groups were switched to a diet that lacked NA, Nam, and NMN (“NAD-precursor-deficient diet” in Table S3) and fed this diet ad libitum for 10 days while the other members of each group were continued on the NAD-precursor-containing diet (n = 8 animals/treatment group; four groups; Figure 2A).

Targeted mass spectrometry of cecal contents revealed that NA levels were significantly higher in colonized compared with germ-free animals (Table S5A); the effect of diet was mirrored in levels of this NAD precursor, which were significantly higher in colonized animals consuming the precursor-sufficient compared with the precursor-deficient diet (p < 0.001; two-way ANOVA; Tukey’s multiple comparisons test; Figure 2B). NA was not detected in the cecal contents of germ-free mice in either diet context. The concentration of NAD, which, as noted above, is produced in bacteria by de novo synthesis from aspartate, was significantly higher in colonized compared with germ-free animals fed the NAD-precursor-sufficient diet (p < 0.03; two-way ANOVA; Tukey’s multiple comparisons test; Figure 2C). Dietary precursor deficiency resulted in a statistically significant decrease in the cecal levels of NAD in mice with the defined bacterial community (p = 0.04), but not in germ-free mice (p = 0.98; two-way ANOVA; Tukey’s multiple comparisons test; Figure 2C). Notably, v-cADPR-x was significantly higher in cecal contents harvested from colonized animals compared with germ-free mice; this was the case in both diet contexts and provided preclinical evidence for its in vivo generation by human gut bacteria (p < 0.0001; two-way ANOVA; Tukey’s multiple comparisons test; Figure 2D).

Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron 7330, Bacteroides xylanisolvens XB1A, and Roseburia intestinalis L1-82 were the only members of the 26-member consortium that contained TIRs that produced v-cADPR-x in vitro; Roseburia intestinalis L1-82 was present at low abundance, and expression of its v-cADPR-x TIR was not detectable in the cecal meta-transcriptome. These results suggested that one or both Bacteroides strains were the source of v-cADPR-x in vivo. Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron 7330 encodes two proteins containing TIR domains with NADase activity in our in vitro assay—one specified by Btheta7330_RS03065 and the other by Btheta7330_RS23835. The TIR domain from Btheta7330_RS03065 produced v-cADPR-x in vitro, while the domain from Btheta7330_RS23835 generated Nam and cADPR (Tables 1 and S2). B. xylanisolvens XB1A contains three genes whose protein products possess TIR domains. Of the B. xylanisolvens XB1A TIR domains tested in vitro, only the v-cADPR-x-producing TIR domain found in the protein product of BXY_39700 possessed NADase activity (Tables 1 and S2).

Other arms in the mouse experiment described in Figure 3A were designed to characterize the effect of community context on production of v-cADPR-x. Mice in these arms were either co-colonized with B. xylanisolvens XB1A and B. thetaiotaomicron 7330 or gavaged with the complete 26-member community. The absolute abundance of B. xylanisolvens was significantly lower in the cecal microbiota of co-colonized mice compared with their mono-colonized counterparts (p < 0.0001; one-way ANOVA; Tukey’s multiple comparisons test; Figure 3B) as were cecal levels of v-cADPR-x (p < 0.0001; one-way ANOVA; Tukey’s multiple comparisons test; Figure 3J). RNA-seq disclosed that (1) the presence of B. thetaiotaomicron did not produce significant differences in the levels of expression of B. xylanisolvens BXY_39700 and (2), compared with B. thetaiotaomicron 7330 mono-colonized animals, the presence of B. xylanisolvens in co-colonized animals did not result in a significant change in expression of Btheta7330_RS03065 (Figure 3C). Moreover, the concentration of v-cADPR-x observed in cecal contents was significantly correlated with the absolute abundance of B. xylanisolvens XB1A across all community contexts (i.e., mice colonized with either organism alone, both together, and with the complete 26-member consortium; Pearson’s rho = 0.93; p = 5.2 × 10−21). Together, the LC-QqQ-MS and microbial RNA-seq results are consistent with B. xylanisolvens and its TIR-encoding BXY_39700 gene being the principal source of v-cADPR-x in the cecal contents of mice harboring the 2- and 26-member communities.

As noted above, our HMM-based approach identified 3,072 TIR domains distributed across 23 BPPS groups in the proteomes encoded by the microbiomes of 30 serially sampled healthy members of a Bangladeshi birth cohort living in Dhaka and 14 serially sampled children from the same locale who presented with SAM. Turning first to the developing gut microbiomes of the healthy and non-wasted infants and children (weight-for-length [height] Z scores no more than two standard deviations below the mean value for a multi-national World Health Organization cohort of infants and children), we identified 2,504 TIRs and determined that TIR domain richness increased significantly during the first 3 postnatal years (β1 = 0.75; p = 9.32 × 10−29; generalized linear mixed-effects model including a random effect of individual and fixed effects of age and sequencing depth [TIR richness ∼ β1(age) + β2(reads) + (1|PID)]; Figure 4A).

Together, these findings suggested that v-cADPR-x-producing TIR domains may be an informative biomarker of healthy gut microbiome development. Follow-up LC-QqQ-MS assays (Table S5C) showed that v-cADPR-x was significantly elevated in the feces of healthy compared with malnourished members of our study cohort, mirroring the observed discordance in their microbiome-encoded TIR domains predicted to produce this metabolite (p = 0.047; Mann-Whitney U test; Figure 4G). Moreover, across all fecal samples tested, the level of v-cADPR-x was significantly correlated with the abundance of putative v-cADPR-x-producing TIR domains (Pearson’s rho = 0.98; p = 2.87 × 10−12), while there was no correlation between the level of TIR domains predicted to produce ADPR and the level of v-cADPR-x (Pearson’s rho = −0.12; p = 0.63). Other possible NAD breakdown products, including ADPR, cADPR, and v-cADPR-y, were not detected with the mass spectrometric conditions we employed. Levels of NA, a metabolite produced from Nam during the salvage and recycling of NAD through the action of the bacterial deamidase, PncA, were significantly higher in the feces of healthy infants and children compared with those who were malnourished (p = 6.7 × 10−4; Figure 4H), while NAD was significantly elevated in the feces of those with acute malnutrition (p = 1.9 × 10−3; Mann-Whitney U test; Figure 4I).

The importance of NAD and its metabolic products to human systems biology is well established, with knowledge in this area expanding rapidly (Katsyuba et al., 2020). This expanding knowledge base includes information about the contributions of the gut microbiome to NAD biosynthesis and metabolism in health and disease. An example of the latter is the role of a mucus-associated gut bacterium, Akkermansia muciniphila, in producing nicotinamide that can ameliorate neurodegeneration in a transgenic mouse model (Sod1-Tg) of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), with supporting evidence coming from microbiome and metabolite measurements in individuals with ALS and asymptomatic members of the same household (Blacher et al., 2019). Our findings suggest that there is a reduction of TIR NADase activity, specifically v-cADPR-x production, in the gut microbiomes of the sampled Bangladeshi children with acute malnutrition compared with those who were healthy. A corollary is that these children may have decreased substrate availability for their gut bacterial deamidases—enzymes that convert Nam to NA within the intestine and that have been reported to alter the pool of NAD metabolites in extraintestinal sites (e.g., liver and kidney) due to differences in the ability of tissues to utilize deamidated and amidated NAD metabolites (Shats et al., 2020).

The current study sets the stage for subsequent analyses of the biological effects of v-cADPR-x. Children with SAM have an enteropathy that is manifest in part by defects in small intestinal epithelial barrier function and repair (Chama et al., 2019). Given the reported role of Paneth-cell-derived cADPR in an intercellular signaling pathway that influences intestinal stem cell renewal and lineage commitment under conditions of chronic caloric restriction (Yilmaz et al., 2012) and the fact that v-cADPR-x was not detectable in the systemic circulation in our mouse models, one immediate goal could be to delineate its effects on cell lineages within the gut epithelium and in underlying mesenchyme. A comparative study that uses single-nucleus RNA-seq to characterize the effects of v-cADPR-x, v-cADPR-y, and cADPR administered singly and in various combinations to germ-free mice could be a starting point but would require sufficient quantities of these NAD metabolites for a proper dose-response study to be performed over various time intervals. Irrespective of this lack of information about the function of v-cADPR-x, our results emphasize how the developing human gut microbiome harbors a diverse array of TIR domains, not only in terms of their phylogenetic origins but also the NAD metabolic activities that they possess. Moreover, the representation of TIR domains changes during microbiome development. Together, these findings provide a rationale for conducting further studies of how gut microbial community- and host-based systems interact via TIR domains to regulate NAD metabolism in the human holobiont.

As noted above, a major limitation of the current study is that the biological effects of v-cADPR-x have yet to be defined. Substantial quantities of purified cADPR, v-cADPR-x, and v-cADPR-y will be required to study their structures and to conduct comparative in vivo analyses of their biological activities.

Finally, our MS-based analysis was performed on a small number of human fecal samples, limiting our ability to comprehensively characterize changes in NAD metabolites during healthy gut microbiome development or in response to nutritional interventions for malnutrition. In addition, we were unable to reliably detect ADPR, cADPR, or v-cADPR-y in these fecal biospecimens; this could reflect, for example, differences in the stability of these metabolites during long-term storage at −80°C or the sensitivity of the LC-QqQ-MS method we employed.



Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Jeffrey Gordon (jgordon@wustl.edu).

All unique/stable reagents generated in this study are available from the lead contact with a completed Materials Transfer Agreement.

Fecal biospecimens were from completed human studies that are described in an earlier publication (Gehrig et al., 2019). These samples were obtained from male and female infants and children who ranged in age from 0 to 36 months. These studies were approved by the Ethical Review Committee at icddr,b (ClinicalTrials.gov identifiers NCT01889329 and NCT03084731) and written informed consent was obtained from the parent or guardian of the infants and children. Coded biospecimens were shipped under a Materials Transfer Agreement to Washington University (on dry ice) where they were stored at −80°C, along with associated clinical metadata, in a dedicated biospecimen repository with approval from the Washington University IRB.

All mouse experiments were carried out using protocols approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of Washington University in St. Louis. All gnotobiotic animals had a C57BL/6J background, were male and 8 weeks of age at the beginning of the experiments.

Genomes for all but one bacterial strain utilized in this study were previously published (Gehrig et al., 2019) and are publicly available. A library was prepared from gDNA isolated from purified Bacteroides uniformis BUAKA3JSW using the Nextera DNA Library Prep Kit (Illumina) and sequencing of the library was performed using an Illumina MiniSeq instrument [2.72 × 106 bi-directional 150 nucleotide reads]. Adapters were removed from reads using trimmomatic (v0.36; Bolger et al., 2014) and reads that aligned to the human reference genome were removed using Bowtie2 (v2.3.4.1; Langmead and Salzberg, 2012). Paired read that overlapped were merged using FLASH (v1.2.11; Magoc and Salzberg, 2011). The genome was assembled using Spades (v3.11.0; Bankevich et al., 2012) and assembly quality was confirmed using Quast (v4.5; Gurevich et al., 2013) [genome length of 4.71 × 106 bp, N50 of 2.37 × 105]. Genomic features were annotated using Prokka (v1.12; Seemann, 2014). Sequencing reads and the assembled genome have been uploaded to ENA (PRJEB48101).

To identify TIR domain-containing proteins, hidden Markov models (HMMs) for six Pfam domains [DUF1863, SEFIR, TIR-like, TIR, TIR_2, and TIR_3; all members of Pfam clan CL0173 (Pfam-A v33.1, El-Gebali et al., 2019)] were used as input profiles to the hmmsearch tool in Hmmer (v3.3.1; http://hmmer.org/). We used these HMMs to search 7,047 reference bacterial proteomes in UniProt (release 02_2020), 215 cultured human gut bacterial taxa, and the dataset of fecal microbiomes sampled from healthy Bangladeshi infants and children and from those with malnutrition. TIR-domain-containing proteins were defined as those with (i) a full-sequence bit score greater than the Pfam-defined noise cutoff for any of the six HMMs, or (ii) containing a statistically significant TIR domain signature as reported by InterProScan (v5.45-80.0; Jones et al., 2014) and encoding at least one domain with a bit score greater than 12. The following InterPro entries were used to define TIR domain signatures via InterProScan: IPR013568, IPR000157, IPR035897, IPR015032, IPR019302, IPR041340.

TIR domain families defined by HMMs often produce significant hits overlapping the same region of a single protein. In these cases, we kept the TIR domain annotation with the highest bit score, alignment length or alignment accuracy (in that order, as defined by Hmmer), for any domains that shared an overlap of at least 33% (Bramley et al., 2020). The probable start and end positions of these domains, as determined by Hmmer (the envelope coordinates), were used to extract individual TIR domain sequences from the proteins. The individual domains were subsequently assigned names based on the locus tag of the gene where they were found, the Pfam model that identified them, and a count based on the number of domains within a given protein that belonged to that family (in cases where a single protein encodes multiple putative TIR domains).

Double stranded (ds) DNAs encoding TIR domains were synthesized (GeneBlocks, IDT); they encompassed an average of 138 (minimum = 120, maximum = 143) amino acids starting four amino acids before the position aligning to the profile HMMs or at the start codon (if that codon was located less than four codons before the first aligning position) (Table S2). All sequences were codon optimized for expression in E coli K12. dsDNAs were subcloned into the pET30a(+) E. coli expression vector with an N-terminal tandem StrepTag and a C-terminal 6× His tag. Recombinant plasmid DNAs were transformed into E. coli C3013I (New England Biolabs).

The NADase activities of purified TIR domains and TIR domain-encoding proteins were also characterized (e.g., Figure 1B inset). To generate purified protein, overnight cultures of E. coli C3013I harboring recombinant pET30a(+)-TIR constructs described above were diluted 1:100 in 100 mL LB supplemented with 50 μg/mL kanamycin. Once cultures reached an OD600 of ∼0.6, IPTG was added (100 μM). Cells were harvested from 50 mL cultures 3 h after induction, and Strep-tagged proteins were purified using 200 μL HiCap Streptactin Mag Beads (Cube Biotech). Ten μL of purified bead-bound proteins were tested for NADase activity in a 50 μL reaction mixture containing HEPES (25 mM) and 10 μM NAD substrate.

TIR domains were identified and annotated as described above, and their sequences were extracted in the same manner as described for the in vitro NADase assay. An HMM profile (model length = 116) was generated from the multiple sequence alignment of clan CL0173 obtained from the online Pfam database (Pfam-A v33.1, El-Gebali et al., 2019) using the hmmbuild tool contained within Hmmer (v3.3.1; http://hmmer.org/). Sequences were aligned to the HMM profile using the hmmprofalign tool within Matlab, and then subset to include only residues at positions that aligned with the HMM profile (i.e., insertions were removed). Sequences that had gaps (missing residues) in >15% of these 116 positions were removed from downstream analyses. This trimmed and filtered alignment was used to calculate the pairwise Jukes-Cantor distance between all pairs of sequences that remained. TIR domains identified in the microbiome datasets were assigned a predicted function based on the activity observed for the most similar (lowest Jukes-Cantor distance) TIR domains tested in vitro, with a maximum Jukes-Cantor distance of 1.75. [The pairwise distance between active TIR domains was significantly lower than the pairwise distance between active and inactive TIR domains (p = 2.65 × 10−57; one-way ANOVA)]. Additionally, sequences were required to encode a glutamate at the known catalytic site of TIRs (position 73 in the CL0173 alignment) in order to be classified as active (Essuman et al., 2018).

Diets were produced by Dyets, Inc (Bethlehem, PA); they were modified versions of the AIN-93G Purified Rodent Diet (Dyets; catalog number 110700) where the amount of cornstarch was altered to accommodate addition or removal of NAD precursors to maintain levels of all other micronutrients, and most macronutrients (Table S3). The NAD precursor-sufficient diet had NMN and Nam added in amounts that were equimolar to the level of NA in AIN-93G. The NAD-deficient diet contained no NAD-precursors. The NA-supplemented diet contained 55.5 times the molar amount of the combined NAD precursors in the NAD-sufficient diet (Feng et al., 2020). All diets were sterilized by gamma irradiation (30-50 kGy; Sterigenics, Rockaway, NJ). Sterility was confirmed by culturing the diets at 37°C in TYG medium under aerobic and anaerobic (75% N2, 20% CO2, 5% H2) conditions.

Germ-free C57BL/6J mice were reared in plastic flexible film gnotobiotic isolators (Class Biologically Clean) at 23°C under a strict 12-h light cycle (lights on at 0600h, off at 1800h). Animals were weaned onto an autoclaved, low-fat, plant polysaccharide-rich chow (catalog number 2018S, Envigo) that was administered ad libitum. Five days prior to colonization, 8-week-old male mice were switched to the NAD precursor-sufficient diet; 2 days later, they were either placed on the NAD precursor-deficient diet, or the NA-supplemented diet, or were continued on the NAD precursor-sufficient diet. All bacterial strains that were introduced to gnotobiotic mice are listed in Table 1; strain identity was confirmed by sequencing of full-length 16S rDNA. Equivalent numbers of bacterial cells (based on OD600 measurements), recovered from monocultures grown to stationary phase in LYBHI medium under anaerobic conditions, were introduced into germ-free mice using a plastic-tipped oral gavage needle (Fisher); mice were either mono-colonized or gavaged with mixtures of 2 or 26 bacterial strains (volume of gavage: 200 μL). Animals were maintained in separate gnotobiotic isolators, each dedicated to mice colonized with the same bacterial consortium (n = 3 or 4 animals/cage). Animals received their diets ad libitum. Cages contained autoclaved paper ‘shepherd shacks’ to facilitate their natural nesting behaviors and to provide environmental enrichment. Pre-colonization fecal samples were collected to verify the germ-free status of the mice using both culture-based and culture-independent (16S rRNA-based) assays.

Short-read COmmunity PROfiling by Sequencing (COPRO-Seq, McNulty et al., 2013) was used to define the absolute abundance of bacterial strains in cecal samples obtained from colonized mice. For absolute abundance determination, known quantities of two spike-in organisms (Agrobacterium radiobacter DSM 30147 and Alicyclobacillus acidiphilus DSM 14558) were added to each weighed, frozen specimen of cecal contents (Stämmler et al., 2016; Wolf et al., 2019). DNA was isolated from the pellets by adding 500 μL of extraction buffer [200 mM Tris (pH 8), 200 mM NaCl, 20 mM EDTA], 210 μL of 20% SDS, and 500 μL of 0.1 mm diameter zirconia beads, followed by treatment with a BioSpec bead beater for 4 min, addition of 500 μL phenol:chloroform:isoamyl alcohol (25:24:1), and precipitation of nucleic acids with isopropanol. Libraries were prepared using the Nextera DNA Library Prep Kit (Illumina) and combinations of custom barcoded primers (Adey et al., 2010). Multiplex sequencing of the libraries was performed using Illumina MiniSeq and/or NextSeq instruments [uni-directional 75 nucleotide reads; 4.33 × 106 ± 1.99 × 106 reads/sample (minimum of 2.76 × 106 reads)]. Reads were mapped onto the sequenced genomes of consortium members using an analytic pipeline described in Gehrig et al. (2019), as well as to the genomes of the two spike-in bacteria, and five ‘distractor’ genomes belonging to bacteria that were not present in the samples (Lactobacillus ruminis ATCC 27782, Megasphaera elsdenii DSM 20460, Olsenella uli DSM 7084, Pasteurella multocida subsp. multocida str. 3480 and Staphylococcus saprophyticus subsp. saprophyticus ATCC 15305). The absolute abundance of each community member was calculated by multiplying the normalized counts of that member with the abundances of the spike-in and dividing by the measured weight of the sample of cecal contents (Stämmler et al., 2016). A strain was considered to be a successful colonizer if its absolute abundance was greater than two standard deviations above the mean absolute abundance of the distractor genomes in a given sample.

Snap-frozen aliquots of cecal contents were stored at −80°C. Cecal samples were thawed on ice and reagents were added in the following order: (i) 250 μL of acid-washed glass beads (212-300 μm diameter; MilliporeSigma; catalog number G1277), (ii) 500 μL of Buffer B (200 mM NaCl, 20 mM EDTA), (iii) 210 μL of 20% SDS, and (iv) 500 μL of a mixture of phenol:chloroform:isoamyl alcohol (125:24:1, pH 4.5; ThermoFisher). The mixtures were homogenized in a bead beater (Biospec) for 4 min at room temperature and centrifuged at 8,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C. An aliquot (450 μL) of the aqueous phase was transferred to a new tube on ice and RNA was isolated according to a protocol described in a previous publication (Hibberd et al., 2017). The integrity of total RNA was assessed using a Bioanalyzer (Agilent). Genomic DNA (gDNA) was eliminated by DNase treatment and the samples were purified using the MEGAclear Transcription Clean-Up Kit (ThermoFisher). The absence of gDNA contamination was verified using PCR primers directed against variable region 4 of the bacterial 16S rRNA gene. gDNA-free RNA was quantified using the Qubit RNA BR Assay Kit (Invitrogen) and 1 μg was subjected to ribosomal RNA depletion using the Ribo-Zero (Epidemiology/Bacteria) kit (Illumina) followed by ethanol precipitation. dsDNA and dual-indexed Illumina libraries were prepared using the SMARTer Stranded RNA-Seq kit (Takara Bio USA). Libraries were first sequenced on an Illumina MiniSeq instrument, generating 75-nt reads. Read counts were used to balance the pool and deeper coverage was obtained using an Illumina NextSeq platform [70-nt unidirectional reads; 2.97 ± 1.4 × 106 reads/sample (mean ± SD); n = 51 samples)]. Fluorescence was not measured from the first five cycles because the library preparation introduces three non-templated deoxyguanines that would terminate the sequencing run if imaged. Sequences were trimmed using Cutadapt (v. 1.16 Martin, 2011) to remove adapters, low-quality ends (quality cutoff = 25), and the first three bases of the 75-nt reads generated by MiniSeq. Quality control of the trimmed, demultiplexed, sequences was conducted using FastQC and reads were mapped to the genomes of community members after combining reads generated by the MiniSeq and NextSeq instruments. Raw counts were normalized using library sizes and gene lengths to transcripts per kilobase million (TPM) counts. The resulting dataset was then imported into R, and DESeq2 (Love et al., 2014) was used to identify differentially expressed, TIR domain-encoding genes using a DESeq2 significance threshold of α = 0.1 and raw read counts as input.

Methods used for LC-QqQ-MS-based quantification of these metabolites were similar to those used in the E. coli based TIR expression assay described above, with the following modifications. Cecal contents were collected on 10 μL plastic inoculation loops at the time of sacrifice, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at −80°C. Aliquots were kept frozen, removed from the loops and weighed. 10 μL of ice-cold methanol was added per mg of sample, which was then thawed on ice. The mixture was subsequently shaken for two minutes in a BioSpec bead beater. Samples were then centrifuged for 10 min at 3,000 × g at 4°C; a 150 μL aliquot of the supernatant was transferred to a new tube containing 150 μL ice-cold chloroform, then mixed by pulse vortexing and centrifuged for 10 min at 3,000 × g at 4°C. One hundred microliters of the methanol fraction was transferred to a new tube containing 100 μL of ice-cold chloroform, mixed by pulse-vortexing, and centrifuged for 10 min at 3,000 × g at 4°C. 70 μL was transferred to a new tube and lyophilized in a Labconco SpeedVac. Samples were resuspended in 40 μL of ammonium formate. At least two samples per treatment group were split into two aliquots, and purified v-cADPR-x was spiked into one of the aliquots. Following centrifugation (20,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C), 10 μL of the supernatant was injected into a C18 reverse phase column (Atlantis T3, 2.1 × 150 mm, 3 μm; Waters). The spiked-in v-cADPR-x was used to determine the retention time of this metabolite across biological matrices and experiments.

Details about the statistical methods employed can be found in the main text and in figure legends. COPRO-Seq and mass spectrometric data for gnotobiotic mouse experiments are expressed as mean values ± standard deviations (SD) with the number of independent biological replicates indicated in the figure legends. Two-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test was used to analyze mass spectrometric data for experiments testing multiple microbial communities and diets. One-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test was used for analyses comparing metabolite levels in mice consuming the same diet colonized with different microbial communities. The non-parametric Mann-Whitney U test was used to compare the abundance of individual strains within the 26-member community between mice fed the NAD-precursor deficient- or sufficient-diet (results shown in Table S4A). To compare relative levels of expression of genes with in a single bacterial strain, the RNA-seq data from gnotobiotic mouse experiments shown in Figures S4B and
3C were normalized based on library size and gene length to transcripts per kilobase million (TPM) and the results shown as mean values ± SD. Analysis of differential gene expression was performed using DESeq2 with p-values determined by applying the Wald test with FDR correction to DESeq2 normalized counts. Human microbiome shotgun sequencing and LC-QqQ-MS data were analyzed with the non-parametric Mann-Whitney U test as they were not normally distributed. Data were processed and analyzed using Bash, Prism Software 9.0 (GraphPad), MATLAB R2021b (Mathworks), R (v4.1.0), and Python (v 3.6.5).

This work involves data and biospecimens from clinical trials. The clinical registry numbers and associated links are as follows: ClinicalTrials.gov identifiers NCT01889329 (https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01889329?term=NCT01889329&draw=2&rank=1) and NCT03084731 (https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03084731?term=NCT03084731&draw=2&rank=1).

J.S.W. conducted bioinformatic analyses of TIR domains and pathways of bacterial NAD metabolism together with M.Z., with invaluable input from W.B., A.Y., D.A.R., and A.O. J.S.W., N.D., and M.Z. performed in vitro assays of TIR domain NADase activity. J.S.W. and J.I.G. designed gnotobiotic mouse experiments, with community profiling by shotgun sequencing (COPRO-seq) and microbial RNA-seq analyses of collected biospecimens carried out by J.S.W. and S.V. Mass spectrometric analysis of metabolites generated during in vitro and in vivo experiments were performed by Y.S. Fecal samples collected from Bangladeshi children from a previously published study were supplied by T.A. and maintained in a biospecimen archive overseen by M.J.B. This manuscript was written by J.S.W. and J.I.G. with contributions from M.Z., A.O., A.D., and J.M.

A.O. and D.A.R. are co-founders of Phenobiome, Inc., a company pursuing development and biomedical applications of computational tools for predictive phenotype profiling of microbial communities. A.D. and J.M. are co-founders of, and Y.S. served as a consultant to, Disarm Therapeutics, a company dedicated to developing therapeutics for neurodegenerative conditions that is now part of Eli Lilly and Company.

Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2022.110738.





