Impact of Environmental Pollutants on Gut Microbiome and Mental Health via the Gut–Brain Axis

Over the last few years, the microbiome has emerged as a high-priority research area to discover missing links between brain health and gut dysbiosis. Emerging evidence suggests that the commensal gut microbiome is an important regulator of the gut–brain axis and plays a critical role in brain physiology. Engaging microbiome-generated metabolites such as short-chain fatty acids, the immune system, the enteric nervous system, the endocrine system (including the HPA axis), tryptophan metabolism or the vagus nerve plays a crucial role in communication between the gut microbes and the brain. Humans are exposed to a wide range of pollutants in everyday life that impact our intestinal microbiota and manipulate the bidirectional communication between the gut and the brain, resulting in predisposition to psychiatric or neurological disorders. However, the interaction between xenobiotics, microbiota and neurotoxicity has yet to be completely investigated. Although research into the precise processes of the microbiota–gut–brain axis is growing rapidly, comprehending the implications of environmental contaminants remains challenging. In these milieus, we herein discuss how various environmental pollutants such as phthalates, heavy metals, Bisphenol A and particulate matter may alter the intricate microbiota–gut–brain axis thereby impacting our neurological and overall mental health.

The gut microbiome is made up of approximately 100 trillion miсroorgаnisms that collectively have almost 200 times more genes than the human genome, making it an “organ” in and of itself [1,2,3,4]. Bасteroidetes аnd Firmiсutes are the two main bacterial phyla that dominate the human intestine, accounting for 90% of intestinal bacteria in healthy people according to findings based on gene sequencing [5]. Proteobacteria, Actinobacteria, Verrucomicrobia and Fusobacteria, among others, make up the remaining 10% [5]. The gut microbiota distribution differs greatly between individuals and even changes throughout life. The co-evolution of human beings and their microbiota has emerged due to a symbiotic interplay and сo-deрendenсy for both species’ existence, ensuing in biomolecular networks between them [6,7]. Bacterial populations in this state are constantly changing, and they are vulnerable to changes in the host environment and body conditions. The inflammation and disruption of gut permeability appear to be caused by gut dysbiosis that, in turn, can have an impact on the host’s health [8]. Gut dysbiosis caused by environmental pollutants leads to alterations in the GBA, which is linked to the onset or exacerbation of psychiatric disorders [9].

Many variables can increase the chance of having a mental disease, but most of them are caused by a combination of environmental, psychological and biological factors. Genetics, brain injury, microbial infection, substance abuse, poor nutrition or exposure to environmental pollutants all may play an important role in the development of mental disorders [15]. To this end, this review discusses different routes that connect microbiota, the gut and the brain, while summarizing recent research pertaining to the effects of environmental pollutants such as heavy metals, phthalates, Bisphenol A (BPA), particulate matter (PM) and others on microbiota. In addition, we deliberate the significance of early exposures on gut dysbiosis and developmental neurotoxicity while pondering some microbiota-targeted intervention strategies which may aid in alleviating mental disorders.

The bidireсtionаl сommuniсаtion between the enteric nervous system (ENS) and the central nervous system (CNS), linking peripheral digestive activities to the brain’s emotional, behavioral and cognitive centers constitutes the gut–brain axis (GBA) [16]. Much of the early investigations on gut–brain communication concentrated on digestive function [17,18], but more recent studies have focused on the higher-order psychological and intellectual effects of brain–gut and gut–brain communication [19,20,21].

The microbiota has been the focus of research in recent years to discover a missing link between mental health and gut dysbiosis. More than 98% of bacteria in the human gut come from four phyla, viz. Bacteroides, Firmicutes, Proteobacteria and Actinobacteria, making up the microbiome’s remarkable complexity and diversity. The human gut microbiome may comprise more than 1000 bacterial species, containing more than nine million genes, according to metagenomic studies [22]. The presence of a microbiota–gut–brain axis (MGBA) is indicated by the fact that changes in the composition and amount of gut microbes via diet, host-derived metabolites and different environmental contaminants, can affect both the CNS and the ENS [16,23]. The engagement between microbiota and the CNS is principally mediated by the neurological (ANS), hormonal (HPA axis) and immunological (cytokine and chemokine) pathways, which are all linked [20]. Gut microbiome dysbiosis caused by exposure to environmental pollutants may be a direct factor that affects the GBA’s normal functioning and contributes to mental health issues such as depression, anxiety and mood disorders [24] (Figure 1).

Although the precise processes underlying microbiota–gut–brain crosstalk are as yet unknown, there are several potential mechanisms through which the gut bacteria can alter brain function. Microbes can influence CNS processes bidirectionally via the vagus nerve [25]; through immune system modulation [26]; regulating the activity of the HPA axis, including the plasma level of glucocorticoids [27,28]; tryptophan metabolism [29]; production, expression and turnover of neurotransmitters and neurotrophic factors [30,31,32]; and production of metabolites with neuroactive properties, such as short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) [31,33,34,35,36]. The gut microbiota imbalance has been proven in animal studies to affect brain chemistry, metabolic status and neuronal function [23]. SCFAs can cross the blood–brain barrier (BBB) via monocarboxylate transporters (MCTs) by overexpressing tight junction proteins and maintaining the integrity of the BBB [36]. SCFAs such as propionate, butyrate and acetate may modulate the levels of neurotrophic factors (BDNF), promote neurogenesis, influence glial cell morphology and function, contribute to serotonin formation and improve neuronal homeostasis and function, all of which help to regulate neuroinflammation in the CNS [36]. The engagement of SCFAs with these gut–brain networks can alter cognition, emotion and the pathophysiology of mental disorders directly or indirectly [36]. Changes in neurotransmitter activity via modulatory pathways including the kynurenine pathway [37], as well as changes in the availability and effects of SCFAs in the brain, can all have an impact on brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) functions including neuronal survival and differentiation in the CNS [37]. SCFAs also alter the release of gut hormones such as peptide tyrosine tyrosine (PYY), cholecystokinin (CCK) and glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) from gut mucosal enteroendocrine cells expressing free fatty асid receptors (FFАRs) [38]. In rodents, blood-borne PYY and GLP;-1 permeate the brain and have significant effects on neurotransmitters and behavior [39,40,41]. Daily exposure to the diverse variety of environmental pollutants affects our gut microbiota and impairs the bidirectional GBA and may lead to the development of psychiatric disorders [23]. Manipulation of the intestinal microbiota using prebiotics, probiotics or antimicrobial drugs is an effective therapeutic or preventative measure to counteract behavioral and cognitive deficits and these may be useful to supplement the action of drugs in the treatment of CNS disorders.

The various environmental contaminants produced by modern civilization has expanded considerably as industrial processes and technology have advanced around the world. Although the impact of pollution on public health is well documented, little is known about the link between environmental pollutants, gut dysbiosis and mental health [42]. Host diseases (immunological, gastrointestinal and neurobehavioral) can arise as a result of changes in the microbiota that favor more pathogenic organisms producing virulence factors like lipopolysaccharide (LPS) that start a cascade of processes leading to “leaky gut” [43]. This is commonly defined as an increase in intestinal mucosa permeability that сould аllow bасteriа, bасteriаl toxins and other small substances to leak into the bloodstream and cause systemic inflammation [44]. Bacterial virulence factors and metabolites are capable of being transferred to distant target areas, such as the brain. Hormone synthesis, bacterial generated metabolites, factors that mimic those produced by the host and epigenetic mutations are all potential mechanisms by which gut dysbiosis can affect the host. Exposure to environmental pollutants has been demonstrated to target both the host and the resident gut microbiota, whose disturbance could have systemic repercussions including alterations in the functioning of CNS through the MGBA [21,45,46]. Heavy metals, organic solvents and air pollutants are among the best-studied types of manmade and natural toxicants implicated in human psychiatric illnesses and psychological functioning [47,48].

There is mounting evidence that heavy metals may play a role in the development of various mental health and metabolic disorders, and gut dysbiosis induced by heavy metal intake may play a role in the pathophysiology and progression of these diseases. These pollutants are absorbed by the organism at a rate faster than the rate at which these are excreted or eliminated by excretion or catabolism.

BPA: Bisphenol A; EE: Ethinyl estradiol; DEHP: Diethyl hexyl phthalate; DBP: Dibutyl phthalate; MPB: Methylparaben; TCS: Triclosan; CAPM: Concentrated ambient particulate matter; UFP: Ultra-fine particles; MVE: Motor Vehicle Exhaust; BMF: Biomass Fuel; OTU: Operational Taxonomic Unit; ↑: higher/increased; ↓: lower/decreased.

Heavy metal ion interaction or accumulation inside the GI epithelium causes oxidative stress, microbial dysbiosis, cellular damage and an increased abundance of facultative anaerobes including Proteobacteria and Bacilli [121]. As a result, the amount of oxygen available to epithelial cells increases, depleting anaerobic SCFA-producing bacteria and lowering the production of anti-inflammatory and antioxidant metabolites that may further disrupt the integrity of the BBB and reduce neurogenesis, leading to disturbance in brain functions. Overall, metal exposure alters the microbial composition, which leads to metabolic alterations in the gut microbiota, affecting human metabolism. To eliminate xenobiotic metals, a stable and efficient gut microbiota is required. Dietary toxic metal mitigation treatments are anticipated to lessen the inflammatory burden on beneficial intestinal flora and thus the development of mental ailments.

Phthalates are plasticizers present in a large number of products, notably lubricants, flooring materials and personal care items such as shampoos and soaps [122]. Their leaching, migration and oxidation contaminate various water sources, air and soil during product usage and storage [123]. Humans are exposed to phthalates through ingestion of contaminated food, inhalation and dermal absorption [123]. Recent research in multiple species suggests that developmental phthalate exposure affects gut microbiota (Table 1), lowering its diversity and particularly modifying the amounts of bacterial metabolites, which could have serious health implications. The gut microbiome of newborns is affected by early life di-2-ethylhexyl phthalate (DEHP) exposure from medical treatments, which may influence their immunological responses later in life. When babies are given DEHP intravenously, a temporary gut microbial dysbiosis develops. DEHP exposure changed the composition and diversity of bacterial communities, including reductions in Rothia species and Bifidobacterium longum [124]. In mice, DEHP exposure leads to alterations in the gut microbiota community structure as well as in fecal metabolite profile and female reproductive toxicity [90]. DEHP-exposure-induced gut dysbiosis altered the levels of microbial metabolites such as SCFAs, BCAAs and simple sugars [90], which are important components of the microbiota–gut–brain axis.

As evident from the research led by Whyatt et al. on 319 non-smoking inner-city women who gave birth between 1999 and 2006, where four phthalate metabolites (DEHP, di-isobutyl phthalate-DiBP, di-n-butyl phthalate-DnBP and butyl benzyl phthalate-BBzP) tested were detected in maternal urine as prenatal exposure indicators [125]. Three of the phthalates (DnBP, DiBP and BBzP) were linked to a slew of behavioral issues, including, anxiety/depression, somatic complaints and withdrawn behavior [125]. Prenatal phthalate exposure has been linked to negative impacts on children’s neurodevelopment, including psychomotor, cognitive and behavioral outcomes, as indicated in numerous research studies [126,127,128,129]. By interfering with neuroendocrine systems, this contaminant may impair neuronal differentiation and maturation, increasing the risk of behavioral and cognitive deficits [130]. Mood problems are typically linked to the HPA axis, which can be disrupted by estrogenic EDCs such as phthalates and BPA. A study by Xu et al. recorded anxious and depressive behavior of pubertal and adult mice on perinatal DEHP exposure [131]. Increased anxiety-related behavior was linked to a dysfunctional HPA axis [132] in these trials, as demonstrated by greater ACTH and decreased corticosterone levels, as well as raised hypothalamic GR levels [126,133]. In young mice, DEHP exposure inhibited butyrate synthesis and upregulated the production of p-cresol, a bacterial metabolite linked to neurodevelopmental and behavioral problems, by increasing the abundance of species that synthesize the metabolite’s precursor [92]. This demonstrates the link between DEHP’s neurotoxic effects and gut microbiota dysbiosis.

Bisphenol A (BPA) is an endocrine disrupting chemical (EDC) used in the production of рolyсаrbonаte рlаstiсs [134]. Diet, air, water and dust are all probable sources of BPA exposure in humans [135]. Due to BPA’s extensive use, its exposure is becoming a matter of concern. BPA can change the gut microbiota of a range of species, according to recent animal investigations of developmental and adult BPA exposure (Table 1). In a study Proteobacteria, a dysbiosis marker [86], increased in abundance, but Akkermansia, a gut microbe linked to the improved gut barrier function and reduced inflammation, fell dramatically [85]. Intestinal tight junction protein expression levels also dropped dramatically, resulting in greater intestinal permeability and higher amounts of circulating endotoxins [85]. Prenatal BPA exposure in mice decreased Bifidobacteria [136], known to have anti-inflammatory properties [137], which may lead to systemic inflammation causing various health problems including mental disorders. Various experimental and epidemiological investigations have connected increased prenatal BPA/maternal urine concentrations to sex-specific changes in child behavior [138,139,140,141,142,143], spatial learning and memory outcomes [144,145].

More investigations have demonstrated that animals exposed to BPA during prenatal have higher levels of anxiety and cognitive abnormalities [144,146,147,148,149,150,151,152] by hyper activating the HPA axis and disrupting its basal and stress-induced function in a sexually dimorphic manner that may raise the risk of developing stress-related problems later in life by reducing the inhibition on the HPA axis mediated by hippocampal GR-mediated feedback [153,154]. The data imply that prenatal BPA exposure and mental disorder persistent potentiation are linked through reprogramming-induced activation of the HPA axis [153]. Estrogenic EDCs have been demonstrated to influence the brain, particularly the hypothalamus, in a time-, sex- and exposure-dependent manner [152]. BPA exposure resulted in differences in beta diversity with a considerable drop in the relative abundances of SCFA producers such as Oscillospira and Ruminococcaceae, according to 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing analyses [155]. BPA also reduced fecal SCFA levels while increasing oxidative stress [156,157], systemic LPS levels and gut permeability, all of which are early indications of inflammation-induced chronic illness [155,156,157]. According to a recent investigation, the neurotoxicity caused by BPA exposure in mice may be attributable in part to disruption of the MGBA. The results of male mice exposed to BPA showed that increased neuro-inflammation harmed their cognitive functions. Brain, colon and serum levels of the neurotransmitter serotonin, its precursor tryptophan (TRP), and its metаbolite 5-hydroxy indole асetiс асid (5-HIAA), are all reduced on exposure to BPA [158]. With alterations in the gut microbiome, mucin 2 levels and mucus secretion in the colon were found to be lower, as were рroрioniс, сарroiс and butyric acid levels [158]. Considering the significance of gut microbiota function for both brain and metabolic health, it is tempting to believe that BPA-induced gut microbiome changes partially mediate the negative effects of BPA on psychological and metabolic health. BPA decreased fecal SCFA and serotonin levels in the brain, as well as different types of microorganisms involved in TRР metаbolism, resulting in changes in the neurotransmitter signaling. BPA altered the integrity of the gut–blood barrier (GBB) and the BBB, which may be linked to dysbiosis, increasing cognitive decline and inflammation in the gut and the brain.

Chemicals most commonly found in air pollution include carbon monoxide (CO), particulate matter (PM), ozone (O3), nitrogen dioxide (NO2) and others which constitute both solid and liquid components and come from various sources including road dust, vehicle exhaust and windblown soil [159].

These findings are significant because the majority of the world’s population lives in places with particulate matter concentrations above WHO guidelines, and the link between air pollution and mental disorders such as depression and anxiety cannot be overlooked [191].

Considering the significance of the MGB axis in CNS function, interventions aiming at regulating the MGB axis are a promising way to improve mental health outcomes. The gut microbiota has emerged as an essential conduit to mental health and a prospective intervention target. Probiotics, prebiotics and synbiotics and postbiotics can all act as psychobiotics and a few are therapeutic interventions for mental disorders.

Probiotics when administered in suitable doses have been shown to reduce stress, anxiety and depression in healthy people in numerous investigations [192,193,194,195] (Table 2 and Table 3). Lactobacilli and Bifidobacteria are the most studied strains for exploring the psychobiotic potential of probiotics. Mixtures of various strains of probiotics can also be used to produce synergistic effects or boost efficacy.

↑: higher/increased; ↓: lower/decreased.

↑: higher/increased; ↓: lower/decreased.

Postbiotics, or deliberately inactivated whole cells or their components, offer health advantages that are mediated by changes in the microbiota, improved intestinal barrier function, modulation of metabolic or immunological responses or nervous system signaling. Several studies on humans and animal models have shown the anti-depressive and anxiolytic effects of postbiotics [202,203] (Table 2 and Table 3).

The processes by which bacteria or their components exercise their psychobiotic potential have yet to be fully understood. However, it has been discovered that the regulation of the HPA axis, modulation of immunological responses and inflammation, and the generation of neurohormones and neurotransmitters are the primary mechanisms by which psychobiotics exert their effects [37] (Figure 2). Psychobiotics influence the bacteria–gut–brain relationship by restoring the eubiotic state in the gut and alleviating mental disorders [223].

Psychobiotics may modulate the functions of immune system by reducing inflammation and restoring the BBB integrity either by directly alleviating pro-inflammatory cytokines (TNFα, IL1-β) or in a roundabout way by augmenting anti-inflammatory cytokines (IL-10) [223,226,227,228]. Bacterial migration outside the lumen can also directly affect inflammation by increasing levels of pro-inflammatory cellular components such as LPS [223,225]. Some of the gut microbes that can produce neurotransmitters like GABA, norepinephrine and serotonin are Lactobacillus acidophilus, Lасtobасillus саsei, Bifidobасterium infаntis, Bifidobасterium longum, Escherichia, Bacillus, Saccharomyces, Candida, Streptococcus and Enterococcus. These can have psychotropic effects (anxiolytic and antidepressant) by regulating the expression of particular neurochemical receptors in the GBA [229]. Though research into the human microbiome is still in its initial phases, the findings imply that gut microbes may influence people’s cognitive health, behavior and mood.

The diversity of an individual’s microbiome fluctuates throughout time. As a result, the bacteria that prevail can be influenced by the host’s conditions and the environment. Disturbances in the gut microbiota can have a huge impact on the host’s physiological responses and overall health. There is considerable evidence that environmental pollutants interact with the microbiota, which plays a critical role in GBA regulation. Such exposures can cause systemic and long-term repercussions in the host by generating gut dysbiosis. This review entails a thorough literature search for demonstrating how various environmental pollutants such as phthalates, heavy metals, bisphenol A and particulate matter may alter the intricate microbiota–gut–brain axis, thereby impacting our neurological and overall mental health. The data advocate that the microbiota should be considered by regulatory authorities when making decisions because it affects the health of the vulnerable population.

The MGBA is important for human health, especially in preventing neuropsychiatric disorders. As a result, it becomes critical to comprehend the systems that keep the body in a state of homeostasis. Through in vitro, in vivo and in silico investigations, substantial progress has been accomplished in understanding the gut microbiome and its relationship with host intestinal imbalance, mental ailments and neurotoxicity. However, there are still certain gaps in our understanding of the microbiota–gut–brain axis’s complicated interplay and how to exploit and harness the microbiome as a possible therapeutic target to minimize mental disorders. Using computational tools such as high-throughput next-generation sequencing and metagenomics, it has become possible to establish the structure of a healthy microbial community and identify significant associations between the gut microbiota of healthy and diseased people. However, the cellular and molecular links between gut dysbiosis and the role environmental pollutants play in disease progression remain a mystery. Longitudinal field studies will need to be combined with tightly controlled randomized clinical trials and related in vitro experiments in the future. Multi-omics approaches integrating genomic, transcriptomic and metabolomic data should be used to define changes in the functional capacity and activity of the gut microbiota. More investigation is required to construct a physiological-based pharmacokinetic model for environmental pollutants and their metabolites to anticipate the consequences of contamination, рhаrmасokinetiсs, the role of the gut flora and harmful effects on the host. Future studies should emphasize developing microbial-based interventions and therapeutic approaches for psychotic disorders, using the computational studies of enormous volumes of data collected by meta-omics to uncover the underlying biological pathways of the MGBA. The human intestinal flora varies greatly from individual to individual. This heterogeneity may also contribute to the development of algorithms for predicting psychological stress and personalized approaches for beneficial control of the gut flora.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

