Lifestyle and Metabolic Syndrome: Contribution of the Endocannabinoidome

Lifestyle is a well-known environmental factor that plays a major role in facilitating the development of metabolic syndrome or eventually exacerbating its consequences. Various lifestyle factors, especially changes in dietary habits, extreme temperatures, unusual light–dark cycles, substance abuse, and other stressful factors, are also established modifiers of the endocannabinoid system and its extended version, the endocannabinoidome. The endocannabinoidome is a complex lipid signaling system composed of a plethora (>100) of fatty acid-derived mediators and their receptors and anabolic and catabolic enzymes (>50 proteins) which are deeply involved in the control of energy metabolism and its pathological deviations. A strong link between the endocannabinoidome and another major player in metabolism and dysmetabolism, the gut microbiome, is also emerging. Here, we review several examples of how lifestyle modifications (westernized diets, lack or presence of certain nutritional factors, physical exercise, and the use of cannabis) can modulate the propensity to develop metabolic syndrome by modifying the crosstalk between the endocannabinoidome and the gut microbiome and, hence, how lifestyle interventions can provide new therapies against cardiometabolic risk by ensuring correct functioning of both these systems.

Diets poor in essential nutritional factors (e.g., dietary fibers or vitamins) and rich in high-calorie nutrients, lack of exercise, and uncontrolled use of recreational substances or certain therapeutic drugs, together with other environmental challenges such as recently changed lifestyle habits in populations living at extreme temperatures or regarding night–day cycles, are all known to negatively affect the body’s ability to regulate energy metabolism and, hence, contribute to the development of metabolic syndrome [1]. A plethora of epidemiological studies point to these aspects as major predictors of various forms of dysmetabolism, including obesity and visceral adipose tissue accumulation [2], glucose intolerance, pre-diabetes and type 2 diabetes [3], dyslipidemia [4], hypertension [5] and, eventually, the development of atherogenic inflammation [6] and the ensuing cardiovascular disorders [7]. By contrast, several other studies show how fighting bad dietary habits and the introduction of some dietary supplements and vitamins, as well as the increase of physical exercise, can successfully counteract many features of metabolic syndrome [1,8,9].

In this article, we shall discuss several ways through which lifestyle-induced alterations of the endocannabinoidome—very often through direct or indirect effects on the gut microbiome (µB; that is the ensemble of genes, proteins, and metabolites provided by intestinal microorganisms)—can either worsen or ameliorate energy metabolism in mammals and, hence, influence the development of the metabolic syndrome.

The very popular drug of abuse, marijuana, is prepared from the flowers of Cannabis sativa varieties containing relatively high contents of the non-psychotropic precursor of Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), i.e., Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinolic acid, wherefrom the better known THC is obtained following desiccation and/or heating. However, Cannabis sativa—including those varieties that have been used for centuries for their fibers and employed to make ropes and paper—contains more than one hundred other THC and THC acid-like compounds in the inflorescence. These compounds have little or no psychotropic action and, together with THC and THC-acid, are known as cannabinoids. The euphoric, appetite-stimulating, and many other “central” actions of THC, are due to its unique capability to bind and activate a G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR), the cannabinoid receptor type-1 (CB1), whereas another GPCR, the cannabinoid receptor type-2 (CB2), with little more than 50% homology with CB1 [1,2], is responsible for the immune-modulatory effects of this compound. So far, THC is the only plant-derived cannabinoid known to be capable of potently and efficaciously activating these receptors (which is why they should, in our opinion, be renamed “THC receptors”), although a THC congener, Δ9-tetrahydrocannabivarine (THCV), was more recently shown to antagonize CB1 [25]. The discovery of cannabinoid receptors suggested the existence of endogenous ligands for such receptors. Two small lipids ultimately derived from arachidonic acid, N-arachidonoylethanolamine (AEA or anandamide) and 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG), were indeed identified and shown to be capable of high-affinity binding to both CB1 and CB2 receptors, stimulating their activity with good efficacy [26,27]. These molecules were named endocannabinoids (eCBs) [28].

The existence of the eCBome complicates the development of selective pharmacological and genetic tools to be used for the understanding of the several tissue-specific local functions of the eCBs, and for the exploitation of this knowledge for the development of new therapies against pathological conditions in which AEA and 2-AG are involved. On the other hand, if one looks at the eCBome as a whole and as the potential target of several physiopathological and environmental clues, and at eCBome profiles as possible personalized fingerprints of disease and responses to lifestyle, this complex signaling hypersystem, no matter how challenging, may open new therapeutic and diagnostic avenues. Indeed, as will be discussed below, diet and dietary components, habits, exercise, and the environment strongly impact on the eCBome—to an extent of which we have had perhaps, so far, only a partial view.

In the obese state, the eCB system is modulated at the level of anabolic and catabolic enzyme activity, endocannabinoid levels, and CB1 receptor expression, resulting in a generally increased eCB tone “in the wrong place and at the wrong time” [36]. BMI positively correlates with circulating AEA and 2-AG levels, especially when fat distribution is partitioned more towards intra-abdominal stores [37,38,39]. However, the levels of AEA are dysregulated in obesity with respect to responses to feeding or the time of day as viscerally obese men were found to have significantly lower levels of AEA in the morning than normoweights [38]. The observed increases in AEA and 2-AG levels appear to be due to changes in expression of adipose tissue-metabolizing enzymes, as the AEA-catabolizing enzyme FAAH was decreased and the 2-AG-anabolizing enzyme DAGLα was increased in the adipose tissue from obese individuals in conjunction with decreased CB1 expression, perhaps as a homeostatic compensatory response [37,39,40]. Changes in eCBome gene expression within adipose tissue appear to be depot-specific, however, since gluteal subcutaneous adipose tissue from obese subjects had decreased eCBome gene expression (including FAAH, DAGLα, and CB1) while abdominal subcutaneous adipose tissue showed the opposite trend, with visceral adipose tissue similarly having increased CB1 expression [41].

In the study by Everard et al. discussed above, the chronic high-fat-diet-induced changes in the jejunum eCBome lipid levels were associated with significant alterations in the gut µB, with the proportions of 19 bacterial genera identified as being significantly modified [18]. The same group had previously shown that 4 weeks of high-fat-diet feeding increased 2-AG levels in the ileum which was also associated with an altered µB [78]. High-fat-diet-induced µB changes were associated with increased CB1 expression in the colon whereas FAAH was increased in the jejunum [79]. Thus, it appears that µB alterations in response to high-fat diets impacts upon the intestinal eCBome directly which, under obesity-inducing conditions, increases gut barrier permeability, subsequently resulting in increased circulating bacterially derived lipopolysaccharide (LPS) that subsequently modulates adipose tissue eCBome and functionality (reviewed in [80]).

The health benefits of dietary fiber have been extensively studied and reviewed, and there is little doubt that higher fiber is beneficial for cardiovascular disease, supporting prevalent recommendations that fiber intake be increased in order to maintain a healthy diet [81]. The positive effects of fiber on obesity and metabolic syndrome are believed to be intimately linked to alterations of the gut µB [23,82]. Increasing attention is being paid to “prebiotic” fiber, which is non-digestible by the host but is metabolized by gut microbiota, resulting in an alteration of the composition and/or activity of the µB, producing bioactive metabolites (such as short-chain fatty acids) that provide physiological benefits to the host [83].

The eCBome has been found to regulate intestinal permeability. Using the same genetic model discussed above (ob/ob mice), Muccioli et al. showed that CB1 antagonism partially rescued tight junction integrity within the intestinal epithelium and reduced plasma LPS levels, while CB1 agonism in wild type mice increased gut permeability [79]. Further, blocking CB1 activity in mice on an obesity-inducing diet not only inhibited the development of obesity and improved glucose homeostasis, as expected, but also decreased intestinal permeability as evidenced by reduced circulating LPS levels in association with decreased adipose tissue inflammation and circulating inflammatory cytokine profile, indicating a decrease in systemic inflammation [21]. Importantly, these changes were observed in conjunction with an increase in the relative amounts of intestinal A. muciniphila and decreased Lachnospiraceae. The reduction in metabolic endotoxemia induced in ob/ob mice fed oligofructose correlated with decreased colonic CB1 expression and AEA levels, with the latter presumably due to increased expression of the AEA catabolic enzyme FAAH [79]. Thus, CB1 regulation of gut permeability, under the influence of the µB, is another mechanism by which CB1 regulates inflammation in addition to direct proinflammatory effects such as, for example, the stimulation of proinflammatory cytokine release from macrophages, which has developmental consequences for type 2 diabetes [90,91]. These results collectively support the notion that the cardiometabolic health effects of dietary prebiotic fiber is associated with alteration of the gut microbiota and intestinal eCBome, resulting in decreased intestinal permeability and the ensuing metabolic endotoxemia/systemic inflammation.

The consumption of spicy food has been associated with overall decreased mortality and significant reduction in hazard ratios for deaths caused by ischemic heart diseases and, in the case of the consumption of fresh chili peppers, reduced diabetes [92]. Capsaicin is the active component endowing chili peppers with their spiciness, due to activation of transient receptor potential vanilloid-1 (TRPV1) cation channels. TRPV1 channels primarily respond to noxious heat (>42 °C), but are also modulated by several eCBome members (including long-chain-saturated NAEs, monoacylglycerols, N-acyldopamines, and N-acyltaurines) [33]. Several human studies have indicated the various metabolic benefits of dietary capsaicin, which improved postprandial glucose handling in both healthy individuals and overweight individuals and women with gestational diabetes [93,94,95]. While a meta-analysis of capsaicin studies supported the positive effects of this dietary component on energy expenditure and appetite regulation, the overall effects were very small and more evident at high doses [96]. In rodent models, oral capsaicin is able to combat diet-induced obesity, insulin resistance, and hepatosteatosis [97]. The positive metabolic effects of capsaicin appear to be mediated by both TRPV1 and PPARα [97,98]. However, the role of TRPV1 in obesity and associated side effects—especially dysregulation of glucose homeostasis—is complex, as indicated by contrasting results from Trpv1−/− mice in diet-induced obesity, in which both beneficial [99] and detrimental [100] effects have been observed. These differences may be due to variations in the diets used between studies or the ages of the mice, as Trpv1−/− mice have been shown to have increased activity at young ages, but decreased activity at older ages, in association with increased weight gain [100,101].

Capsaicin and TRP channels have also been linked to the gut µB. The antiobesity effects of capsaicin have been associated with changes in the gut µB, including also increases in A. muciniphila [20,102,103]. The gut µB appears to have a causative role in mediating capsaicin antiobesity effects as gut µB transplantation from capsaicin-treated to germ-free mice replicated the capsaicin-dependent antimetabolic endotoxemia effects, which were mitigated by antibiotics in capsaicin-treated mice [104]. These changes were defined by decreases in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-producing, gram-negative bacteria and LPS biosynthetic genes, and increases in short-chain fatty acid (SCFA)-producing bacteria, such as Lachnospiraceae, Ruminococcaceae, and Roseburia, as well as decreased colonic CB1 expression [104]. Accordingly, TRPV1 has been suggested to counteract increased intestinal permeability in vitro [105]. Most interestingly, in a human study, different µB enterotypes (different gut µB ecosystems) of participants were associated with the extent of capsaicin-mediated positive metabolic effects. Capsaicin increased the Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio and Faecalibacterium abundance more prevalently in participants with the Bacteroides enterotype than the Prevotella enterotype, in combination with increased serum incretin (GIP and GLP-1) levels, which stimulate insulin production, and decreased LBP, which was assessed as a marker of inflammation [106]. As in the case of eCBs and CB1 receptors, also the communication between TRPV1 and the gut µB seems to be bi-directional. In fact, the visceral antinociceptive effects of the probiotic Lactobacillus reuteri has been attributed to inhibition of TRPV1 activity in mesenteric neurons [107], indicating also that the eCBome may play a significant role in mediating the activity of microbial influences on the gut–brain axis, at least with respect to pain.

Vitamin D deficiency represents a global health issue, with over a billion people being deficient [108], largely due to inadequate sun exposure. Yet, significant levels of deficiency still occur in populations living in areas of abundant sunlight [109]. Vitamin D is found only in a few foods and is thus a common dietary supplement recommended by health authorities, especially in winter months [110]. Several aspects of the metabolic syndrome are associated with vitamin D deficiency, including obesity, dyslipidemia, insulin resistance, hepatosteatosis, and hypertension [111]. The causal role of vitamin D in the pathophysiology of these aspects of the metabolic syndrome is not known, but the gut µB also appears to play a significant role. In a mouse model of diet-induced obesity, vitamin D deficiency aggravated high-fat-diet-induced insulin resistance and hepatosteatosis along with inflammation. These results occurred in conjunction with mucosal breakdown within the ileum, endotoxemia and dysbiosis with increased levels of pathogenic Helicobacter hepaticus, and decreased levels of the metabolically beneficial A. muciniphila [112]. Vitamin D receptor knockout mice also develop dysbiosis, exemplified by an alteration in the ratio of Bacteroidetes/Firmicutes phyla with increases in Lactobacillaceae and Lachnospiraceae families [113]. However, while the mechanisms remain to be determined, UVR has recently been found to alter the mouse gut µB independently of vitamin D [114].

Taken together, these studies suggest that sunlight exposure, and the elevation in vitamin D levels that results from it, modify the eCBome as well as the µB. Whether there is a link between the two remains to be determined. For this reason, and given that these alterations are associated with µB changes that are believed to impact on metabolic health, such as increased Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratios and the presence of low A. muciniphila levels, it will be interesting to investigate if µB–eCBome crosstalk plays a significant role in regulating obesity and associated metabolic complications downstream of vitamin D.

Exercise is the second pillar, together with the diet, which maintains metabolic health. Viscerally obese men who underwent a lifestyle modification program that included the addition of regular exercise for one year had significant improvements in several metabolic parameters as well as reduced circulating 2-AG and, to a lesser extent, AEA levels [121]. These latter alterations were very likely associated with decreased adiposity. However, while physically active men have higher lymphocyte FAAH activity than sedentary controls, suggesting higher eCBome tone within these cells, basal circulating levels of AEA, PEA, and 2-AG were not found to be different from those of sedentary males [122]. By contrast, in a study of normoweight and obese women whose activity was tracked over 6 days, while 2-AG was associated with BMI, as expected, AEA and OEA levels were positively associated with moderate–vigorous physical activity [123].

Recent evidence indicates that exercise and the µB interact with each other (reviewed in [24]). Germ-free mice have decreased exercise performance as compared to conventional controls, and reintroduction of a single bacterial species (Bacteroides fragilis) partially reversed this [137]. While the sample sizes were small, Petriz et al. found that moderate exercise differentially changes the µB in wild type Wistar, obese Zucker, and spontaneously hypertensive rats, suggesting that exercise-induced changes in the µB may be dependent on the metabolic state of the host organism [138]. Similarly, high-intensity interval training of high-fat-diet-fed mice altered the µB differentially along the gastrointestinal tract with the most significant changes found in the distal regions [139]. Interestingly, exercise reversed the high-fat-diet-induced decrease in microbial diversity and the Bacteroidetes/Firmicutes ratio, which are indicative of obesity [139]. Furthermore, fecal microbiota transplant from exercised mice to mice on a high-fat diet resulted in improved metabolic parameters, suggesting that that µB can confer, at least in part, the benefits of exercise [140]. However, a more recent study found that high- or medium-intensity training had no effect on the µB of obese Zucker rats [141]. In humans, studies on professional rugby players found that their µBs were more diverse than sedentary controls and produced more short-chain fatty acids, though these changes were also associated with dietary differences [142,143]. However, other studies have found that independent of diet or BMI, higher levels of cardiorespiratory fitness correlated with higher µB diversity and short-chain fatty acid production [144]. Similarly, independent of diet, six weeks of endurance exercise in overweight women significantly altered the µB of participants with an increase in A. muciniphila [145], which has been shown to increase the levels of eCBome monoacylglycerols, including 2-AG [87] and, as mentioned above, to be regulated by both CB1 and TRPV1 activity [21,103]. To date, no studies have examined the potential link between the eCBome, exercise, and the gut µB. However, given that activities of several eCBome receptors (CB1, TRPV1, PPARα) have been linked to µB changes [21,103,146], it is possible that their modulation through exercise-induced changes in eCBome mediator levels may play a role in exercise-induced changes in the µB, or vice versa.

The principal psychoactive component of marijuana/cannabis (THC), one of the most commonly used recreational drugs the world over, acts mainly through CB1 activation (reviewed in [25]). Given the strong association of CB1 and its ligands AEA and 2-AG with several aspects of metabolic syndrome and obesity in general [10], it is somewhat counterintuitive that cannabis use is generally associated with an improved metabolic phenotype. Analysis of the NHANES survey from 2005–2010 found that current and past cannabis use is generally associated with significantly lower odds of metabolic syndrome [147]. Combined examination of two large epidemiological studies (NESARC and NCS-R) concluded that chronic cannabis users had significantly decreased adjusted prevalence rates of obesity, from 22%–25% in non-users to 14%–17% in users [148]. A very recent prospective analysis of NESARC data supports the above, finding that cannabis use is inversely associated with BMI increases over 3 years [149]. Several large studies have also shown inverse associations between cannabis and diabetes [150,151,152], which were corroborated by a Swedish study involving 18,000 participants, though the observed protective effects on diabetes were attenuated when adjusted for age [153]. Interestingly, these associations, observed in large heterogeneous populations, are also observed in Inuit from the Canadian north, a relatively isolated ethnic group in which the decreased weight associated with cannabis use was found to account for an association with improved glucose metabolism [154]. Cannabis use is also associated with reduced prevalence of both alcoholic and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease [155,156]. It should be noted that cannabis use is not always associated with positive metabolic outcomes; among individuals with type 1 diabetes, it is correlated with an increased risk in ketoacidosis [157], subclinical atherosclerosis (but only among cigarette smokers) [158], and mortality in patients with myocardial infarction, despite having lower rates of diabetes and hyperlipidemia [159].

It is still unclear if the modulation of the µB by THC is dependent on CB1 activity. However, inhibition of CB1 with the inverse agonist rimonabant alters the µB composition of diet-induced obese mice, including increasing A. muciniphila in conjunction with metabolic parameter improvements [21]. Further, an adipose tissue-specific knockout of a major NAE anabolic enzyme, NAPE-PLD, which reduced local OEA, PEA and SEA, but not AEA levels, inhibited adipose tissue browning, and led to increased weight gain, glucose intolerance, and dyslipidemia in addition to exacerbating diet-induced obesity [19]. These effects were associated with an alteration in the gut µB which when transferred to germ-free mice, partially reproduced the phenotype, and are therefore likely to be CB1-independent, as the affected NAEs are ligands for other eCBome receptors, including TRPV1, which, as indicated above, impacts upon metabolic health, at least in part through alteration of the µB. Taken together, the above studies indicate that cannabis use—through its psychoactive constituent, THC, and non-psychoactive phytocannabinoids—potentially impacts upon metabolic health, in part by modulating µB constituents.

In summary, we have reviewed several examples of how the lifestyle–eCBome–μB triangle, with its multifaceted aspects, is likely to play a fundamental role in both metabolic health and metabolic syndrome (Figure 2). It is likely that several healthy and “bad” lifestyle habits, in synergy with other environmental factors, independently affect both eCBome signaling and the μB, and hence help in determining their correct or defective control of energy metabolism, respectively. It is also possible, however, that eCBome and μB crosstalk—which has not yet been fully explored—directs the manner in which lifestyle cues result in virtuous or vicious circles that can respectively counteract or accelerate the development of metabolic syndrome. The molecular aspects of the lifestyle–eCBome–μB triangle, therefore, need now to be fully elucidated in order to exploit this knowledge for new lifestyle (e.g., nutritional, physical activity, etc.) and pharmacological interventions aimed at combating the appearance of one or more of the metabolic syndrome features that together contribute to the development of type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular risk factors.

