A Guide to Diet-Microbiome Study Design

Intense recent interest in understanding how the human gut microbiome influences health has kindled a concomitant interest in linking dietary choices to microbiome variation. Diet is known to be a driver of microbiome variation, and yet the precise mechanisms by which certain dietary components modulate the microbiome, and by which the microbiome produces byproducts and secondary metabolites from dietary components, are not well-understood. Interestingly, despite the influence of diet on the gut microbiome, the majority of microbiome studies published to date contain little or no analysis of dietary intake. Although an increasing number of microbiome studies are now collecting some form of dietary data or even performing diet interventions, there are no clear standards in the microbiome field for how to collect diet data or how to design a diet-microbiome study. In this article, we review the current practices in diet-microbiome analysis and study design and make several recommendations for best practices to provoke broader discussion in the field. We recommend that microbiome studies include multiple consecutive microbiome samples per study timepoint or phase and multiple days of dietary history prior to each microbiome sample whenever feasible. We find evidence that direct effects of diet on the microbiome are likely to be observable within days, while the length of an intervention required for observing microbiome-mediated effects on the host phenotype or host biomarkers, depending on the outcome, may be much longer, on the order of weeks or months. Finally, recent studies demonstrating that diet-microbiome interactions are personalized suggest that diet-microbiome studies should either include longitudinal sampling within individuals to identify personalized responses, or should include an adequate number of participants spanning a range of microbiome types to identify generalized responses.

Microbiome features and metabolites have been increasingly linked to states of health and disease (1, 2), and diet is appreciated as one of the key drivers of this relationship. The microbes residing in the human gastrointestinal tract depend on their hosts for sources of fermentable substrate. Microbes metabolize the end-products of human digestion and indigestible dietary substrates to produce a wide variety of diet-derived and secondary metabolites. The microbes themselves and their metabolites signal the immune and nervous systems through known and unknown mechanisms, ultimately affecting human physiology, and disease development or progression. Unlike the known relationships between the essential nutrients and disease, which focus on single-nutrient relationships such as that between vitamin C and scurvy, these new diet-microbe-disease, and diet-metabolite-disease relationships are more complex. Microbe-disease relationships likely depend on the production of diet-derived metabolites such as short chain fatty acids (SCFAs) or on the production of secondary metabolites created by microbes prior to entering host circulation (Figure 1). While mechanisms have been identified for certain unique diet-microbe-metabolite relationships (3, 4) and a growing body of evidence suggests that the microbiome is playing an important role in drug metabolism (5), the complexity of the changing landscape of each individual's gastrointestinal tract has proven difficult to study. With each individual person's microbiome acting as an ecosystem, the majority of mechanisms explaining exactly how diet alters the microbiome and conversely how the microbiome alters dietary inputs to impact health remain uncharacterized.

High interindividual variation in both dietary intake and microbiome composition contribute to our poor understanding of the relationships between the foods we eat and how they impact the bacterial communities that reside within our bodies (6). It is difficult to control for diet and microbiome covariation in observational and interventional studies. In this article we discuss the limitations and complexity involved in planning dietary intervention studies with microbiome outcomes. We identify variables that should be considered, controlled for, and recorded in study designs. Finally, we attempt to make practical suggestions for study designs moving forward that appropriately incorporate and control for nutritional factors such as food intake and dietary patterns.

Past efforts to understand diet-microbiome relationships have linked dietary features to microbial composition (7, 8), but few diet-microbe-metabolite pathways have been decoded. Most of the exploration of diet-microbe-metabolites has been focused on SCFA production from fiber. However, other metabolites are gaining increased interest. Products of bacterial proteolytic fermentation from dietary proteins have been linked to negative health conditions such as diabetic kidney disease (9) and insulin resistance in individuals without diabetes (10). A large focus on the research in this space has centered on the microbial production of trimethylamine (TMA) from host dietary choline, which after absorption and conversion to trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO), becomes a circulating microbe-host co-metabolite that is associated with increased risk for cardiovascular disease (3). Blocking microbial TMA production in a mouse model has been demonstrated to reduce atherosclerotic lesion development (11). The production of secondary bile acids by microbes have also been linked to health outcomes. For example, the relationship between cream-derived saturated fat, host production of taurocholic acid, and Bilophila wadsworthia has been identified in animal models as potentially important for the development of inflammatory bowel diseases in genetically susceptible individuals (12). Microbial production of secondary bile acids may also impact host metabolism by producing ligands that bind to the farnesoid X receptor (FXR) (13) and the G protein-coupled bile acid receptor-1 (also known as the Takeda G-protein-coupled receptor-5[TGR5]) (14). A large amount of work remains to be done in this space for these relationships to be exploited for their therapeutic potential because the majority of metabolites measured by untargeted mass spectroscopy remain uncharacterized (15).

Altering the microbiome through dietary intake is not a new concept. One hundred years ago John C. Torrey stated that, “It is now well-known that diet exercises a profound influence on the determination of the types of bacteria developing in the intestinal tract (27).” Scientists of the early 1900s accepted that the intestinal flora, as they referred to what we now call the microbiome, changed quickly in response to changes in diet. These findings were built on a foundation of animal studies (28), but they incorporated minimal evidence from humans (29). Likewise, modern diet-microbiome understanding has grown out of strong foundations in animal models—primarily mice (12, 30)—with other non-human primates also contributing to our understanding (31). Increasingly, there is a need to translate findings from animal models to free-living humans and recent work has made strides toward this effort. The body of diet-microbiome literature has recently been reviewed elsewhere (15, 25, 32–34).

The advent and increasing availability and affordability of sequencing technology has resulted in an explosion of diet-microbiome literature. This is easily illustrated with a PubMed search of “diet” and “microbiome.” In 2009 there were 100 papers published and in 2019 there were 2,204 papers published that were identified using these search terms. As of January 2020, there are 9,544 papers that are returned on PubMed using these terms, and of those over half were published in the last 3 years. This increase in publications has been accompanied by a growing awareness of the limitations we face while attempting to measure and analyze the highly complex interactions between microbes, dietary exposures, and host phenotypes.

In addition to the microbiome changes induced by the biochemical components of foods, foods themselves contain bacteria that affect the gut microbiome. From a health perspective, fermented dairy such as yogurt and cheeses, are the most commonly recognized foods that contain “beneficial” microbes (59). These foods are sources of microbes that can transiently populate the human gut (23). Fresh, non-fermented foods have long been recognized as a source of food-borne pathogens and are the target of public health interventions to prevent the spread of food-borne disease. Despite this recognition, we know surprisingly little about the microbial composition in other non-fermented foods. Recently, crops that are not usually considered to transfer bacteria, such as apples, have been shown to harbor a microbiome that depends on growth and farming practices (58). Indeed, dietary patterns that include more food types, particularly fermented foods like yogurt, contain a higher abundance of microbes relative to less diverse diets (1 × 109 colony forming units [CFU] vs. 1 × 106 CFU in a day's worth of meals) (60). Consideration for the microbial load of a dietary pattern is important because the engraftment of non-pathogenic food-borne bacteria depends, in part, on other dietary components. For example, higher abundances of parmesan-cheese-associated bacteria are present after consumption of milk products (61). Ideally, we need to consider these microbial features of diet when planning and analyzing microbiome-diet studies.

As the number of longitudinal microbiome studies steadily increases in the literature, controlling for within-individual variation is an increasingly important consideration during study design. Here we present reasoning that supports including multiple consecutive microbiome samples per study timepoint or phase, and multiple days of dietary history prior to each microbiome sample whenever feasible; thus capturing longitudinal change within an individual by measuring changes over time or before and after a dietary intervention, while also using repeated sampling around set timepoints to control for within-person variation. To support these recommendations, we provide suggestions for microbiome sample collection, transport, and storage for diet-microbiome studies and explore questions that researchers designing studies in this space should consider.

Diet explains around 5–20% of the variation in microbiome (6, 46, 62, 63). In every cohort there is a large amount of variation between individuals that is not driven by diet and likely depends on environmental differences, early life exposures, or immune and other host differences (64, 65). Without establishing a baseline microbiome for each study participant, it is difficult to assess the effects of dietary interventions on the microbiome. Moving toward designs that can account for inter-individual variation is necessary to improve microbiome studies (66). Studies can minimize the impact of inter-individual variation by increasing the number of participants enrolled in a study. The number of participants needed to assess the effects of a particular dietary intervention on the gut microbiome likely varies depending on the research question and anticipated taxon difference in a case-control setting. Study populations of 400–500 individuals are necessary to power case-control microbiome studies to detect differences in dominant taxon proportions of between 5 and 9% (62), suggesting that these sizes should be sufficient to detect differences of dietary origin. This also suggests that a substantial amount of cross-sectional research in the diet-microbiome space may be underpowered to detect dietary impacts on microbiome composition and raises questions regarding when cross-sectional study designs should be used, if at all, to assess diet-microbiome interactions. We expect that in the majority of cases longitudinal studies in which subjects serve as their own control will be more fruitful than cross-sectional studies, and we expect that cross-sectional studies will require large sample sizes.

In addition to considerations regarding sample size and sampling frequency, researchers should take into consideration participant selection as a means to improve diet-microbiome research (Figure 2). When enrolling participants for dietary intervention trials it can be useful to consider the baseline microbiome of participants. In situations where a 1-2 week turn-around from collection to sequence is possible, there are opportunities to consider participant stratification or exclusion by baseline microbiome composition during recruitment. Current sequencing timeframes likely prevent the incorporation of this type of baseline assessment. However, with advances in fast, affordable sequencing this may be possible in the future. If we imagine a future where baseline microbiome-typing is feasible, then it should be possible to select or stratify participants with the goal of including a range of microbiome compositions at baseline to capture the breadth of possible responses to dietary interventions, or the converse goal of selecting only participants with a certain type of microbiome, for example, Prevotella-dominant, to increase power. In study designs for dietary interventions where the length of the intervention required makes a cross-over design difficult, stratified randomization or an interspersed treatment design that incorporates baseline microbiome could make parallel arm studies more feasible. As an alternative, selection for a specific baseline microbiome phenotype should improve the ability to assess how interventions depend on the presence of particular microbes. As a thought experiment, we consider the situation of studying a specific prebiotic. A researcher in this situation may want to choose only people who have the targeted microbe that is expected to be enriched by that prebiotic, or to choose people who have a low abundance of fiber-degrading microbes to see how the intervention affects that subgroup. Importantly, microbial phenotyping at baseline would allow for randomization into study arms using a stratification design that incorporates baseline microbiome composition, thereby avoiding the situation where after randomization clusters of individuals with similar microbial compositions are assigned to the same treatment arm (6).

Repeated and longitudinal microbiome sampling strategies require careful consideration of fecal sample collection, transportation, and storage to prevent unintentional bias due to the potential for the composition of these living communities to change after collection. Comparisons of fecal microbiome collection, transport, and storage methods have been detailed in several recent publications (69–72). When considering longitudinal studies and repeated microbiome sampling the collection process selected for the study has a large impact on participant compliance and will also dictate the parameters that should be considered in terms of temperature and transport.

An alternative to 16S sequencing is deep whole metagenomic shotgun sequencing, which involves the sequencing of all microbial genomes in a sample. This method provides resolution to species level of taxonomy, and can also detect eukaryotic species and viruses to provide information on other microbes in a sample (86). Amplification bias is less likely to occur with this primer-free approach, but one downfall is that it is significantly more expensive, which may affect the feasibility of use for larger-scale studies. Shallow shotgun sequencing is an alternative to deep shotgun metagenomic sequencing. This method is significantly cheaper and has been shown to provide accurate resolution of species despite having a lower sequencing depth in comparison to deep sequencing (89). Shallow shotgun sequencing has proven effective in assessing longitudinal covariation of the microbiome with dietary intake demonstrating that this is a viable approach for cost-effective longitudinal diet-microbiome studies (6). Additional approaches for and analysis of microbiome data with a clinical focus have recently been thoroughly reviewed including the considerations for when to include metatranscriptomics and metabolomics approaches in analysis pipelines (90).

For observational studies where dietary intake is considered as a confounder for the microbiome outcome of interest, the decision to collect dietary data is driven by different factors than when dietary intake is the exposure of interest. We do not think that all microbiome studies need to collect dietary data. In many well-designed microbiome studies it may not be necessary to collect dietary data and the decision to collect dietary data should be weighed carefully with the researchers' hypotheses and planned analyses. In observational studies where diet will be a clear confounder that cannot be controlled for through other study design parameters, investigators should collect detailed information about diet.

We recommend the collection of dietary recalls or records from 2-3 days prior to the sample collection period (Figure 3). In a cohort where transit time is measured and known it may be possible to optimize the dietary collection window relative to each stool sample to capture the dietary intake that best corresponds to each microbiome sample. When transit time is unknown or cannot be measured, then 3 days should be sufficient to capture most of the dietary intake from the days prior to a stool sample (6). Diet should be collected in a way that ultimately allows for the analysis of food choices, and not simply nutrient totals, to provide opportunity to assess data for food sources of nutrients and capture some of the dietary complexity and diversity that is not apparent from macronutrient totals. The timing of meals and other eating behaviors also impact gut microbiome composition (92). The microbiome responds to circadian rhythms, potentially driven by meal timing and fed-fast cycles (93). As this is not generally controllable in free-living human studies, fecal collection time should be recorded and used as a covariate in analysis to determine relationships relative to meal timing and fasting intervals.

Dietary intake is more variable than microbiome composition both within and between people (6), and studies of diet in the microbiome space must take this dietary variation into account whenever feasible. Measurement of dietary variation may be particularly important when studying diverse populations, because while dietary intake in the US is highly variable, dietary intake in other parts of the world may be homogenous from day-to-day and vary only over longer time periods (46, 47). Considerations for dietary measurement can vary depending on study design and outcomes measured. Considerations for different types of studies are included below.

Based on currently available information, we recommend controlling variation in dietary intake by stabilizing diet, rather than by standardizing diet. This ensures consistency of individual diet during microbiome-focused intervention studies but does not attempt to modify habitual diet. The simplest approach is to ask participants to maintain their normal diet. More complex approaches would assign each subject to a specific constrained diet based on their own recent dietary intake data. Ultimately the best dietary approach will be study-dependent, and should be considered carefully when planning interventions to improve the ability to draw strong conclusions.

Dietary intervention studies are likely the best way to understand the impact of dietary components on the microbiome, but themselves come with some caveats. Cross-over intervention studies, where each participant undergoes both the target intervention and the control arm, with a washout period between treatments, is the most optimal study design for studying the effects of a dietary intervention because each participant acts as their own control. Cross-over designs have been successfully implemented in diet-microbiome studies (19, 24, 95), and allow the researcher to conduct a within-person comparison instead of a between-person comparison, reducing the sample size needed to detect differences by at least half, and reducing the confounding effects of inter-individual variation (96). Cross-over studies are more difficult to conduct than parallel studies for several reasons including longer study duration and higher participant burden, and it is imperative that the washout period be long enough to prevent carryover effects (97). Proper control of factors such as randomization of order, verifying a return to baseline diet during the washout period, and general compliance with study protocols over a longer study duration are critical and typically require a higher level of study personnel training and time. A lead-in period both prior to the start of the study and during the latter half of the washout period are also recommended to acclimate participants and to stabilize any relevant diet and lifestyle factors (98). Despite these obstacles, cross-over study designs hold promise for understanding the effects of diets on the gut microbiome due to their unique ability to not just account for or diminish the noise of inter-individual variability, but to allow the study of personal responses, which can lead the way to personalized diets, and personalized microbiome-oriented recommendations.

Ultimately, the results of even extremely well-controlled dietary intervention studies are likely to be affected by personalized diet-microbiome interactions. The individual variation across people's microbiomes arises from a combination of factors beginning in infancy, likely including birth mode and antibiotic exposure (64, 65). Individual microbiome responses also likely stem from variation in biogeography along the gastrointestinal tract, stochastic or random events, and complex community interactions. For example, a recent well-controlled study measuring microbiome response to either fast food or the Mediterranean diet demonstrated individual variation. Most participants showed consistent and comparable changes in response to dietary intervention. However, there was a small number of participants whose microbiome shifts were in opposite directions when compared to the majority (24). Individual responses to interventions and dietary intake are documented across multiple studies (6, 16, 19). These kinds of observations create difficulties for analysis, particularly when using group means for comparisons, but there is strong evidence now that individual-specific responses should be expected and modeled.

Participant compliance and the cost of participant time remain an obstacle for researchers to attain authentic dietary information in a practical way. Improvement in dietary assessment by shortening the time of data collection and reducing participant workload would improve the overall quality of dietary intervention trials. Recent work has applied the technique of metabarcoding to evaluate the plant component of diet from stool samples using the trnL-P6 marker gene (114). Similar techniques have previously been used to assess diet in non-human primate populations (115, 116); demonstrating that DNA from plant species persists through digestion and can be identified in stool. While these methods may not be able to quantify protein or kilocalorie content, they should provide a method to identify plant diversity and could provide a non-invasive measure of diet quality. Importantly, plant diversity has previously been linked to microbiome features (73) and ways to quantify this may improve future studies of diet and the microbiome without increasing participant burden. Moreover, detection of dietary intake within stool samples will allow for perfect matching between dietary and microbiome features without concern for transit time or self-report.

Given the still-emerging technologies in dietary assessment, exploration of alternative methods of collecting dietary data is an important area of future work. In the short-term, we may need to shift the paradigm in dietary assessment from a nutrition-centric perspective to a microbiologist-centric perspective and to design and validate a microbiome-focused food intake questionnaire. A tool like this should divide foods into groups that have particular relevance for the microbiome based on fiber type or phytocompound composition known or suspected to affect the microbiome. There may be other proxies that we can capture as latent variables for diet that discard previous dietary norms and assumptions such as macronutrients and kilocalories while still collecting key information relevant to microbiome analysis. There is likely also a role for nutritional biomarkers or blood metabolites to characterize individual diet-microbiome interactions, particularly when personalization is considered relative to microbiome changes (129). Combined, advances in these areas as well as in microbiome sequencing and analysis techniques have the potential to greatly improve the quality of diet-microbiome studies to move beyond correlational analysis and develop understanding of causative relationships.

In this article, we have presented a variety of considerations including both practical recommendations that can be immediately incorporated into studies and aspirational recommendations that will require greater effort for implementation (Table 1). Ultimately, we believe that microbiome research will benefit from more rigor and more informed design in dietary assessment and intervention. We have also raised several questions that do not yet have good answers. Moving forward, the field is in need of more well-controlled longitudinal studies and controlled feeding trials that can isolate the impact of specific changes in dietary intake on microbial communities in human hosts. With well over 9,000 unique foods represented in most nutritional databases and an estimated 26,000 unique food chemicals in the larger food supply (38) it is difficult to determine which foods are the most promising candidates for intervention trials. Studies with strong dietary data collection methods will therefore play an important role in identifying potential diet-derived bioactive compounds and their food sources that can be investigated more closely with well-designed interventional studies.

AJ wrote the manuscript and created the figures. JZ, JK, and AS wrote sections of the manuscript and assisted with figure planning. DK and AZ planned the review and contributed to editing and revising the manuscript. All authors read and approved the submitted version. All figures were created with BioRender.com.

AJ and DK have received research support from General Mills. AJ has received speaking fees from Abbott Nutrition. DK serves as CEO of CoreBiome, a company involved in the commercialization of microbiome analysis. CoreBiome is now a wholly owned subsidiary of OraSure. These interests have been reviewed and managed by the University of Minnesota in accordance with its Conflict of Interest policies. The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

Funding. This work was supported by USDA National Institute of Food and Agriculture, Hatch project CA-D-NTR-2575-H (to AZ), NIH Grant No. R01AI121383 (to DK), and Minnesota Partnership for Biotechnology and Genomics Grant No. #18.08 (to DK).

