Microbiome-Specific Statistical Modeling Identifies Interplay Between Gastrointestinal Microbiome and Neurobehavioral Outcomes in Patients With Autism: A Case Control Study



Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder with unclear mechanisms of pathogenesis. Gastrointestinal microbiome alterations were found to correlate with ASD core symptoms, but its specific role in ASD pathogenesis has not been determined. In this study, we used a case-control strategy that simultaneously compared the ASD gastrointestinal microbiome with that from age-sex matched controls and first-degree relative controls, using a statistical framework accounting for confounders such as age. Enterobacteriaceae (including Escherichia/Shigella) and Phyllobacterium were significantly enriched in the ASD group, with their relative abundances all following a pattern of ASD > first degree relative control > healthy control, consistent with our hypothesis of living environment and shared microbial and immunological exposures as key drivers of ASD gastrointestinal microbiome dysbiosis. Using multivariable omnibus testing, we identified clinical factors including ADOS scores, dietary habits, and gastrointestinal symptoms that covary with overall microbiome structure within the ASD cohort. A microbiome-specific multivariate modeling approach (MaAsLin2) demonstrated microbial taxa, such as Lachnoclostridium and Tyzzerella, are significantly associated with ASD core symptoms measured by ADOS. Finally, we identified alterations in predicted biological functions, including tryptophan and tyrosine biosynthesis/metabolism potentially relevant to the pathophysiology of the gut-brain-axis. Overall, our results identified gastrointestinal microbiome signature changes in patients with ASD, highlighted associations between gastrointestinal microbiome and clinical characteristics related to the gut-brain axis and identified contributors to the heterogeneity of gastrointestinal microbiome within the ASD population.

Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a complex neurodevelopmental disorder (1). Although the etiology of ASD is unclear and likely multifactorial, it likely involves an interplay between genetic and environmental factors (2–4). Recent studies suggest that the gastrointestinal microbiome may play an important role in the pathogenesis of inflammation both in the gastrointestinal and systemically and contribute to dysregulation of the “gut brain axis” (5–10). Other studies point to the potential utility of gastrointestinal microbiome features as biomarkers in assisting ASD diagnosis and screening (11).

A major knowledge gap in the field is identifying drivers of symptom heterogeneity in patients with ASD, and it is unknown to what extent core behavioral symptoms correlate with, predict, or are predicted by the gastrointestinal microbiome. This information will be crucial in developing strategies for identifying subgroups of patients who may have dysregulation of the gut-brain axis, and who may respond to therapies targeting the gut brain axis. As a secondary goal of the study, we explored microbiome heterogeneity within the ASD group using clinical indices (including GI, dietary habits, immunological functions, and birth history) and behavioral assessments (e.g., ADOS and SRS) using multivariable omnibus testing. We also performed subtype discovery within the ASD microbiome, including clinical factors and behavioral assessments. Focusing on this within-group heterogeneity may offer an alternative path to search for candidate microbes or microbial metabolic pathways that have pathogenic implications for the autism core symptoms and underlying “gut-brain axis” pathophysiology.

The Internal Review Board (IRB) and Ethical Approval were issued from Shenzhen Maternity and Child Healthcare Hospital. Written informed consent was obtained either from adult subjects who were competent to provide consent or from the parents or legal guardians of children and adults with cognitive impairment. Assent was obtained from subjects who were unable to give consent.

Although we intended to enroll siblings as well as mothers, we were only able to recruit mothers as controls due to the paucity of siblings in our study population.

Included demographic data of the research subject, history of antibiotic use, intestinal health, oral health, etc.

This is suitable for the development assessment of children aged 0–6 (22). The assessment is divided into five subcategories: adaptation, gross movement, fine movement, language, and personal-social functions. The scores were omitted from univariate analysis due to missing values.

ABAS-II provides a complete assessment of adaptive skills, and behavior rating scale typically completed by parent or primary caregiver (23). It is scored for the 10 Skill Areas—norm-referenced scaled scores and test-age equivalents. For the 3 Adaptive Domains and the General Adaptive Composite (GAC)–norm-referenced standard scores and age-based percentile ranks. In addition, all scores can be categorized descriptively. The scores were omitted from univariate analysis due to missing values.

CARS is developed by E. Schopler and others and helps to identify children with autism and determine symptom severity through quantifiable ratings based on direct observation for children over 2 years of age (24). The 15-item rating scales are completed by the clinician, and each item is graded on a 1–4 scale. The total score ranges from 15 to 60; a score of below 30 is considered non-autism, a score of 30–36.5 is considered mild to moderate autism, and a score of 37 or more is considered severe autism based on CARS scale.

ADOS is a semi-structured standardized assessment of social interactions, language and communication, repetitive, restricted patterns of behavior and interest, and play and imagination. There are four modules (25, 26). The evaluator selected the appropriate module based on the age and language development of the subject and administered it based on the standard protocol. The assessment takes about 40 min for each subject and the cores are recorded on each authorized Chinese version booklet from WPS (27). Raw scores from different ages are converted to standard scores based on the diagnostic algorithm, and the patient's scores are then compared. Calibrated severity scores are converted via standard formula. The evaluators are well-trained and professionally certified in the operation.

The RBS-R is a 44-item self-report questionnaire that is used to measure the breadth of repetitive behavior for ASD individuals (28). It consists of 6 sub-categories: stereotyped behavior (6 items), self-injurious behavior (8 items), compulsive behavior (8 items), routine behavior (6 items), sameness behavior (11 items), and restricted behavior (4 items) for a total score of 43 items. Behaviors are rated on a 4-point scale: 0-Behavior does not occur, 1-Behavior occurs and is a mild problem, 2-Behavior occurs and is a moderate problem, 3-Behavior occurs and is a severe problem. Higher scores indicate more severe repetitive stereotypes. Reliability and validity of the Chinese version of the RBS-R was applicable to 2–7 years old and tested by Li and Jiang in 2013 (29).

SRS is a 15-min questionnaire that measures the severity of autistic social impairment from non-existent to severe across the entire range of the autism spectrum (30). It is suitable for children 4–18 years old, with a total of 65 items. It is analyzed from five dimensions including social perception, social cognition, social communication, social motivation, and autistic behavior. Each item has a rating of 0–3: 0 for “No,” 1 for “Sometimes,” 2 for “Often,” and 3 for “Always.” The total score is between 0 and 195 points. The higher the scale score, the more severe the obstacle.

The stool samples were collected by the parents of the subjects following the stool collection kit manufacturers' protocol using the protocol described in Kong et al. 2019 (11). Sample were stored in room temperature for up to 2 days by patients and stored in −80°C freezer in the hospital before shipping to the Beijing Boao Medical Laboratory for processing.

Eligible research subjects first signed informed consent and completed relevant questionnaires. Researchers extracted the results of ASD-related evaluations. The researchers distributed a well-labeled stool sample collection tube [room temperature stool collection kit from Precidiag INC (11)] and instructed the parents on sample collection, date labeling, and sample characteristics recording at home. Samples were kept at room temperature and sent them back to the hospital within 2 days after collection. Samples collected back to the hospital were stored in −80°C freezer before shipping to the Beijing Boao Medical Laboratory for processing.

After the sample collection of the ASD group was completed, healthy control group subjects were recruited in a kindergarten in Shenzhen, and the recruitment targets were filtered based on the inclusion and exclusion criteria. Researchers went to the kindergarten for parents to sign the informed consent form, distribute stool collection tubes, instruct teachers and parents to complete sample collection.

Method for DNA extraction from stool is modified from magnetic beads method for soil and stool DNA extraction kit (TIANGEN Biotech, DP712). Following the manufacturer's standard operation procedure, 200 mg stool sample was added into 500 μL buffer solution SA (TIANGEN Biotech, DP712), 100 μL buffer solution SC (TIANGEN Biotech, DP712) and 0.2 g zirconia beads (NIKKATO, YTZ-0.2). This was then placed in a Tgrinder H24 tissue-grinding homogenizer (TIANGEN Biotech) and oscillated at the speed of 6 m/s with 5 sessions of 30 s intervals. DNA sample control was set as: DNA volume ≥ 200 ng, OD260/280 = 1.8–2.1, and main band from DNA electrophoresis > 2,000 bp.

V4-V5 segments were amplified with 515f-y/926r primer pair via PCR (98°C for 3 min, followed by 27 cycles at 98°C for 20 s, 55°C for 30 s, and 72°C for 30 s, and a final extension at 72°C for 2 min). PCR products were purified using AMPure XP Beads (Beckman, A63880) and amplified with Illumina P7 and P5 primer via PCR (98°C for 30 s, followed by 6 cycles at 98°C for 20 s, 60°C for 30 s, and 72°C for 30 s, and a final extension at 72°C for 2 min). The post PCR products were purified again using AMPure XP Beads (Beckman, A63889). Library DNA was mixed with fluorescent dye (Qubit dsDNA HS Reagent) for quantitative quality control (concentration ≥ 2 ng/μL) using a Qubit 3.0 fluorometer. Library fragment size was detected by 2% agarose gel electrophoresis and the library was qualified with no primer dimer contamination below 100 bp and library main band around 500 bp. The DNA library was pooled and sequenced on Illumina Miseq sequencing platform with PE 300 bp protocol with overlapping reads.

Amplicon sequences were then bioinformatically processed through the DADA2 workflow in R which had been wrapped in the reproducible bioBakery workflow with AnADAMA (31, 32). Briefly, the sequences were demultiplexed and DADA2 run with default parameters to denoise, filter, and trim Illumina data. Next, the open-source R-package assessed the reads for sequence error rates and corrected them on a base-by-base basis. Chimera removal was carried out prior to grouping amplicons into amplicon sequence variants (ASVs). Then, phylogenetic trees were constructed after alignment of sequences using Clustal Omega (33). Finally, ASVs were then taxonomically assigned using SILVA and rRNA specific databases (34).

All raw data from 16s rRNA Illumina amplicon sequencing have been deposited in The National Centre for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Sequence Read Archive (SRA, PRJNA687773).

Next, the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health Microbiome Analysis Core tested disease endpoints against the bacterial communities' alpha and beta diversities (InvSimpson and Bray-Curtis dissimilarity, Unweighted and Weighted UniFrac distances, respectively). Alpha diversity was calculated using the built-in estimate diversity function in Phyloseq (29), and differences in diversity were found using an ANOVA test on a linear model. Beta diversities were calculated using the vegan package in R, and significant differences in community composition were tested using an omnibus univariable PERMANOVA test. Next, we incorporated significant and known influences of the microbiome in multivariable models. Patients < 4 years of age were excluded whenever SRS was used in the modeling, because SRS was only validated for patients ≥ 4 years of age.

Microbiome co-abundance network analysis was performed using the SparCC algorithm via MetagenoNets to elucidate ecological interactions between bacterial features (34). Features were filtered using a prevalence cutoff of 0.005 of maximum prevalence and with occurrences in 10% of samples. After feature filtration and normalization, 69 features remained from the initial total 244 features. Taxa abundances were subsequently normalized by Total Sum Scaling (TSS). All plotted network correlations are significant at P < 0.01 based on bootstrapping of 500 iterations.

To characterize the gastrointestinal microbiota and relevant clinical indices associated with ASD, we recruited 39 ASD subjects, 36 first-degree relative controls, and 44 age-/sex-matched healthy controls. The demographic characteristics and selected baseline medical conditions and dietary behaviors of the participants are summarized in Supplementary Tables 1, 2, respectively. Overall, the ASD group showed higher trends in GI severity total score, prevalence of food/skin allergy, as well as scores related to restricted eating behavior, although the differences did not reach statistical significance when compared to other groups. The GI severity total score for children with ASD is 1.77 ± 1.72 whereas the GI severity total score for the HC group is 0.84 ± 1.33 (P < 0.01). The mother control group had a GI severity total score of 1.46 ± 1.84.

Next, random forest analysis (Supplementary Figure 1) was used to identify genera important for differentiating between ASD and healthy status. First-degree relative controls were excluded from this analysis because the use of microbiome for disease classification was more relevant for early screening and diagnosis in the age cohort represented by the ASD group and healthy controls. The results showed overlap with taxa identified by mixed linear modeling, with the top discriminatory index, Escherichia/Shigella, being also the most significant taxa from MaAsLin2.

Next, we assessed the biological functions (predicted by PICRUSt) associated with the gastrointestinal microbiome by performing groupwise comparisons and visualization. We identified significant differences in microbiome-associated functions between ASD and healthy control groups, while no significant results were found for such indices between ASD and first-degree family controls after adjusting for age (Figure 2). Bacterial metabolism functions that were differentially enriched in patients with ASD include pathways such as Tryptophan metabolism, Tyrosine metabolism, Lysine degradation, and fatty acid synthesis/metabolism. Conversely, tryptophan, phenylalanine and tyrosine biosynthesis (Figure 2; Supplementary Table 3) were deficient in the ASD gastrointestinal microbiome. Interestingly, the age of subjects and the age of the mothers were also strong contributors to differences in some biological functions (Supplementary Figure 2, top 50 enriched or deficient predicted biological functions). Many of these pathways were of pathophysiological relevance to ASD. Next, we performed SparCC network on the genus level within each group of subjects. Patients with ASD demonstrated the densest network of co-occurring genera, compared to first-degree relative controls or healthy controls (Supplementary Figure 3). Furthermore, several differentially abundant microbiota are significantly correlated with bacterial metabolism functions (Supplementary Figure 4).

This study is the first to systematically investigate the relationship between gastrointestinal microbiome and ASD clinical presentations. Despite high prevalence of GI symptoms or occult GI issues in ASD, invasive GI investigation remains challenging for this patient population and is frequently under-performed. Sampling of the gastrointestinal microbiome, which only requires stool collection, is relatively simple but financially burdensome. Using an omnibus univariable and multivariable ANOVA test, we asked whether clinical presentations and comorbidities can predict gastrointestinal dysbiosis in ASD patients. The goal was for clinicians to use existing clinical factors to identify the subtypes of ASD patients in whom a greater suspicion of GI abnormality should be raised and followed.

Features that are incorporated into the omnibus modeling were selected from relevant clinical indices, including ADOS and SRS scores (validated clinician assessment and parent assessment for ASD symptoms and functionality, respectively), other behavioral assessments such as CARS and RBS, as well as indices from assessments of GI functions, immune functions, and history of other medical or psychiatric comorbidities. Using the Shannon index as a response variable for alpha diversity, we identified multiple clinical factors, most notably GIS total score, ADOS social affect score, ADOS repetitive and restricted behavior (RRB) score, food refusal, nighttime awakening, and weight, as significant predictors of the Shannon index under a univariate model (P < 0.05, Table 1). Next, we attempted to model Shannon index via multiple linear regression and ANOVA to identify predictors based on significant indices from the previous univariate analysis. Predictors included in the multivariate linear model in response to Shannon index include age, weight, GIS total score, “wake up at night,” “refuses food,” ADOS social affect-CSS, ADOS-CSS, and ADOS total score. GIS total score, ADOS SA standard score (CCS) and patient weight were the most significant contributing features (P < 0.05, multivariate analysis, Table 1).

In an attempt to identify specific gastrointestinal microbial taxa that may independently contribute to the severity of ASD core symptoms, we explored associations between individual bacterial taxa and ADOS scores using linear models. Mixed linear modeling (MaAsLin2) was used to determine the significance of taxa associated with specific clinical variables of interest while adjusting and accounting for other potentially confounding covariates such as age of subjects. The relative abundance of the genus Erysipelatoclostridium is positively associated with ADOS social affect (SA) score (Q < 0.1, Figure 3). We also found that the genus Lachnochlostridium was significantly associated with ADOS SA score, ADOS total score, and ADOS calibrated severity score (CCS, Q < 0.1, Figure 3), all of which displayed a direct correlation with the bacterial relative abundance. The only bacterial taxa found to be significantly associated with stereotypical behavior scores is Tyzzerella (positive correlation, Q < 0.1, Figure 3). Next, we asked if any of the features of the microbiome could predict worsening symptoms of autism among the children with autism spectrum disorder using Random Forest models. Due to the relatively small sample size, the model yielded high specificity but poor sensitivity in both the training (data not shown).

ASD is a highly heterogeneous condition, combining that with highly personalized gastrointestinal communities can make associations difficult. To explore the features contributing to gastrointestinal microbiome diversity within the ASD group, we modeled beta diversity with Bray-Curtis dissimilarity and Weighted/Unweighted UniFrac distance using selected clinical factors (e.g., immune, dietary, and GI conditions), SRS scores (validated for 4 years and above) and ADOS scores. Modeling Bray-Curtis dissimilarity using an omnibus univariable PERMANOVA test showed both intestinal irritability and SRS cognition score are strong predictors in the multivariate model (Table 2, P < 0.05). Unweighted UniFrac, which accounts for the phylogenetic relationship between the taxa in generation of dissimilarity matrix, also identified SRS cognition score as significant predictor of beta diversity in a multivariate model, whereas weighted UniFrac identified other gastrointestinal indices, including GIS total score, abdominal pain (a subscale of GIS score), and fatigue (also a subscale of the GIS score), as significant predictors (Table 2, PERMANOVA, P < 0.05).

In this study, we took advantage of a double-control study design to identify microbial taxa with potential relevance for ASD pathophysiology. We found that the relative abundances of the taxa Akkermansia, Escherichia/Shigella, Phyllobacterium, and Enterobacteriaceae were significantly different in patients with ASD as compared to first-degree relative controls or healthy controls. Intriguingly, all the taxa that were enriched in the ASD group, including Phyllobacterium, Enterobacteriaceae and Escherichia/Shigella, followed a decreasing trend of ASD > first-degree relative control > healthy controls. The fact that the majority of differentially enriched taxa showed such a trend further supports the importance of environmental factors as major drivers in shaping the ASD gastrointestinal microbiome. The Enterobacteriaceae family consists of multiple genera of opportunistic pathogens, with E. coli being one of the most abundant members in the stool. Escherichia/Shigella, a putative proinflammatory bacteria and a potential opportunistic pathogen, has been previously reported to be enriched in ASD with constipation and positively associated with GI symptoms (36, 37). Akkermansia, a genus known to secrete beneficial short chain fatty acids and make positive contributions to the gastrointestinal mucosal health, is deficient in ASD which is consistent with previous studies (38, 39). In addition, the ASD microbiome demonstrates the densest network of co-occurring genera, with the majority of the core co-occurring genera contain species of opportunistic pathogens or are implicated in inflammatory conditions, such as Tyzzerella, Haemophilus, Veillonella, and Enterobactor. Previous studies have proposed possible mechanisms that altered bacteria can trigger, modify or enhance ASD symptoms, such as through neurotoxic microbial byproducts or intestinal inflammation as a result of certain bacterial species or an altered microbiome (3, 5, 7, 40). However, to causally link the differences in relative abundance to ASD symptoms, further research using animal models are required. From clinical studies and animal models, the importance of inflammation in ASD pathogenesis and disease presentation has been known for a long time. Recent studies have started to unravel the cellular and molecular mechanisms involving the functions of different types of immune cells, ranging from transcriptional factor signaling, cytokine signaling, to pathways involved in cellular proliferation (16, 41, 42). Future studies should investigate whether these mechanisms are involved in the pro-inflammatory processes triggered by ASD-enriched microbe species.

Lastly, our study demonstrated predicted abnormalities in stool microbiome-mediated metabolic pathways that are relevant to the functions of the gut-brain-axis in patients with ASD compared to healthy individuals. Our stringent statistical framework took into account patient age and parental age as covariates and identified altered tryptophan and tyrosine metabolism and biosynthesis. The “gut brain axis” is hypothesized as an intricate interplay between the gastrointestinal microbiome, mucosal immune system, enteric nervous system, autonomic nervous system (ANS), and the central nervous system receiving ANS input (40, 49). Recent studies with rodent ASD models suggest that autistic symptoms may be, at least in part, affected by microbial metabolites and their interactions with host immune and neuroendocrine pathways (50, 51). Tyrosine is a precursor to multiple neurotransmitters of the central and enteric nervous system, including dopamine and norepinephrine (52, 53). Consistent with our finding of elevated tyrosine metabolism in the ASD microbiome, previous studies also demonstrated significantly increased Tyrosine metabolism in children with ASD compared to the control group (54). This raises the possibility of altered balance of downstream products such as dopamine and norepinephrine which may exacerbate ASD symptoms or comorbid psychiatric conditions via the ENS/ANS and systemic absorption. In addition, the abundant E. coli may be responsible for the predicted elevation in Tryptophan (Trp) metabolism in the ASD stool microbiome which is known to produce many downstream bioactive metabolites (55–57). In addition to the roles of these metabolites in neurotransmitter signaling and inflammation, emerging literature suggests cross talk between metabolism and transcriptional regulation. For example, Tryptophan derivatives have been demonstrated to regulate aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) signaling, which controls cell-specific transcription of important genes in environmental responses and xenobiotic metabolism (58). Future studies are required to further explore the roles of downstream transcriptional signaling with alternations of these key metabolites. Future studies performing stool and serum metabolite profiling are necessary to further explore the metabolic implications of stool microbiome changes.

This double-controlled study demonstrated that Escherichia/Shigella, Enterobacteriaceae, and Phyllobacterium are enriched in the ASD group, and their relative abundances all follow a pattern of ASD > first degree relative control > healthy age sex matched control. Furthermore, the microbial biomarkers are significantly associated with ASD core symptoms (measured by ADOS evaluation) and GI symptoms, among other clinical factors. The microbiome-associated biological functions, including Tryptophan and Tyrosine biosynthesis/metabolism were found to be relevant to the pathophysiology of the gut-brain-axis. These findings suggest that some signature changes of microbiome and its associated bacterial metabolic pathways could be of potential diagnostic and subtyping values for ASD. However, future studies are needed to establish mechanisms and causal relationships between the enrichment of pathogenic microbes and ASD pathophysiology with attention to the contribution of microbial metabolites. Larger scaled studies with direct serum and gastrointestinal metabolite sampling would provide further insights. A larger sample is also required to explore the diagnostic and classification utility of the microbial biomarkers identified in our study. The limitations of the current study include: (1) exclusive use of Chinese subjects and the results are not generalizable to other ethnic groups until further studies are performed (2) The relatively high dropout rate and small sample size, which most likely led to the small number of ASD signature taxa identified and underperformance of classification/subtyping by random forest modeling. (3) The use of first-degree relative controls as family member controls, despite accounting for age as a covariate in the statistical analysis. Ideally, future studies can focus on only age-matched sibling controls. (4) use of ADOS-G (Chinese version) instead of ADOS-2.

The datasets presented in this study can be found in online repositories. The names of the repository/repositories and accession number(s) can be found below: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/687773, PRJNA687773.

The studies involving human participants were reviewed and approved by Shenzhen Maternity and Child Healthcare Hospital. Written informed consent to participate in this study was provided by the participants' legal guardian/next of kin.

X-JK conceptualized the study. X-JK and GW contributed to the project administration and funding acquisition of the study. GW contributed to the provision and organization of study resources. JL and MH contributed to the writing of the original draft. MH and KL contribute to data curation. X-JK, GW, and JL contributed to the methodology and supervision of the study. JL and KL contributed to the formal analysis. KL contributed to the software and validation of the research outcomes. KL, MF, RT, BW, and PZ contributed to the visualization of study outcomes. X-JK, JL, KL, MF, BW, CB, and PZ contributed to the review and editing of the final draft. JC, ZW, ZF, and YW contributed to the investigation and data collection of the study. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.

This study was supported by the Sanming Project of Medicine in Shenzhen (SZSM201512009), Massachusetts General Hospital internal funding (#233263), and Shenzhen Maternity & Child Healthcare Hospital Funding (FYA2017003).

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpsyt.2021.682454/full#supplementary-material

