Impact of the Chromatin Remodeling Factor CHD1 on Gut Microbiome Composition of Drosophila melanogaster



The composition of the intestinal microbiota of Drosophila has been studied in some detail in recent years. Environmental, developmental and host-specific genetic factors influence microbiome composition in the fly. Our previous work has indicated that intestinal bacterial load can be affected by chromatin-targeted regulatory mechanisms. Here we studied a potential role of the conserved chromatin assembly and remodeling factor CHD1 in the shaping of the gut microbiome in Drosophila melanogaster. Using high-throughput sequencing of 16S rRNA gene amplicons, we found that Chd1 deletion mutant flies exhibit significantly reduced microbial diversity compared to rescued control strains. Specifically, although Acetobacteraceae dominated the microbiota of both Chd1 wild-type and mutant guts, Chd1 mutants were virtually monoassociated with this bacterial family, whereas in control flies other bacterial taxa constituted ~20% of the microbiome. We further show age-linked differences in microbial load and microbiota composition between Chd1 mutant and control flies. Finally, diet supplementation experiments with Lactobacillus plantarum revealed that, in contrast to wild-type flies, Chd1 mutant flies were unable to maintain higher L. plantarum titres over time. Collectively, these data provide evidence that loss of the chromatin remodeler CHD1 has a major impact on the gut microbiome of Drosophila melanogaster.

The model organism Drosophila melanogaster has been used extensively to study the various facets of host-microbe interaction and defence mechanisms. Aside from the discovery of several highly conserved mechanisms regulating the complex networks that underlie the innate immune system of the fly [1], the complex interplay between the host animal and its associated microbiota has been attracting rising attention [1–5]. Results of many studies that analyzed the intestinal microbiota of flies caught in the wild or reared in the laboratory showed that the bacterial community associated with the fly gut is of low diversity, usually ranging from only four to eight species [6–13]. Although, a recent comprehensive analysis of Drosophila gut commensals did not find evidence for a “core”microbiome shared across diverse Drosophila hosts [13], most of the bacterial species commonly found within the fly gut belong to the genera Lactobacillus and Acetobacter [10,13]. In light of the relative simplicity of its microbiome compared to the complexity and species richness found in mammals [14], the fly is a highly useful model organism for the study of host-microbe interactions.

We have previously shown that another SWI/SNF-type chromatin remodeling factor, CHD1, is involved in Drosophila immune response. Chd1-mutant flies exhibited increased sensitivity towards oral infection with the gram negative bacterium Pseudomonas aeruginosa and showed substantially increased levels of intestinal AMP expression as well as increased bacterial load in the absence of bacterial challenge [25]. Here we investigated in detail the effects of Chd1 depletion on gut microbiome composition. We find that loss of CHD1 results in a striking reduction of gut microbiome diversity.

Flies were reared at 25°C and 60% humidity in a 12/12 h light/dark cycle in batches of 25 flies on sugar-cornmeal media (110 g/l refined sugar, 52 g/l cornmeal, 27.5 g/l brewer’s yeast, 4 g/l agar, 2.4 g/l tegosept dissolved in ethanol). The media was boiled for 15 min prior to portioning into sterile plastic vials. Flies were transferred to fresh vials every three days. Chd1 deficient flies were obtained by crossing flies bearing the deletion allele Df(2L)Chd11 with the chromosomal deficiency Df(2L)Exel7014, which uncovers Chd1 [26]. Both alleles are in the w1118 genetic background. In the following, the transheterozygous combination of Df(2L)Chd11/Df(2L)Exel7014 will be referred to as Chd1-/-. In all experiments the mutant flies were compared to a Chd1-mutant strain that was rescued by reintroduction of a wild-type Chd1 transgene controlled by its native promoter (genotype: w1118; Df(2L)Chd11,P{Chd1WT}/ w1118; Df(2L)Exel7014,P{Chd1WT}; in the following referred to as Chd1WT/WT flies). The origin of these strains is described in detail in [27].

For gut-specific microbiome analyses, virgin female Chd1-/- and Chd1WT/WT flies were collected from different vials of crosses of heterozygous parents as described above. Crosses for both genotypes were handled side-by-side. Virgins were used to be able to compare results with our previous study of infection susceptibility of Chd1-/- flies [25]. Flies were kept in separate food vials (25 each) until 4 days old and subsequently pooled. Three batches of 10 flies each were randomly collected from the pools and processed for further analysis. To this end, flies were surface sterilized by washing twice with 70% EtOH, and subsequently guts (foregut to hindgut without Malpighian tubules) were dissected in sterile PBS and transferred into 200 μl sterile TES buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5% SDS (w/v)) using sterilized forceps. For a negative control, 200 μl TES buffer without guts was further processed in an identical manner as the gut samples. Isolation of genomic DNA was performed as described [25]. DNA was dissolved in 25 μl sterile a.d. and 1 μl (approximately 200 ng DNA) was used as template for 16S rDNA amplification. Bacterial universal primers 27F (5’-AGAGTTTGATCMTGGCTCAG-3’) and R361 (5’-CTGCTGCCTCCCGTAGGAG-3’) [modified from lifetechnologies.com/microbial] covering the variable regions V1 and V2 of the bacterial 16S rRNA gene were used for library preparation. Adapter sequences, required for bidirectional sequencing, as well as sample-specific barcodes were fused to the target-specific primers according to the manufacturers’ instructions (Ion Amplicon Library Preparation User Guide; Life Technologies). The 16S amplicon libraries were purified using Agencourt AMPure XP reagent (Beckman Coulter). Template preparation was performed using the Ion One TouchTM 2 System and the Ion PGMTM Template OT2 400 Kit (Life Technologies). Sequencing was performed using the Ion PGMTM Sequencing 400 Kit on the Ion PGMTM System (Life Technologies). Barcoded samples were first run on a 314TM Chip v2 (Life Technologies) and afterwards on a Ion 316TM Chip v2 (Life Technologies). Sequences of both Chips were pooled for the respective sample replicates.

For bioinformatic analysis of deep sequencing samples and data visualization the open-source software QIIME (Quantitative Insights Into Microbial Ecology; version 1.8.0; [28] and R (version 3.1.1; [29]) were used. Demultiplexing and quality filtering was done according to the following requirements: minimum quality score of 20 in each 50 bp sliding window, minimum length of 150 bp, homopolymers no longer than 6 bp, as well as a maximum number of six ambiguous bases. Preprocessing of the sequences resulted in a mean sequence length of 272.57 +/- 32.33 bp. For subsequent clustering of the preprocessed sequences into operational taxonomic units (OTUs) the open reference approach was selected. OTU picking was carried out with an identity of 97% using the usearch61 algorithm [30] with the SILVA database (version 111; [31]) as reference. This script includes further steps, such as taxonomy assignment with UCLUST ([30]; 90% similarity; SILVA reference database and default settings), sequence alignment using the PyNAST algorithm (default settings; [32]), phylogenetic construction applying FastTree [33]. Quality filtering of the OTUs was performed according to the following requirements: removal of OTUs with a sequence count lower than 0.005% of total sequence number and total observation count <2. OTU assignments for the individual replicates before and after filtering are shown in S1 Table. To create S2 Table, results from individual replicates were merged using the Python script summarize_otu_by_cat.py provided by QIIME. Where indicated in the main text and figures, alternative filtering parameters were used: (i) Removal of OTUs with a sequence count <10 and of OTUs with higher number of reads in the negative control than in the sample [10]. (ii) Removal of OTUs with a sequence count lower than 0.005% of total sequence number and total observation count <2 and of OTUs with higher number of reads in the negative control than in the sample. Alpha- and jackknifed β-diversity (normalized, weighted UniFrac distances) were calculated in QIIME and the corresponding plots illustrated using R and the phyloseq package [34]. For statistical analysis of the α-diversity indices, Welch two-sample t-test was applied in R. “Effective number of species” was calculated from Shannon index (SI) values (eSI). Statistical significance of the UniFrac distances was analysed by a two sample t-test within QIIME. The heatmap, showing the 25 most abundant 97% identity OTUs, was created in R using the gplots package [35]. Relative abundance was calculated based on the sequence counts per OTU, values were transformed into log10 scale. Hierarchical clustering using a euclidean distance measure was performed in R. The alignment against all Acetobacter (1294) and Lactobacillus (46782) reference sequences deposited in the SILVA database was performed in QIIME using the PyNAST algorithm [32]. The confidence level was set at 99%, sequences with fewer than 10 counts were excluded from the analysis. Sequencing data is available at the Short Reads Archive (SRA) accession number SRP064451.

For bacterial plating assays, virgin female Chd1-/- and Chd1WT/WT flies were reared on standard food (see above) with transfer to fresh food vials on every third day. At the respective ages of 4, 7, 10, 14, 21 days, flies were collected and consecutively washed with 10% bleach, 70% ethanol, and three times with sterile 1xPBS (Dulbecco). Since Chd1-/- flies show a three-day delay in eclosion timing compared to Chd1WT/WT flies (S1 Fig), crosses were set up such that mutant and control flies would eclose at the same time and could be aged in parallel. Batches of 6 surface-sterilized flies were homogenized in 100 μl sterile 1xPBS using autoclaved microtube pestles. Homogenates were cultured on Ace agar (0.8% (w/v) yeast extract, 1.5% (w/v) peptone, 1% (w/v) dextrose, 0.3% (v/v) acetic acid, 0.5% (v/v) ethanol; [21,36]) or MRS agar (2 g/l di-ammonium hydrogen citrate, 2 g/l Na2HPO4, 20 g/l D(+)-glucose, 0.1 g/l MgSO4, 0.05 g/l MnSO4, 0.05 g/L, 5 g/l meat extract, 5 g/l sodium acetate, 10 g/l universal peptone, 5 g/l yeast extract, 12 g/l agar) at 27.5°C (Ace) or 37°C (MRS) for 3 to 4 days. MRS plates were incubated under microaerophil conditions. Two technical replicates were plated of serial dilutions of four biological (6 flies each) replicates at each time point. CFUs were counted and mean numbers of bacteria per fly were calculated.

Gut preparation from virgin females at different ages (4, 7, 10, 14 days old) and DNA extraction were performed as described above for amplicon sequencing. DNA was isolated from pools of ten guts each. For detection of Acetobacteraceae by end-point PCR, 17 ng DNA was used with primers Ace1 (5’-CZAGTGTAGAGGTGAAATT) and Ace2 (5’-CCCCGTCAATTCCTTTGAGTT) at an annealing temperature of 55°C; for detection of Pseudomonadaceae by end-point PCR 200 ng DNA and primers Pse1 (5’-TCCAAGTTTTAAGGTGGTAGGCTG) and Pse2 (5’-CTTTTCTTGGAAGCATGGCATC) at an annealing temperature of 60°C was used. Three PCR reactions (25, 30, 35 cycles for detection of Acetobacteraceae and 30, 35, 40 cycles for Pseudomonadaceae) of each of three biological replicates were performed for each time point. PCR products were separated on 2% agarose gels and intensities of ethidium bromide-stained bands were quantified using Fiji for MacOS X. The ratio of the intensities of Pseudomonas and Acetobacter bands of the same DNA sample was determined. Results are shown as mean ratios ± SEM. For qPCR analysis of L. plantarum, 100 ng DNA was used with the L. plantarum-specific primers Lp16Sf (5’-TGATCCTGGCTCAGGACGAA-3’) and Lp16Sr (5’-TGCAAGCACCAATCAATACCA-3’) [37]. qPCR reactions were conducted in triplicate using a StepONEPlus instrument (Life Technologies) and Power SYBR Green PCR master mix (Life Technologies). The Drosophila GAPDH gene was used for normalization and 2−ΔCT values were plotted.

Whatman filter discs were soaked in 2 ml 5% sucrose containing 107 cfu of L. plantarum. The discs were placed into 200 ml vials and batches of 20 four-day old virgin female flies that had been starved for 24 h in vials containing filter discs soaked with 1x PBS were added to each vial (3 replicates per line). The flies were kept overnight in the inoculated vials at 25°C and subsequently transferred into fresh food vials every 3rd day. L. plantarum load was analysed at days 1, 4, 7, 10, 14 and 21 post inoculation by qPCR and by plating of fly-homogenate on MRS agar as described above. Statistical significance was determined using Student’s t-test (Prism 5.0).

To examine the composition of the intestinal microbiome of Chd1 null flies, we performed deep sequencing of 16S rRNA gene amplicons of guts isolated from Chd1-/- and control flies (Chd1WT/WT), which carried a wild-type Chd1 rescue transgene in a Chd1-deficient genetic background [27]. We isolated genomic DNA from guts of 4 days old virgins for PCR amplification of the variable regions V1 and V2 of the bacterial 16S rRNA gene. Using the Ion PGM sequencing platform for deep sequencing, we obtained a total of 1,451,602 reads after quality filtering representing a mean 241,933 reads per replicate. The preprocessed sequences were clustered into operational taxonomic units (OTUs) using the SILVA database [31] as a reference with a sequence identity threshold of 97%. Principal Coordinate Analysis (PCoA) revealed clear separation between Chd1 mutant and wild-type replicates with PC1 explaining 89.1% of the overall variation (Fig 1A). This was confirmed by a two-sample t-test applied on the calculated distance matrix using QIIME (P = 4.709 e-5). Thus, the difference in bacterial community composition of Chd1 mutant and wild-type samples correlates with the genetic background of the host flies, whereas variability among replicates of the same genotype only accounts for a minimal portion of the total disparity.

1 discard OTUs with <0.005% of total # of reads and OTUs with reads in <2 replicates.

2 discard OTUs with <10 reads and OTUs with higher # of reads in blank compared to sample [10].

3 discard OTUs with <0.005% of total # of reads and OTUs with reads in <2 replicates and OTUs with higher # of reads in blank.

* P-value < 0.05

** P-value < 0.01

In summary, the results provide evidence for an influence of CHD1 on the commensal community composition in the gut of Drosophila in that loss of this chromatin remodeler results in a reduction of species diversity of intestine-associated bacteria.

Investigation of the bacterial taxa associated with the gut of Chd1 mutant and wild-type flies revealed that at the phylum level, Proteobacteria accounted for more than 97% of total reads across all samples, whereas Firmicutes, which have been shown to normally be the second dominating phylum in adult flies [10,13], were strikingly underrepresented in our analysis. On the family level, the bacterial community associated with Chd1WT/WT guts was dominated by Acetobacteraceae, while Pseudomonadaceae, Enterobacteriaceae, Comamonadaceae and Staphylococcaceae together comprised ~19% of the microbiota. By contrast, these families were nearly absent (0.5%) in Chd1-mutant flies. Likewise, Lactobacillaceae, accounted for only 0.3% within the bacterial community of wild-type and 0.2% of that of mutant flies (Fig 2A, S3 Fig, Table 2). All of these families have been reported to be associated with Drosophila before [11]. The relative proportion of detected bacterial families changed only slightly when the above-described different filtering parameters were applied (S3 Fig, Table 2). We next performed cluster analysis of the 25 most abundant OTUs (classification down to the lowest level possible) across both samples. Consistent with the taxa summary (Fig 2A), OTUs assigned to the Pseudomonadaceae, Enterobacteriaceae, Comamonadaceae or Staphylococcaceae families grouped into the two clusters with the lowest relative abundance, whereas Acetobacteraceae dominated the two high abundance OTU clusters (Fig 2B). The differences between Chd1 mutant and wild-type samples were most pronounced in the two low abundance clusters, whereas the variations in the Acetobacter-dominated clusters were minor.

1 discard OTUs with <0.005% of total # of reads and OTUs with reads in <2 replicates. Observed species: 246 (wt)/159 (mut).

2 discard OTUs with <10 reads and OTUs with higher # of reads in blank compared to sample [10]. Observed species: 831 (wt)/415 (mut).

3 discard OTUs with <0.005% of total # of reads and OTUs with reads in <2 replicates and OTUs with higher # of reads in blank. Observed species: 237 (wt)/148 (mut).

Given that Acetobacter and Lactobacillus species are frequent commensals in the gut of Drosophila, we examined in more detail all Acetobacter and Lactobacilli identified in the microbiota of Chd1 mutant and wild-type flies by alignment to sequences deposited in the SILVA database using a 99% identity threshold. All Acetobacter species present in our samples (Fig 2C) have been previously reported to associate with Drosophila. By contrast, with the exception of L. brevis, L. plantarum, L. fructivorans and L. homohiochii, none of the other identified Lactobacillus species has been linked to the Drosophila microbiome before. Comparison of Chd1WT/WT and Chd1-/- guts revealed that while there was no major variation in the relative abundance of the identified Acetobacter species, several Lactobacilli were present at significantly lower levels or even absent in Chd1 mutants. Only L. fructivorans, L. homohiochii and L. plantarum showed similar levels as in the wild type (Fig 2C).

To determine if differences in gut microbiome composition and titre between Chd1-/- and Chd1WT/WT flies persist during adult life, we employed PCR- and bacterial plating assays. Since our deep sequencing results showed that the majority of bacteria in both Chd1 mutant and control strains belongs to the Acetobacteraceae family, we plated Drosophila homogenates on the Ace medium semiselective for Acetobacteraceae [21] for estimation of bacterial numbers. Moreover, we used plating on MRS agar under microaerophil conditions to assay Lactobacillus load. In good agreement with earlier reports [17–19,21,42], bacterial titres increased with age in Chd1WT/WT flies but reached a plateau around 14 days of age. Chd1 mutant guts exhibited considerably higher Acetobacter titres at the earlier time points tested (4, 7, 10 days), while titres were roughly equal in mutant and control flies at days 14 and 21 (Fig 3A, left panel). Particularly on day 7, bacterial load was almost two orders of magnitude higher in Chd1-/- flies compared to Chd1WT/WT suggesting rapid accumulation of Acetobacteraceae in younger mutant flies. By contrast, Lactobacilli showed lower representation in younger Chd1 mutant flies compared to rescued control flies with progressively decreasing titres until day 10 of age. At days 14 and 21, Chd1 mutant and wild-type flies had again similar Lactobacillus levels (Fig 3A, right panel). These results confirm our results from the deep sequencing experiments (performed with 4 day old flies) that the loss of Chd1 correlates with an accumulation of Acetobacter and a decrease of Lactobacillus species in Drosophila.

Previously it was shown that Drosophila gut microbiome composition is variable and can differ considerably even between individual flies of the same strain [13]. To further rule out that the species distribution differences we detected by deep-sequencing in Chd1 mutant and wild-type flies were a result of sampling all biological replicates from one fly generation, and to further corroborate the changes in relative distribution of Acetobacteraceae and other bacterial families (as also observed in Fig 3A), we sought to determine the relative amounts of Acetobacteraceae (the major family in both strains) and Pseudomonadaceae (~8% in Chd1WT/WT vs 0.2% in Chd1-/-) in further samplings of the two fly strains. To this end, we collected guts from a new generation of both strains (about two years after the original sampling for the deep-sequencing analysis). Moreover, we collected guts from flies of different ages (4, 7, 10, 14 days old) and analysed the samples using semiquantitative PCR with taxa-specific primers. We had to resort to this method, as we were unable to find Pseudomonadaceae-specific primers that were suitable for real-time PCR. Within the limitations of this methods regarding accuracy, we found that in most Chd1-/- samples the fraction of Pseudomonas species was lower than in the control fly guts (Fig 3B). As observed with the plating assays for Acetobacter and Lactobacillus (Fig 3A), the differences between mutant and control guts disappeared also for the Acetobacter/Pseudomonas ratio at 14 days of age.

Collectively, the results show that loss of CHD1 does not affect the core species present under our cultivation conditions but rather contributes to the relative reduction or elimination of minor bacterial taxa. The data also suggest that this effect shows its strongest manifestation in young flies, while it seems that upon aging the microbiomes of mutant and control flies become more similar to each other.

Our plating assays showed that L. plantarum levels were already decreased in one-day old Chd1 mutant flies compared to wild-type flies. To determine, if elevating Lactobacillus levels in young flies would prevent its observed diminishment in the guts of Chd1-/- flies at later stages of life, we fed 4-day old Chd1 mutant and control flies with a bacterial suspension of L. plantarum overnight, subsequently transferred the flies to standard food vials, and determined Lactobacillus titres by plating fly homogenates on MRS agar and by qPCR with L. plantarum-specific primers. Both assays clearly showed that while L. plantarum load did not significantly change over a period of 21 days in control flies, it decreased continuously in Chd1 mutant flies despite equal initial titres in both strains (Fig 4A and 4B). These results suggest that the environment in Chd1-/- guts discriminates against the growth of bacteria such as Lactobacillus, while it promotes accumulation of Acetobacter sp.

The Drosophila gut microbiome is predominantly shaped by the nutritional environment. Several studies showed that in Drosophila, just as in mammals, diet is a substantial determinant of intestinal microbiota composition, whereas factors such as host species identity or phylogeny seem to be of minor importance [11–13,15,43]. The profound contribution of commensal microbiota to mammalian health, in particular with regard to inflammatory diseases of the intestine, is well recognized [44]. We have previously shown that loss of Chd1 in flies renders them sensitive towards oral infection with P. aeruginosa. In particular, we found that large numbers of bacteria were able to transit into the body cavity in the course of infection in Chd1 mutant but not control flies suggesting compromised barrier function of intestinal epithelia [25]. Here we confirm elevated bacterial titre, in particular Acetobacter levels, in the gut of Chd1 mutant flies, and we show that the microbiome of mutant guts is significantly less diverse than that from wild type. Whether this change in bacterial community composition contributes to increased infection sensitivity is not known at this point.

Alternatively, CHD1 might act indirectly, for instance by causing deregulation of gut physiology or developmental processes, which in turn may favour microbiome changes and/or affect susceptibility to infection. Regardless of the way by which loss of CHD1 affects Acetobacter titre initially, the further increase with progressing age may be linked to replenishment of the gut microbiome by feeding of the flies on their feces [21]. This may also enforce the dominance of Acetobacter over all other species and aggravate the reduction of minor taxa as indicated by the age-linked reduction of Pseudomonas compared to Acetobacter (Fig 3B). However, why bacterial titres as well as the relative levels of some minor taxa become more similar between mutant and wild-type flies at later stages of age is not known to date. Although there are many possible explanations, it is tempting to speculate that the gut environment of younger Chd1-/- flies may somehow resemble that of older wild-type flies [17,21,42]. Not only the elevated bacterial load in young Chd1-/- flies, but also the previously demonstrated higher levels of AMPs provide evidence for this notion, since upregulation of AMP genes was detected in aging flies before [47,48]. Further studies are needed to examine if CHD1 might actually affect the physiological age of the gut.

