Diet and feeding pattern modulate diurnal dynamics of the ileal microbiome and transcriptome



Compositional oscillations of the gut microbiome are essential for normal peripheral circadian rhythms, both of which are disrupted in diet-induced obesity (DIO). Although time-restricted feeding (TRF) maintains circadian synchrony and protects against DIO, its impact on the dynamics of the cecal gut microbiome is modest. Thus, other regions of the gut, particularly the ileum, the nexus for incretin and bile acid signaling, may play an important role in entraining peripheral circadian rhythms. We demonstrate the effect of diet and feeding rhythms on the ileal microbiome composition and transcriptome in mice. The dynamic rhythms of ileal microbiome composition and transcriptome are dampened in DIO. TRF partially restores diurnal rhythms of the ileal microbiome and transcriptome, increases GLP-1 release, and alters the ileal bile acid pool and farnesoid X receptor (FXR) signaling, which could explain how TRF exerts its metabolic benefits. Finally, we provide a web resource for exploration of ileal microbiome and transcriptome circadian data.



Dantas Machado et al. show that time-restricted feeding restores diurnal dynamics of the ileal microbiome and transcriptome that are lost under high-fat diet ad libitum food access. Time restricted feeding restores ileal microbiome oscillations, circadian genes, bile acid signaling, and GLP-1 regulation.

The gut microbiome plays a crucial role in many physiological processes such as digestion and nutrient absorption, vitamin synthesis, and immune system development and programming (Gilbert et al., 2018; Lynch and Pedersen, 2016; Sharon et al., 2014). Recent studies show an added role for the gut microbiome: the entrainment of intestinal and hepatic circadian rhythms (Alvarez et al., 2020; Bishehsari et al., 2020; Frazier and Chang, 2019; Thaiss et al., 2016; Zarrinpar et al., 2016). Diet and feeding/fasting cycles drive diurnal oscillations of microbial communities and secondary metabolites in the gut luminal environment. These oscillations are necessary for the entrainment of peripheral circadian clocks and with it the diurnal expression of hepatic and intestinal metabolic regulators that control glucose, cholesterol, and fatty acid homeostasis and overall host metabolic health (Bishehsari et al., 2020; Frazier and Chang, 2019; Thaiss et al., 2014; Zarrinpar et al., 2016). However, studies that investigate the relationship between the gut microbiome and peripheral clocks using microbiome-depletion models (Leone et al., 2015; Mukherji et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2017; Weger et al., 2019) do not explain whether diet-induced perturbations in microbiome dynamics could influence host metabolism through circadian dyssynchrony (Saran et al., 2020; Zarrinpar et al., 2016).

Despite this, there are few studies that highlight the importance of the ileal gut microbiome and its impact on host metabolic health. In this study, we investigated the diurnal dynamics of the microbiome composition and transcriptome in the ileum under normal and HFD feeding conditions. Our goal was to determine how peripheral circadian rhythm is entrained in the ileum and to characterize the role of the microbiome and transcriptome under normal feeding, HFDs, and TRF given the importance of incretin release and bile acid reabsorption signaling in the ileum. The ileum has highly cyclical luminal microbial dynamics and host transcriptomics that are greatly perturbed with DIO. TRF has a large impact on the ileal microbiome composition, imposing a strong diurnal dynamic that is distinct from both DIO mice and mice on a normal chow diet (NCD). Moreover, TRF prevents the loss of host ileal diurnal transcriptome dynamics and maintains the rhythmicity of the intestinal clock. These effects on ileal dynamics could underlie TRF metabolic benefits and effects on peripheral clock entrainment.

To investigate the effects of TRF on host ileal cyclical activity, we collected ileal samples from the same mice as described in a previous TRF experiment where the cecal microbiome was characterized (Zarrinpar et al., 2014). The phenotype of mice with time-restricted access to HFD (FT) was compared with mice with ad libitum access to HFD (FA; which is the same as the DIO model) and mice with ad libitum access to NCD (NA; control mice) (Figure 1A). After 8 weeks under these conditions, whole ileum was collected every 4 h during a 24-h period (three mice per time point per feeding condition) to investigate diurnal dynamics of both luminal and adherent bacteria. TRF improves body weight and blood glucose levels associated with HFD (Figures S1A and S1B) despite isocaloric food intake compared with DIO (Chaix et al., 2014; Hatori et al., 2012; Sherman et al., 2012).

Because the maintenance of microbial, circadian, and metabolic rhythms has been linked with the benefits of TRF on metabolic function (Saran et al., 2020; Zarrinpar et al., 2016), we next investigated microbiome cyclical patterns using the JTK_CYCLE algorithm (Hughes et al., 2010) in MetaCycle (Wu et al., 2016). Compared with the NA mice, FA mice had less than half the number of cycling ASVs (Figure 1F). However, TRF displays a similar level of cyclical fluctuations observed for animals under the NA condition despite being fed an HFD. This is likely a result of a few predominantly cyclical ASVs, as shown by the percentage of total ASV reads cycling (Figure 1F). The main taxa differentially ranked genera between NCD and HFD, as determined using Songbird (Morton et al., 2019b), include Ruminococcaceae, Lactococcus, Tuzzerella, and Enterococcus. On the other hand, the genera Lactococcus and Erysipelatoclostridium were identified as enriched in FA compared with FT (Figure 1G). Together, these findings indicate the ileal microbiome displays robust diurnal dynamics that are disturbed by diet in a feeding-pattern-dependent manner.

To characterize the cyclical oscillations of the ileal microbiome and determine their importance in host metabolism, we investigated the relative abundances of taxa under different diet and feeding conditions over time. Firmicutes were the predominant phylum across all conditions. Similar to what has been observed in the cecum and stool, the abundance of Bacteroidota decreased dramatically under both HFD conditions (Figure S2A). Family-level analysis revealed that diet and food access modulated oscillations in bacterial taxa and abundance over a 24-h period, as exemplified by the top 10 most representative families (Figure 2A). Bacteria at the highest and lowest differential rankings or with different rhythmicity between conditions (Figures 1G and S2B) were further analyzed. At the genus level, Lactobacillus was found in all conditions but had a cyclical pattern only under HFD conditions (Figure 2B), with its level greatly reduced during the dark phase in FT when the mice have access to food (Figure 2B). On the other hand, Lactococcus, which is found in the irradiated HFD (Bisanz et al., 2019), displayed abundance in agreement with food ingestion patterns of animals under both HFD conditions, although rhythmicity was observed only in FT (Figure 2C). During the beginning of the dark phase, a spike was seen in Staphylococcus in NA and FT mice, whereas the FA mice did not have this spike (Figures 2A and
2D). Despite this increase in both NA and FT mice, Staphylococcus had significant cycling in FT but not NA (Figure 2D). Finally, Streptococcus levels followed the feeding pattern of mice under the different conditions, and only displayed rhythmicity in NA and FT mice (Figure 2E).

Because log ratios of bacteria, as opposed to relative abundances, take advantage of reference frames and are not dependent on bacterial load information, they are more robust and yield more reproducible measures. Thus, we next evaluated if differences were observed in the log ratios of some high-ranking microbes between light and dark phases. Log ratios for bacteria whose differentials were predominant across conditions or between light and dark phases are shown in Figure S2C. Differences between conditions occurred during the light and dark cycles for Ruminococcaceae/Lactococcus, Turicibacter/Enterococcus and Enterococcus/Lactococcus (Figures 2F-
2H). Together, our findings suggest that TRF affects the diurnal dynamics of the gut microbiome composition at the ileum. An interactive tool allows researchers to investigate bacterial families at https://zarrinparlab.github.io/ti_cycling_paper/ti_16S_family_abundance.html (Figure S3).

To test whether circadian clock genes are important for microbiome dynamics, we used a Cry1;Cry2 double-knockout (CDKO) mouse (Vitaterna et al., 1999). Since HFD disrupts circadian gene expression, we used a CDKO mouse model with ad libitum access to an NCD (CDKO-NA) to investigate diurnal dynamics of the gut microbiome. Feeding behavior and metabolic phenotyping of these animals is well documented in previous studies, where CDKO-NA mice lose diurnal feeding pattern and have disrupted feeding patterns (Chaix et al., 2019a; Vollmers et al., 2009). Microbial cycling in the ileum was completely abolished in CDKO-NA mice (Figure 3A). PCoA analysis (Figure 3B, CDKO-NA versus wild-type [WT]-NA PERMANOVA pseudo-F = 3.0083, p = 0.045) reflects the perturbed rhythms in these mice (e.g., feeding, sleeping). The most prevalent bacteria found in the ileum of these mice were members of the Erysipelotrichaceae and Lactobacillaceae families (Figure 3C). These results further suggest that the host molecular circadian clock is linked to microbiome ileum dynamics and that interfering with the host circadian clock disrupts the diurnal rhythm of the ileal microbiome, likely through a disturbed feeding pattern.

Because the diurnal dynamic of the microbiome can affect that of the hepatic transcriptome (Leone et al., 2015; Manella et al., 2021; Weger et al., 2019), we hypothesized that the ileal transcriptome would also be affected by these luminal oscillations. Moreover, because the FA condition led to a decrease in the percentage of ASVs that had diurnal fluctuations, and the FT condition dramatically increased this number, we also hypothesized that FT could prevent the loss of daily cyclical dynamics of the ileal transcriptome. Ileal transcriptome analysis by RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) followed by rhythmic analysis using MetaCycle revealed that the overall number of cycling transcripts was dramatically decreased in FA compared with NA, and partially maintained in FT (Figures 4A and
4B). We observed that 1,862 protein-coding genes had circadian cycling across all three conditions (Figure 4B). However, closer analysis of these transcripts showed that HFD still disrupted their rhythms in FA mice by inducing a phase shift toward the light period (Figures 4C and
4D). Notably, TRF partially maintained the phase of these transcripts in the FT mice (Figures 4C and
4D). This suggests that rhythmic luminal dynamics is related to circadian maintenance of TRF on the host peripheral clock.

Since the FA condition disrupts cycling of a number of genes, we interrogated which genes had their cycling maintained by TRF. An enrichment analysis based on shared cyclical genes between NA and FT, but not FA, indicated that the significant Gene Ontology (GO) (Ashburner et al., 2000; Gene Ontology, 2021) terms maintained by TRF comprise a wide range of terms, including those related to phospholipid metabolism, autophagy, and circadian rhythms (Figure 4E). Conversely, a number of genes gain circadian oscillations in FA only, for which enriched pathways are shown in Figure S4. The fact that TRF maintains diurnal fluctuation of the microbiome and protects mice from the detrimental metabolic effects of HFD suggests that circadian and metabolic genes were important for the effects of TRF on the host intestinal clock. In fact, cyclical dynamics of major circadian genes were disrupted by HFD (Figure 4F). HFD ad libitum induced loss of cycling in Rev-erb, Per3, and Clock, all of which were maintained in TRF (Figure 4F). A change in phase was also observed for Bmal1 and Cry1 in FA but maintained in FT (Figure 4F) according to phase estimates from MetaCycle (Wu et al., 2016). Contrary to what was observed for these circadian genes, a loss of rhythmicity is observed in Cry2 under the FT condition. In addition, Ppara and Nfil3, circadian regulatory genes that are modulated by the gut microbiota (Mukherji et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2017), were also dampened in the FA condition through phase shift and disrupted cycling, respectively, but were maintained in the FT condition (Figure 4F). Hence, TRF prevention of obesity and dysmetabolism occurs in the setting of maintained ileal circadian cycling, maintenance of the phase of cycling in the clock genes, and maintained luminal diurnal dynamics. Since inconsistencies in previous studies of the intestinal transcriptome could be explained by studies not accounting for circadian timing of their target genes, we have created an interactive tool to allow investigators to determine the cycling and phase of their target genes and additional RNA-seq data at https://zarrinparlab.github.io/ti_cycling_paper/ti_expression.html (Figure S3).

Having observed that DIO (i.e., the FA condition) dampens diurnal fluctuation of the luminal microbiota and the ileal transcriptome, and that TRF (i.e., the FT condition) maintains microbiome and host transcriptome circadianness (Figures 1 and
4), we investigated the altered products and potential pathways through which the ileum can contribute to the TRF metabolic outcomes. Visual inspection of principal component analysis (PCA) of transcriptome data suggests that mice ileum samples are distinguished under different diet and feeding conditions (Figure 5A), which could indicate that metabolic phenotype alone does not dictate transcriptional activity in the ileum. To determine which transcripts were involved in modulating the similar lean, insulin sensitive metabolic phenotype in FT and NA conditions, we determined differentially expressed (DE) genes between NA versus FA and FT versus FA mice. Overall, TRF had a greater effect on gene expression with an increased number of DE genes between FT and FA compared with NA and FA in the ileum (Figures 5B and
5C), a phenomenon that is observed across different time points (Figure S5). Hence, even though diet was the same between FA and FT, and the microbiome was less different, the feeding pattern change had a bigger impact on the ileal transcriptome than the lean phenotype itself.

To investigate host-microbe relationships further, we performed a co-occurrence analysis between the host transcriptome and microbiome within the ileum using mmvec (Morton et al., 2019b). Major co-occurrence probabilities depict possible relationships between the host transcriptome and microbiome (Figures 6A and
6B). Transcripts belonging to the GO term defense response to bacterium display a strong relationship with specific microbes (Figure 6A). There is a high conditional probability that these transcripts co-occur with Lactococcus and Enterococcus species, with the opposite trend being observed for Staphylococcus and Akkermansia (Figure 6B). The biological significance of these findings requires additional in vivo validation. Collectively, transcriptome analysis of the ileum of NA, FA, and FT mice suggests that diet and feeding pattern modulate distinct effects on host transcriptional networks. Most enriched GO terms between NA and FA conditions act in a circadian manner through regulation of digestive, lipid, metabolic, and immune pathways. Enriched terms between FT and FA, on the other hand, are observed as constitutive, suggesting that TRF acts as a different entity that could remedy the dysmetabolism induced by HFD through the modulation of a specific set of genes different from those disrupted by HFD alone in FA mice.

Since TRF improves insulin sensitivity and adiposity in mice consuming an HFD (Figure S1A), we investigated how this feeding pattern affected intestinal metabolic signaling pathways in the context of preserved diurnal oscillation of the gut microbiome and ileal clock (Figures 4D-
4F). Here we specifically focus on pathways related to GLP-1, which is a major glucoregulatory ileal hormone, and fibroblast growth factor 15 (FGF-15), which is released with FXR activation (Figure 7) (Drucker, 2018; Gadaleta and Moschetta, 2019; Zarrinpar et al., 2014; Zarrinpar and Loomba, 2012).

Overall, our results suggest that GLP-1 and bile acid signaling are compromised under DIO but maintained by TRF. Gcg and Dpp4 lose circadian rhythmicity and have their expression levels decreased when mice are given ad libitum access to HFD. TRF, however, maintains circadian dynamics of both and led to changes in gene expression for additional transporters involved in GLP-1 signaling. Furthermore, bile acid pool, transport, reabsorption, and signaling are compromised under DIO but maintained by TRF. Bile acid signaling in hepatocytes is likely disrupted by DIO, with increased oscillations in mice fed an ad libitum diet compared with normal or TRF conditions.

The gut microbiome is intimately related to circadian rhythms, and dysregulation of major circadian genes as well as time of feeding are disruptors of the gut microbiome in animal models (Bishehsari et al., 2020; Choi et al., 2021; Frazier and Chang, 2019). What is less understood is how the gut microbiome and oscillations in its daily rhythms contribute to host phenotype and physiology, particularly in the ileum, which is a major region responsible for regulating host metabolic signaling and physiology. We address this gap in knowledge with an omics approach in a mouse model of DIO and a model of TRF, which prevents HFD-induced weight gain and dysmetabolism, in spite of both models consuming the same amount of calories (Chaix et al., 2014; Hatori et al., 2012). Our results reveal disrupted rhythms on microbiome components and transcriptome pathways, and identify potential functional ways through which some of the metabolic benefits of TRF could be mediated. DIO disrupts the total number of cyclical ASVs and transcripts to a greater extent than TRF, suggesting that TRF alone alleviates some of the effects of DIO, potentially by modulating the intestinal clock. This opens a paradigm where entrainment of the peripheral clock could be modulated by the ileum.

Our findings further highlight potential implications of regional differences in circadian dynamics and the need for better circadian phenotype, transcriptome, and microbiome characterization. It is conceivable that two investigators performing the same exact study in similar settings may come to different conclusions solely based on the timing of their sample collection. This is particularly important with microbiome analysis (Allaband et al., 2021). Moreover, it is possible that specific interventions or drugs may only be effective at specific times due to availability of xenobiotics or the amplitude of key metabolizing genes, which can alter results significantly between studies. This, in turn, prompted us to provide a Web resource of circadian microbiome and transcriptome data that can be easily queried. This resource could aid in explaining discrepancies obtained across similar experiments and enable investigators to make better-informed decisions about experiments, since oscillations within daily patterns vary greatly and can influence interpretation of results.

Our microbiome and transcriptome ileal results demonstrate that TRF acts through maintenance of diurnal fluctuation and the restoration of host phenotype. Nonetheless, duodenal and jejunal tissue, as well as nutrients absorbed in these regions, likely play an important role in metabolism despite their lower microbial and secondary metabolites content. Thus, additional studies targeting multiple GI tissues are needed to disentangle the contributions of TRF on metabolism and circadian rhythms. Furthermore, different sequencing techniques were used for ileal and cecal microbiome experiments, which made comparisons of these regions difficult to perform. Moreover, the CDKO mice are of different maternal line than control mice, which could affect the composition of the gut microbiome, again making comparisons between conditions difficult to perform. As demonstrated in our transcriptomic analysis, TRF affects many physiological processes. Although we have focused primarily on bile acid and incretin signaling, it is possible that other processes, such as inflammation, gut barrier function, and autophagy, which are also affected by TRF, could play as important a role, which we hope other investigators will explore. Although we have used the most state-of-the-art bioinformatic tools available to study the relationship between the gut microbiome and host transcription as part of our multi-omic analysis, these findings are still associative and require additional investigation. We plan to use functional manipulation of the gut microbiome through engineered native bacteria (Russell et al. in press) to allow us to mechanistically investigate the relationship between specific bacterial functions and host physiological processes.

Requests for further information should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Amir Zarrinpar (ude.dscu@rapnirraza).

This study did not generate new unique reagents. Samples might not be available due to small amounts obtained from mouse experiments.

All animal work was approved by the Salk Research Institute IACUC. All experiments conform to current regulatory standards. Mice were the same as described in Zarrinpar et al. (2014), with a total of 54 8-week-old, wild-type male C57BL/6 mice (Jackson Laboratories, Bar Harbor, ME) subject to different diet and food access patterns for 8 weeks as previously described (Zarrinpar et al., 2014). Mice were split into three groups: mice fed a NCD with ad libitum food access (n = 18, NA condition), a HFD with ad libitum food access (n = 18, FA condition), or a HFD with time-restricted food access (n = 18, FT condition). Time-restricted food access refers to restricting food access to a period of 8 hours during the dark (ZT 13–21). Normal chow (LabDiet 5001): 3.36 kcal/gm; High-fat (TestDiet 58Y1): 5.16 kcal/gm (Zarrinpar et al., 2014). Whole body clock mutant Cry1;Cry2 double KO (CDKO) were obtained from the Sancar lab and were backcrossed to C57/B6 background >5 times. The genotype of the animals was confirmed by PCR (Chaix et al., 2019a; Vitaterna et al., 1999). CDKO mice were kept in similar light tight boxes with ad libitum food access (n = 18, CDKO-NA). For every 4h time point, three animals from each condition from separate cages were euthanized and whole ileum (content and mucosa) samples were collected during a 24h period for each of the 6 timepoints on the Zeitgeber time scale (ZT1, ZT4, ZT9, ZT13, ZT17, ZT21). Samples from ileum, cecum and blood were collected and stored at −80°C until further processing. Tissue samples were powdered through mechanical homogenization (mortar and pestle) in liquid nitrogen. For GLP-1 experiments, 12 weeks old male C57BL/6 mice (Jackson Laboratories) were fed 60% HFD (Research Diet D12492) either ad libitum or TRF (9 h of access to food during ZT13 – ZT22) for 9 weeks. For each group, blood was collected on BP800 tubes (BD Biosciences #366420) from 2 mice per time point every 3 hours.

DNA was extracted from powdered tissue samples with the QIAmp DNA Stool Mini Kit (Qiagen). Sample quality and quantity was assessed prior to preparation for 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing. The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was performed as follows for amplification of the 16 S rRNA gene from ileal samples: initial denaturation at 95°C for 5 min, followed by a 31-cycles of 98°C for 20 s; 55°C for 20s; 72°C for 20 s, and a final extension at 72°C for 1 min. All oligonucleotides utilized were obtained from Integrated DNA Technologies (IDT). We performed library preparation and paired-end amplicon 16S sequencing of the ileum samples based on the V3-V4 region using an available protocol on the MiSeq Illumina platform.

Powdered tissue samples were homogenized in TRIzol Reagent (Life Technologies #15596026). RNA was isolated with PureLink RNA mini kit (Life Technologies #12183025) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Sample quality control and library preparation were performed by the IGM core at UC San Diego. RNA ScreenTape® was used to assess RNA quality and quantity. Sequencing library was obtained based on mRNA. Sequencing was performed on the NovaSeq Illumina platform using 150PE reads.

Serum from fasting animals (n = 6) at 8 weeks after diet change/intervention was used for cholesterol using Thermo Scientific Infinity Reagents according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Meso Scale Diagnostics K150JWC kit was used to measure active GLP-1 (aGLP-1) from non-fasted serum.

Analysis of bile acids was carried out through liquid chromatography followed by mass spectrometry (LC/MS). Bile acids were extracted from samples according to (Wegner et al., 2017). Briefly, tissue samples were homogenized and extracted in 75% methanol (25 mg of tissue/200 μL) containing heavy internal standards. Supernatants were transferred to glass vials upon 10 minutes of vortexing followed by 10 min of centrifugation (16,000 × g) at 4°C. Samples were injected and analyzed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 LC system (Thermo) coupled to a TSQ Quantiva mass spectrometer (Thermo) fitted with a Kinetex C18 reversed phase column (2.6 μm, 150 × 2.1 mmi.d., Phenomenex). The LC solvents used consisted of two solutions: solution A - 0.1% formic acid and 20 mM ammonium acetate in water; solution B - acetonitrile:methanol 3:1 (v/v) containing 0.1% formic acid and 20 mM ammonium acetate. A reversed phase gradient at a flow rate of 0.2 mL/min was utilized, with a gradient consisting of 25–29% B in 1 min, 29–33% B in 14 min, 33–70% B in 15 min, up to 100% B in 1 min, 100% B for 9 min and equilibrated to 25% B for 10 min, for a total run time of 50 min. The injection volume for all samples was 10 μL, the column oven temperature was set to 50 C and the autosampler kept at 4 C. MS analyses were performed using electrospray ionization in positive and negative ion modes, with spay voltages of 3.5 and −3 kV, respectively, ion transfer tube temperature of 325 C, and vaporizer temperature of 275 C. Multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) was performed by using mass transitions between specific parent ions into corresponding fragment ions for each analyte. Targets were quantified using isotopically labeled internal standards in Skyline (MacLean et al., 2010).

Available raw cecal data obtained from V1-V3 16 S rRNA amplicon sequencing on the 454 platform (Zarrinpar et al., 2014) was reanalyzed from our previous publication for comparison. Raw ileum sequencing data was obtained from V3-V4 amplicon sequencing using the Illumina 16S metagenomic sequencing protocol. Reads were pre-filtered by mapping to the mouse genome (GRCm38.p5 release) with BWA (Li and Durbin, 2009) and removing reads (for 454 data) or read-pairs (for Illumina data) with a match. Filtered reads were processed using Qiime2, version 2020.11 (Bolyen et al., 2019). To dereplicate and create ASV tables and representatives, we used the dada2 denoise-pyro plugin for the 454(cecal) samples, and the deblur 16S plugin on the forward read of the Illumina (TI) samples, trimmed to 150bp (sequence overlap between forward and reverse reads was too low to use merged pairs). After that, cecal and TI samples were processed identically. We removed samples with fewer than 500 features, and features in either fewer than 2 samples, or which were annotated as unclassified, eukaryotic, mitochondrial, or plasmid. Taxonomy assignments were performed with the sklearn feature-classifier plugin against the full-length Silva v132 precomputed model. Trees were built using the align-to-tree-mafft-fastree phylogeny plugin. Diversity metrics were created using the core-metrics-phylogenetic diversity plugin, rarefied to a sampling depth of 1000. We used log-ratios to assess statistically significant differences between conditions since it takes into account reference-frames and is independent of microbial load (Morton et al., 2019b).

Transcript abundance was quantified using kallisto (Bray et al., 2016) with GENCODE release M21 (GRCm38.p6). Differential expression analysis between groups (condition and ZT) of interest was performed using DESeq2 (Love et al., 2014), with fold changes determined using the normal method for all transcripts whose counts were greater than 10 across all samples. Over-representation analysis of GO terms was performed with clusterProfiler (Yu et al., 2012).

Microbiome and transcriptome cycling was determined with the JTK_CYCLE algorithm (Hughes et al., 2010) implemented in Metacycle (p-value < 0.05) (Wu et al., 2016) which has been validated for 24-hour data.

Songbird was used to determine differential rankings of microbes between conditions and light vs. dark phases with a formula of "C(condition, Treatment(‘FA’)) + C(condition, Treatment(‘FT’)) + C(light_dark, Treatment(‘dark’))" and an optimized model with 2000 epochs, resulting in a pseudo Q-squared (1 - average absolute model error/average absolute baseline error) of 0.25 (Morton et al., 2019b). Songbird differentials were visualized at the genus level as previously described (Allaband et al., 2021). To determine the conditional probability that each transcript co-occurs with specific microbes, co-occurrence analysis between microbiome and transcriptome data was carried out using the integrative omics approach mmvec (Morton et al., 2019a) as previously described (Allaband et al., 2021).

Number of samples used per time point and condition are described under “Animals and tissue collection” section and in the caption of each associated figure along with statistical method used for analysis. All analyses were performed in python version 3.6.12 (Python Software, 2020) or R version 4.1.0 (R Core Team, 2021).

An interactive tool that allows for exploration of additional microbiome and transcriptome data is available at https://zarrinparlab.github.io/ti_cycling_paper/ti_16S_family_abundance.html and https://zarrinparlab.github.io/ti_cycling_paper/ti_expression.html, respectively.

DECLARATION OF INTERESTS

A.Z. and S.D.B. are co-founders and equity holders in Endure Biotherapeutics. S.P. is the author of a book titled The Circadian Code, for which he is paid author’s royalty.

SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION

Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2022.111008.

