Interaction effect between NAFLD severity and high carbohydrate diet on gut microbiome alteration and hepatic de novo lipogenesis





Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is associated with high carbohydrate (HC) intake. We investigated whether the relationship between carbohydrate intake and NAFLD is mediated by interactions between gut microbial modulation, impaired insulin response, and hepatic de novo lipogenesis (DNL). Stool samples were collected from 204 Korean subjects with biopsy-proven NAFLD (n = 129) and without NAFLD (n = 75). The gut microbiome profiles were analyzed using 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing. Study subjects were grouped by the NAFLD activity score (NAS) and percentage energy intake from dietary carbohydrate. Hepatic DNL-related transcripts were also analyzed (n = 90). Data from the Korean healthy twin cohort (n = 682), a large sample of individuals without NAFLD, were used for comparison and validation. A HC diet rather than a low carbohydrate diet was associated with the altered gut microbiome diversity according to the NAS. Unlike individuals from the twin cohort without NAFLD, the abundances of Enterobacteriaceae and Ruminococcaceae were significantly different among the NAS subgroups in NAFLD subjects who consumed an HC diet. The addition of these two microbial families, along with Veillonellaceae, significantly improved the diagnostic performance of the predictive model, which was based on the body mass index, age, and sex to predict nonalcoholic steatohepatitis in the HC group. In the HC group, two crucial regulators of DNL (SIRT1 and SREBF2) were differentially expressed among the NAS subgroups. In particular, kernel causality analysis revealed a causal effect of the abundance of Enterobacteriaceae on SREBF2 upregulation and of the surrogate markers of insulin resistance on NAFLD activity in the HC group. Consuming an HC diet is associated with alteration in the gut microbiome, impaired glucose homeostasis, and upregulation of hepatic DNL genes, altogether contributing to NAFLD pathogenesis.

Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is associated with metabolic syndrome, obesity, and diabetes mellitus (DM)1. In addition, NAFLD has genetic and dietary risk factors.2 Patients with nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) and advanced fibrosis present more adverse clinical outcomes,3 and should be potentially targeted for pharmacotherapy. However, in NAFLD patients, lifestyle modification is primarily pursued as a cost-effective intervention to control metabolic dysfunction.4 As a result, further investigation of the underlying mechanisms by which dietary patterns affect NAFLD progression are merited to elucidate its complex pathogenesis.

In this study, we attempted to elucidate the effect of dietary patterns on NAFLD pathogenesis using a multi omics approach in a well-characterized biopsy-proven NAFLD cohort. We aimed to provide new insights into the pathomechanism of NAFLD as related to dietary carbohydrate patterns, alterations of the gut microbiome, and hepatic DNL.

This study included 129 Korean individuals with biopsy-proven NAFLD (NAFL, n = 70; NASH, n = 59) and 75 controls without NAFLD (Supplementary Table 1). Subjects were divided into two groups according to their carbohydrate intake (high carbohydrate [HC] group, energy intake from carbohydrates ≥70%; low carbohydrate [LC] group, energy intake from carbohydrates <70%).17,18 Baseline characteristics did not significantly differ between the HC and LC groups (Table 1). Subjects were then subdivided into three subgroups (N0–2) according to their NAFLD activity score (NAS). The subgroups were categorized as non-NASH (N0), borderline NASH (N1), and definite NASH (N2) (Table 1 and Supplementary Table 2).

Abbreviations: BMI, body mass index; AST, aspartate transaminase; ALT, alanine transaminase; GGT, gamma-glutamyl transferase; HDL, high-density lipoprotein; LDL, low-density lipoprotein; TG, triglycerides; FFA, free fatty acids; TB, total bilirubin; Alb, albumin; hs-CRP, high-sensitivity C-reactive protein; HA, hyaluronic acid; T3, triiodothyronine; HbA1c, glycated hemoglobin; FBG, fasting blood glucose; Adipo-IR, adipose tissue insulin resistance; HOMA-IR, homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance. The mean and standard deviation are presented as the mean ± SD and the number of subjects and those percentages are expressed as n (%). Significant differences among subgroups were calculated using the Kruskal-Wallis test. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001.

On average, the HC group consumed 76.83% of daily total energy from carbohydrate, 11.28% from fat, and 11.89% from protein, while the LC group consumed 63.56% of daily total energy from carbohydrate, 20.16% from fat, and 16.28% from protein (Figure 1a). In terms of the absolute amount of each nutrient consumed, the LC group consumed higher amounts of fat, animal fat, plant fat, protein, animal protein, and plant protein than the HC group (Figure 1b, Supplementary Table 3).

Carbohydrate consumption was positively correlated with serum alanine transaminase (ALT), a liver damage marker only in the HC group. After adjusting for potential confounding factors, the positive correlation between carbohydrate intake and ALT in the HC group remained marginally significant (P = .053) (Figure 1d). Significant positive correlations between the surrogate markers of insulin resistance (homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance [HOMA-IR] and adipose tissue insulin resistance [adipo-IR]) with carbohydrate consumption were found only in the HC group. In contrast, obesity and lipid metabolism-associated clinical markers (low density lipoprotein [LDL]-cholesterol and TG) were significantly correlated with carbohydrate consumption in the LC group (Figure 1e). These results were confirmed by a linear regression model adjusted for BMI, age, and sex. Carbohydrate intake significantly predicted FFA concentrations, HOMA-IR, adipo-IR, and insulin levels in the HC group, whereas carbohydrate intake significantly predicted LDL-cholesterol levels and BMI in the LC group (Figure 1f).

In the HC group, the composition of gut microbiota varied significantly according to the NAS (P = .009), but this pattern was not exhibited in the LC group (P = .742) (Figure 2a). Subsequent analysis of nonmetric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) scores showed a significant difference between the N1 and N2 groups (P = .0195) (Figure 2b).

However, alpha diversity, measured using four indices (Simpson’s diversity index, Pielou’s evenness index, the Shannon diversity index, and species richness), did not significantly differ among the NAS subgroups in either the HC or LC group (Figure 2c). The top 10 microbial taxa enriched or depleted by NAFLD severity in all participants, the HC group, and the LC group were visualized using stacked bar plots (Figure 2d).

Univariate analysis revealed a significant decrease in the abundance of Ruminococcaceae family (P = .006) and a significant increase in the abundance of Enterobacteriaceae family (P = .010) with increasing NAFLD activity (N2 vs. N0) in the HC group, and a marginally significant increase in the abundance of Veillonellaceae in individuals with definite NASH (N2) compared to non-NASH individuals (N0) (P = .06). No significant alterations in the abundance of microbial taxa were found in the LC group (Figure 3a). These trends were maintained at the genus level in the HC group (Figure 3b): compared with subjects without NASH, NASH subjects had a significant decrease in the abundance of Faecalibacterium (N2 vs. N0), and a significant increase in the abundance of unclassified Enterobacteriaceae (N2 vs. N0) and Dialister (N1 vs. N0).

To analyze the functional changes in the gut microbiome in the HC and LC groups according to NAFLD severity, the functional prediction analysis was conducted. As a result of linear discriminant analysis effect size (LEfSe), a total of 287 Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) categories and 16 KEGG pathways were identified as significantly differing between the non-NASH (N0) and NASH (N1 and N2) subgroups within the HC group. On the other hand, no differences in the functional changes in KEGG categories between the non-NASH and NASH subgroups were observed, and 6 KEGG pathways were identified as significant in the LC group. The KEGG pathways found to be significant in the HC group are visualized in supplementary figure 2. Notably, the majority of KEGG pathways that were enriched in the NASH subgroup within the HC group were related to microbial carbohydrate metabolism, such as ‘phosphotransferase system PTS’, ‘glycerolipid metabolism’ and ‘fructose and mannose metabolism’.

To investigate the effect of an HC diet on the gut microbiome in the non-NAFLD population, gut microbiome data from the Korean healthy twin cohort were analyzed (n = 682) (Figure 4). Study subjects were divided into the HC and LC groups using a cutoff of 70% energy intake from carbohydrates (HC group, n = 382; LC group, n = 300) (Supplementary Figure 3A). Furthermore, both groups were subdivided into two subgroups according to the hepatic steatosis index (HSI) (HC group: HSI ≥30, n = 246; HSI <30, n = 135 and LC group: HSI ≥30, n = 211; HSI <30, n = 88). The population characteristics of the HC and LC groups in the healthy twin cohort are described in supplementary information (Supplementary Table 5, Supplementary Figure 3).

The composition and alpha diversity of the gut microbiome did not significantly differ by the HSI in the healthy twin cohort, regardless of carbohydrate intake (Figures 4 A and b). Among the three crucial microbial families (Ruminococcaceae, Enterobacteriaceae, and Veillonellaceae), the enrichment of the abundance of Veillonellaceae in individuals with high HSI was evident in all participants as well as in the HC and LC groups (Figure 4c). This observation was also confirmed in the HC group by univariate analysis (Figure 4d).

NAFLD-associated single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were analyzed to understand the genetic background of subjects (Supplementary Table 6). Of the five major SNPs (PNPLA3_rs738409 C > G, TM6SF2_rs58542926 C > T, SREBF2_rs133291 C > T, MBOAT7_rs641738 C > T, and HSD17B13_rs72613567 adenine insertion [A-INS]), only the prevalence of PNPLA3_rs738409 C > G significantly differed among the NAS subgroups in both the HC and LC groups. There were no significant differences in the minor allele frequency of PNPLA3_rs738409 between the HC and LC groups (P = .612), suggesting that the differences between the HC and LC groups were not attributable to genetic factors.

We identified differentially expressed genes between the N0 vs. N1+ N2 subgroups (Figure 5c). Specifically, SIRT1, FASN, SREBF2, and HCFC1 were differentially expressed in the HC group (P = .002, P = .014, P = .029, and P = .042, respectively) and the expression of mTOR, SCD, GSK3B, and MLXIPL were differentially expressed in the LC group (P = .005, P = .012, P = .017, and P = .026, respectively). Among the analyzed transcripts, we focused on the association between SREBF2 and the abundance of Enterobacteriaceae (Figure 5d, Supplementary Figure 5). A linear regression model adjusted for BMI, age, and sex revealed that the expression of SREBF2 was predictive of Enterobacteriaceae abundance in the HC group (P = .006). This suggests a close relationship between NAFLD activity, DNL, and the gut microbiome community under HC diet conditions.

We performed the area under the receiver-operating characteristic curve (AUROC) analysis to evaluate whether specific gut microbial families predict the presence of NASH among subjects with biopsy-proven NAFLD. Three microbial families, Enterobacteriaceae, Ruminococcaceae, and Veillonellaceae, which were present in differing amounts according to NAFLD activity in the HC group, were incorporated into the prediction model (Figure 6). For NASH diagnosis, the addition of these microbial families to the prediction model including BMI, age, and sex yielded an AUC of 0.861 in the HC group (95% CI, 0.774–0.940), which was significantly higher than that of the prediction model including only BMI, age, and sex (AUC = 0.743; 95% CI, 0.625–0.860; P = .018 by DeLong test) (Figure 6b). However, the addition of those microbial families did not significantly improve the predictive validity of the model for detecting NASH in the LC group (AUC = 0.874 [microbes-BMI-age-sex]; AUC = 0.872 [BMI-age-sex]; 95% CI, 0.735–0.937; P = .883 by DeLong test) (Figure 6c).

To determine causality among several variables, we used kernel causality analysis, which identifies plausible causal pathways between two variables using generalized correlation coefficients20(Figure 7). The descriptive source data are shown in Supplementary Table 8. Differences in the causality of variables between the HC and LC groups were observed. In the HC group, we identified positive causation between insulin resistance-related markers, such as HOMA-IR and adipo-IR, and liver damage markers, such as ALT, aspartate transaminase (AST), and gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT). Additionally, there was positive causation between the abundance of Enterobacteriaceae and a DNL regulator, SREBF2; both Enterobacteriaceae and SREBF2 were involved in reducing SIRT1, a lipid biosynthesis suppressor gene.

The current study demonstrated that in individuals with NAFLD who consume an HC diet (but not a LC diet), alterations in the composition of the gut microbiome are associated with NAFLD activity. In particular, the abundances of three key microbial families (Veillonellaceae, Ruminococcaceae, and Enterobacteriaceae) differed among the NAS subgroups within the HC group, such that a set of these microbes served as an accurate tool for diagnosing NASH in the HC group. However, HC consumption did not impact the gut microbiome composition in the absence of NAFLD, according to an independent non-NAFLD cohort. In the transcriptomic analysis of human liver tissues from the subjects with biopsy-proven NAFLD, we found four differentially expressed genes (G6PC, SIRT1, HCFC1, and SREBF2) between non-NAFLD controls and NASH subjects who consumed HC. We then explored the direction of causality of the three microbial families, eight clinical markers, and three transcriptomes using kernel causality analysis.

In summary, based on a multidisciplinary approach, we highlight that habitual HC consumption may be associated with adverse hepatic metabolism and NAFLD severity, which result from alterations in the gut microbiome. In particular, we demonstrated that HC intake is significantly associated with insulin resistance markers and may lead to a prominent shift in microbial diversity and the abundance of specific taxa according to NAFLD activity. We also confirmed that the addition of microbial taxa may significantly improve the prediction of NASH in the HC group. Therefore, the enrichment of pathogenic intestinal microbiota and the depletion of protective gut microbiota by increased NAFLD severity in the HC group seem to be associated with host hepatic metabolism through the transcriptional activation of hepatic DNL.

This cross-sectional study was performed using the ongoing Boramae NAFLD cohort (NCT02206841).11,55,56 This study was performed in accordance with the ethical guidelines of the 1975 Declaration of Helsinki for the participation of human subjects. This study protocol was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Boramae Medical Center (IRB No. 26–2017-48). All study subjects provided written informed consent. The liver specimens were obtained using 16 G disposable needles, then fixed in 4% formalin and embedded in paraffin. The specimens with 20 mm in length and 3 mm in thickness were stained with hematoxylin and eosin and Masson’s trichrome. Liver histology was assessed using the NAFLD activity scoring system.57 The combination of scored steatosis, lobular inflammation, and ballooning was considered for categorizing study subjects. Patients with an NAS of 0–2 were classified as non-NASH (N0), those with an NAS of 3–4 were classified as having borderline NASH (N1), and those with an NAS of 5–8 were classified as having definite NASH (N2).58 Participants with type 1 DM and advanced fibrosis (≥F3) were excluded from this study. Clinical, biochemical, and genetic parameters were evaluated as previously described elsewhere.11,55,56

Usual dietary intake was assessed using 103 items from a food frequency questionnaire (FFQ).59 The frequency of servings during the last year was classified into nine categories: never, once a month, 2–3 times a month, 1–2 times a week, 3–4 times a week, 5–6 times a week, once a day, twice a day, and three times a day. Portion size was categorized as small, medium, or large. Each individual’s daily nutrient intake was calculated using CAN-Pro 5.0 (The Korean Nutrition Society, Seoul, Korea). The calculated daily absolute amount of carbohydrate intake (g) was converted to energy consumed from carbohydrate by multiplying by four calories. Carbohydrate consumption as a proportion of daily energy intake was determined by dividing calories from carbohydrate by the total energy intake.

The HOMA-IR and adipo-IR were measured as described in previous studies.60,61 Liver biopsy was only indicated for study subjects who had at least two risk factors. The risk factors included high TG levels, low high-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels, abdominal obesity, hypertension, DM or insulin resistance, and clinically suspected NASH or hepatic fibrosis.55,56

Curated metagenomic data from the NAFLD cohort were utilized in this study.11 Raw data sequencing was processed using the QIIME pipeline (v 1.8.0).62 Selection and assignment of operational taxonomic unit (OTU) were performed using the gg_13_5 Greengenes database at 97% similarity level.63 Representative sequences were selected and aligned using the UCLUST software and the PyNAST algorithm.64 OTUs were assigned to taxa using the ribosomal database project classifier.65, 66 Chimeric sequences were removed using the ChimeraSlayer algorithm.66 The relative abundance tables at the family and genus levels were used for the microbiome analysis. All of the relative abundance tables were filtered at the 0.001% abundance level and 50% persistence level.

A total of 682 subjects were recruited from the Healthy Twin study, which was part of the Korean Genome Epidemiology study.67 The HC and LC groups in this current study were created in concordance with the main study. Control and NAFLD risk groups were determined according to the HSI.68 Detailed information on the sample collection, 16S rRNA sequencing targeting the V4 region, and bioinformatics processing is described elsewhere.69 In the current study, processed operational taxonomic unit tables at the family and genus levels were utilized for comparing the compositions of the gut microbiomes.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) genotyping of the entire study population was performed using TaqMan 50 nuclease assays (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA) or Sanger sequencing (Macrogen, Inc, Seoul, South Korea) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium was analyzed using the chi-square test. The following SNPs were selected and have been previously described:55,70 PNPLA3_rs738409 C > G,71 TM6SF2_rs58542926 C > T,72SREBF2_rs133291 C > T,70 MBOAT7_rs641738 C > T,73 and HSD17B13_rs72613567 adenine insertion (A-INS).74

Total hepatic RNA was extracted using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA), according to the manufacturer’s protocol. RNA quality was determined using the BioAnalyzer (Agilent Technologies, Inc., Santa Clara, CA). The mean RNA integrity number (RIN) was 8.35 (4.5–9.5). cDNA library construction was performed using a TruSeq Stranded Total RNA Sample Prep Kit (Illumina, Inc., San Diego, CA). Libraries were sequenced using the Illumina platform. Raw data in fastq format were processed using STAR75 and HTseq.76 After performing a quality control of the raw counts, normalization of raw count data was undertaken using DESeq2.77

Statistical comparisons between the HC and LC groups were conducted with the Kruskal-Wallis test and Dunn’s multiple comparisons test using GraphPad Prism software ver 8.0d (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA). Four indices of alpha diversity were calculated with OTU tables at the genus level using the Vegan package in R.78 This package was also used to display NMDS plots of beta diversity. The distance between genera was calculated using the Bray-Curtis distance method, and differences between subgroups were evaluated using the analysis of similarities (ANOSIM) function. Random forest analysis was conducted using the RandomForestUtils package in R79 to determine which microbial families were predictive of NASH. To exclude the potential confounding factors (age, BMI, and sex) for identifying specific taxa associated with NASH at the family level associated with NASH in the HC and LC groups, multivariate association analysis was performed using the MaAsLin2 package in R.19 The functional pathway analysis was conducted using PICRUSt2, and the KEGG database was used to infer the metagenomes.80 LEfSe with a threshold LDA score of 2.0 was performed to identify the pathways that significantly differed between the non-NASH (N0) and NASH (N1 and N2) subgroups in the HC and LC groups, respectively (Galaxy platform, https://huttenhower.sph.harvard.edu/galaxy)81. To estimate the predictive power of the three microbial families (Ruminococcaceae, Veillonellaceae, and Enterobacteriaceae), AUROC analysis was performed using the pROC and multipleROC package in R.82 For causal inference between variables, kernel causality analysis was used. The principal concept of the kernel causality method is to invest kernel regression in both directions of two variables; the variable with the larger correlation coefficient is considered the ‘kernel cause’.83 This kernel cause was measured using the generalCorr package in R84 and visualized using Cytoscape (v3.8.0).85

This work was funded by the National Research Foundation of Korea(NRF) Grant under (2021R1A2C2005820, 2021M3A9E4021818, 2021R1A2B5B03086637 and 2015M3C9A4053391), and the Korea Health Industry development institute (KHIDI) funded by the Ministry of Health & Welfare, Republic of Korea under (HI21C0538).

G.P.K. is a founder of KoBioLabs, Inc., a company that characterizing the role of host–microbiome interactions in individuals with chronic diseases. The other authors declare no competing interests.

The V4 16S rDNA metagenome sequence datasets obtained in this study have been deposited in the European Nucleotide Archive databases under the accession number ERP109777 (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/browser/view/PRJEB27662). The sequences from the Twin cohort study used in this study were deposited in the European Nucleotide Archive under the study accession number ERP010289. (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/browser/view/PRJEB9205).

All other metadata that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

H.K. and H.J.Y. conducted the human microbiome analysis and wrote the manuscript. G.L. performed the human microbiome sequencing. S.H.L contributed to the writing and statistical analysis during the revision process. T.Y. and M.C conducted the human liver transcriptome analysis. S.K.J., M.S.C., D.H.L., S.L., and W.K. collected specimens from Korean NAFLD subjects and conducted the clinical analysis. J.H.P. and J.H.K. analyzed the liver histology. H.J.Y., W.K., and G.P.K. designed the study, analyzed the data, and reviewed the paper. All authors read and commented on the manuscript.

Supplemental data for this article can be accessed online at https://doi.org/10.1080/19490976.2022.2078612

