A metagenome-wide association study of gut microbiome and visceral fat accumulation



Visceral fat is an independent risk factor for metabolic and cardiovascular disease. The study aimed to investigate the associations between gut microbiome and visceral fat.

We recruited 32 obese adults and 30 healthy controls at baseline. Among the obese subjects, 14 subjects underwent laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy (LSG) and were followed 6 months after surgery. Abdominal visceral fat area (VFA) and subcutaneous fat area (SFA) were measured by magnetic resonance imaging. Waist, hipline, waist-to-hip ratio (WHR) and body mass index (BMI) were included as simple obese parameters. Gut microbiome was analyzed by metagenomic sequencing.

Among the obese parameters, VFA had the largest number of correlations with the species that were differentially enriched between obese and healthy subjects, following by waist, WHR, BMI, hipline, and SFA. Within the species negatively correlated with VFA, Eubacterium eligens had the strongest correlation, following by Clostridium citroniae, C. symbiosum, Bacteroides uniformis, E. ventriosum, Ruminococcaceae bacterium D16, C. hathewayi, etc. C. hathewayi and C. citroniae were increased after LSG. Functional analyses showed that among all the obese parameters, VFA had strongest correlation coefficients with the obesity-related microbial pathways. Microbial pathways involved in carbohydrate fermentation and biosynthesis of L-glutamate and L-glutamine might contribute to visceral fat accumulation.

Visceral fat was more closely correlated with gut microbiome compared with subcutaneous fat, suggesting an intrinsic connection between gut microbiome and metabolic cardiovascular diseases. Specific microbial species and pathways which were closely associated with visceral fat accumulation might contribute to new targeted therapies for metabolic disorders.

About 1014 microbes live in the human gut [1]. This complex and dynamic ecosystem functions like an organ, profoundly influencing its host's energy metabolism and immunoregulation. The pivotal role of gut microbiota in obesity has now been widely recognized [2], [3], [4]. Using polymerase chain reaction, gene chip technology, and 16S rRNA sequencing, previous studies have linked the composition of gut microbiota with obesity [5], [6], [7]. Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) and germ-free mouse model establish causality for these correlations [8], [9], [10]. Compared with 16S rRNA sequencing, metagenomic sequencing provides information on gut microbes at the species or even strains level. Some bacteria, such as Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, Akkermansia muciniphila and Lactobacillus reuteri are protective against obesity and diabetes [11], [12], [13]. Functional analyses based on metagenomic sequencing describe the complex and diverse functions of gut microbiota [14]. Some microbial metabolites such as lipopolysaccharides (LPS), short chain fatty acids (SCFAs) and branched chain amino acids (BCAAs) and bile acids metabolism were involved in the correlation mechanisms of gut microbiota and energy metabolism [11], [15], [16], [17], [18].

The pathogenesis and progression of the obesity-related cardiometabolic complications are primarily dependent on fat distribution [19]. Visceral fat and subcutaneous fat are significantly different even from an ontogenetic sight [20]. Visceral fat accumulation significantly increases the risks of type 2 diabetes [21], cardiovascular disease [22], cancer [23], and all-cause mortality [24]; whereas subcutaneous fat acts as a “buffer pool” for the circulating fatty free acid and has a protective role in metabolism [25]. Nevertheless, few studies have investigated the relationship between visceral fat and gut microbiota. These previous studies explored the role of gut microbiome only to the phylum or genus level [26], [27], [28]. Bacterial species belonging to the same genus sometimes have distinct functions. For example, B. thetaiotaomicron ameliorates colon inflammation in preclinical models of Crohn's disease [29], while B. pyogenes causes bacteremia secondary to liver abscess [30]. In order to reduce complications in FMT and find potential therapeutic targets, it is essential to discover the contributions of specific bacterial species to the disease phenotype. In this study, we aimed to investigate the relationships between gut microbiome and visceral fat accumulation in a cross-sectional cohort, and further explore the changes of the visceral fat-associated bacterial species in a longitudinal cohort after weight loss intervention.

The study included a cross-sectional cohort with 32 obese adults and 30 healthy participants and a longitudinal cohort with 14 of the obese subjects receiving laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy (LSG) who were followed 6 months after surgery (Fig. 1a). Visceral fat area (VFA) and subcutaneous fat area (SFA) were precisely measured by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for all participants. VFA and SFA had opposite correlations with the parameters of glycolipid metabolism (Fig. 1b). VFA and waist-to-hip ratio (WHR) was positively correlated with the inferior glycolipid parameters, while SFA and hipline seemed to be protective on glucose metabolism (Fig. 1b). Compared with healthy controls, obese subjects had significantly higher obese parameters and worse homeostasis in glucose metabolism, lipid metabolism, hepatic function, uric acid (UA) and systemic inflammation (Wilcoxon rank sum test; p < 0.05; Fig. 1c; Suppl. Table 1). At 6 months after LSG, almost all the obese parameters (except for WHR) experienced significant decrease, with median values decreased by 8.39 kg/m2 for body mass index (BMI), 89.95 cm2 for VFA, and 216.80 cm2 for SFA (Fig. 1c). Compared with the pre-operative status, blood pressure, glucose metabolism, lipid metabolism, hepatic function, and inflammation significantly improved 6 months after LSG (paired-sample Wilcoxon test; p < 0.05; Suppl. Table 1).

Community diversity including alpha and beta diversity were evaluated at taxonomic levels from phylum to family, genus, and species. Alpha diversity by Shannon index was not significantly different between healthy controls and obese subjects at all taxonomic levels (Fig. 2a). However, alpha diversity of post-operative communities was significantly increased at the species level compared with pre-operative communities (paired Wilcoxon signed-rank test; p < 0.05) (Fig. 2a).

We subsequently investigated community dissimilarity among participant groups based on beta diversity by Bray-Curtis index and Aitchison distance. Comparisons of the Bray-Curtis distance between healthy and obese samples showed no significant separation by nonmetric dimensional scaling ordination (permutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA); p = 0.42) (Fig. 2b). However, within-group distances were significantly higher in obese subjects than in healthy controls, suggesting the microbiome communities were more similar within the population of healthy participants (Wilcoxon rank sum test; p < 0.05) (Fig. 2c). Furthermore, comparisons of the Aitchison distance between healthy and obese subjects suggested a significant separation (PERMANOVA; p < 0.05) (Suppl. Fig. 4a). The significantly higher within-group distances in obese patients comparing with healthy subjects consistently proposed the higher variations within the obese population (Wilcoxon rank sum test; p < 0.05) (Suppl. Fig. 4b). We further observed significant differences in Bray-Curtis distance between pre- vs. post-operative subjects (PERMANOVA; p < 0.05) (Fig. 2d) with within-group distances significantly decreased after LSG (Wilcoxon rank sum test; p < 0.05) (Fig. 2e). However, from the view of Aitchison distance, the difference between pre- and post-operative subjects lost the significance but still with the same trends (PERMANOVA; p = 0.14; Wilcoxon rank sum test; p = 0.34) (Suppl. Fig. 4c & d). Furthermore, by comparing between-group distances, we observed that healthy controls and post-operative subjects had significantly lower Bray-Curtis distances (Wilcoxon rank sum test; p < 0.05) (Fig. 2f). The significant differences in between-group Bray-Curtis diversity among participants who were healthy, obese, pre- or post-operative suggested that the LSG made the overall microbial community of obese subjects more similar with a healthy community.

We compared microbial differences at the species level between healthy controls and obese subjects (Suppl. Table 2). We identified 20 different species (Wilcoxon rank sum test; original p < 0.05; q < 0.37) (Fig. 3a), with 14 enriched in healthy controls and 6 enriched in obese subjects. A group of species belonging to order Clostridiales (such as Eubacterium eligens, Clostridium citroniae, C. hathewayi, and C. symbiosum) were enriched in healthy controls. Three species belonging to order Bacteroidales (Paraprevotella xylaniphila, Alistipes shahii, and B. uniformis) were also enriched in healthy controls. B. massiliensis, Escherichia coli, Dorea longicatena, E. hallii, Slackia piriformis, and Eggerthella lenta were enriched in obese subjects. We further evaluated the significant results by performing Compositional Data Analysis (CoDA). Among the 20 significantly different species, 10 species remained significant (Wilcoxon rank sum test; original p < 0.05; q < 0.37) (Fig. 3a).

Combining results from comparisons of healthy controls vs. obese subjects and pre- vs. post-operative subjects showed 6 potentially beneficial species (A. shahii, E. eligens, unclassified Oscillibacter, C. hathewayi, C. symbiosum and C. citroniae) and 1 potentially harmful species (D. longicatena). The 6 beneficial species were all enriched in healthy controls, decreased in obese subjects, and increased to similar levels with healthy controls after LSG. Moreover, supported by the results from CoDA, the difference of D. longicatena and C. symbiosum in both comparisons remained significant (Fig. 3c).

Spearman’s correlation analysis was used to explore the correlations between species abundances and the clinical characteristics. Sixty-two samples combined from healthy controls and obese subjects were included. We found 271 correlations with original p values < 0.05 (Spearman’s correlation value > 0.25 or < -0.25; q < 0.61) (Suppl. Table 3; Fig. 3d). Among the 6 obese parameters, VFA had the largest number of correlations with bacterial species (n = 26, q < 0.08), followed by waist (n = 24, q < 0.09), waist-to-hip ratio (WHR, n = 20, q < 0.11), BMI (n = 18, q < 0.12), hipline (n = 14, q < 0.15) and SFA (n = 11, q < 0.19). C. citroniae, C. symbiosum and E. eligens had the most frequent correlations with the obese parameters (Fig. 3e). Within the species negatively correlated with VFA, E. eligens had the strongest correlation, followed by C. citroniae, C. symbiosum, B. uniformis, E. ventriosum, Ruminococcaceae bacterium D16, C. hathewayi, A. shahii, and F. plautii. Species negatively correlated with the obese parameters were also frequently and negatively correlated with triglyceride (TG), white blood cell count (WBC), low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL), glycated hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c), fasting C-peptide (FCp), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), systolic blood pressure (SBP), and diastolic blood pressure (DBP), while were positively correlated with high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL).

For a better understanding of the relationships among species and overall interconnectivity within individual communities, we evaluated the correlations among gut microbes with co-abundance networks based on the relative abundance of bacterial species. Networks were constructed using BAnOCC for four groups: healthy, obese, pre-, and post-operative (Fig. 4). Only significant edges with 95% credibility were used for network construction. Overall, co-occurrence relationships were within and between phylum Actinobacteria, Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes, Fusobacteria and Proteobacteria.

Comparisons of detailed co-occurrence results among groups (Suppl. Table 4) showed that positive correlations between Megamonas hypermegale and unclassified Megamonas, and between Megamonas rupellensis and unclassified Meganomas were consistently significant for all four groups. Correlations between B. plebeius and B. coprocola; unclassified Citrobacter and Citrobacter freundii; and unclassified Veillonella and Veillonella parvula were significant only in healthy controls and post-operative subjects, suggesting obesity might disrupt these correlations, which were then re-established after LSG.

We also constructed functional profiles for each sample using the MetaCyc pathway database by HUMAnN2. We retrieved 330 microbial MetaCyc pathways. We evaluated functional alpha diversity by Shannon index which did not show significant differences either between healthy controls vs. obese subjects or pre- vs. post-operative subjects (Suppl. Fig. 2).

Using HUMAnN2, we also calculated pathway abundance based on contributions from individual species (Suppl. Table 6). We created species-specific pathway profiles, focusing on different pathways from the MetaCyc analyses of total community and the contributions of individual species. Comparison of healthy and obese microbial communities showed 58 different species contributions within 49 pathways (Wilcoxon rank sum test; original p < 0.05, q < 0.28), with 49 differences involving E. coli. Specifically, for two pathways enriched in the healthy group, the dominant coding species was A. shahii (original p < 0.05, q < 0.16), which was negatively correlated with VFA and WHR. Comparison of pre- and post-operative subjects showed 27 significant difference in 19 pathways. Interestingly, potential SCFA producer species C. symbiosum, Clostridiales bacterium 1 7 47FAA and C. asparagiforme have significantly higher contributions to pathways responsible for the biosynthesis of adenosine nucleotides and guanosine deoxyribonucleotides as well as the degradation of sucrose and L-histidine in post-operative subjects.

We combined the results from the significantly different MetaCyc pathways and important clinical characteristics for Spearman’s correlation analyses (Spearman’s correlation value >0.25 or <−0.25). Sixty-two samples combined from healthy controls and obese subjects were included. Heatmaps were constructed with Spearman’s correlations (Fig. 6, Suppl. Table 7). It was surprising that BMI only had 7 correlations with pathways (original p < 0.05, q < 0.41), and none of the correlations remained significant after FDR correction. WHR (n = 64, original p < 0.05, q < 0.07), waist (n = 54, original p < 0.05, q < 0.08) and VFA (n = 53, original p < 0.05, q < 0.09) had much more frequent and significant correlations with pathways. The potentially protective SFA had 51 correlations with pathways (original p < 0.05, q < 0.09). Lower body fat was found to be protective against metabolic disorders [31], and the corresponding parameter hipline only had 12 correlations with pathways (original p < 0.05, q < 0.24). The results suggested that the obesity differentiated pathways might potentially contribute to adverse fat distribution. In order to evaluate the correlation strength of different obese parameters, we further compared the significant correlations between obese parameters and the obesity-related microbial pathways. Among the 6 obese parameters, VFA had strongest correlation coefficients, followed by WHR, BMI, SFA, waist and hipline (Suppl. Fig. 3). Pathways positively correlated with WHR, waist and VFA were involved in carbohydrate degradation and biosynthesis of L-phenylalanine, L-glutamate, L-glutamine, and lipopolysaccharides. These results indicated that the microbial functions in fermentation and utilization of carbohydrate, biosynthesis of L-glutamate and L-glutamine were closely related to visceral fat accumulation and abdominal obesity.

Our metagenome-wide association study found that among the obese parameters, VFA had largest number of correlations with gut microbial species. Within the species negatively correlated with VFA, E. eligens had the strongest correlation, followed by C. citroniae, C. symbiosum, B. uniformis, E. ventriosum, Ruminococcaceae bacterium D16, C. hathewayi, A. shahii and F. plautii. After LSG, C. symbiosum, C. hathewayi and C. citroniae, were significantly increased. Microbial pathways involved in carbohydrate fermentation and biosynthesis of L-glutamate and L-glutamine might contribute to visceral fat accumulation.

Our study has some limitations. Firstly, the sample size is relatively small. Secondly, that causality between the discovered species and VFA cannot be proven using our study design and should be further confirmed in germ-free mice. Thirdly, the study subjects are all Han Chinese, thus the results may not be generalized to other ethnic groups. Further clinical studies with larger prospective cohorts and multiethnic data are needed to fully elucidate the association between gut microbiome and visceral fat accumulation.

In this study, we established metagenomic associations between gut microbiome and visceral fat accumulation. VFA had the strongest correlation with the species that were differentially associated with obesity compared with other obese parameters, suggesting an intrinsic connection between the gut microbiome and metabolic cardiovascular diseases. Specific microbial species and pathways which were closely associated with visceral fat accumulation might lead to new therapies for metabolic disorders.

From January 2017 to May 2018, 32 obese adults and 30 healthy participants aged 18 years or older were recruited at Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated Sixth People’s Hospital. Exclusion criteria were: malignant tumor, secondary obesity, acute inflammation, moderate to severe anemia, severe hepatic and renal dysfunction, heart failure, respiratory failure, gastrointestinal ulcers, inflammatory bowel disease, hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism, subacute thyroiditis, schizophrenia, or hormone replacement therapy. For healthy controls, additional exclusion criteria were: BMI ≥ 24.00 kg/m2, hypertension, history of obesity, impaired glucose tolerance, impaired fasting glucose, diabetes, or dyslipidemia. Fourteen out of 32 obese subjects underwent LSG and were followed for 6 months after surgery. LSG surgery was as described previously [61]. The clinical trials were registered in the Chinese Clinical Trial Registry (ChiCTR-COC-17011355, date of registration: 11 May 2017; ChiCTR-SOC-17011356, date of registration: 11 May 2017). All participants provided informed consent. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated Sixth People’s Hospital and performed in accordance with the Helsinki declaration.

Height and body weight were measured in subjects with light clothes and without hats or shoes. BMI was calculated as body weight in kilograms divided by height in meters squared. Waist was measured with a tape measure at the midaxillary line around the midpoint between the lower margin of the 12th rib and the iliac crest. Hipline was measured at the most prominent part of the buttocks. WHR was calculated as waist (cm) divided by hipline (cm). After 15 min of rest in a sitting position, blood pressure was measured at the right arm using an electronic sphygmomanometer.

Venous blood was drawn after a 10-hour overnight fast. The glucose oxidase method was used to detect fasting plasma glucose (FPG) and 2-hour plasma glucose (2hPG). FCp and 2-hour C-peptide (2hCp) were detected by radioimmunoassay (Beijing North Institute of Biological Technology, Beijing, China). HbA1c was detected by high performance liquid chromatography (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA). Total cholesterol (TC), triglyceride (TG), HDL, LDL, UA, creatinine (Cr), ALT and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) were detected by standard methods on a Hitachi 747 analyzer (Castle Hill, NSW, Australia). WBC was detected by nucleic acid staining on a XN-350 automated hematology analyzer (Sysmex Europe GmbH, Norderstedt, Germany).

MRI is an internationally recognized method for precisely measuring abdominal fat [62]. MRI scanning was performed on all participants using a 3.0 T clinical MRI scanner (Archiva, Philips Medical System, Amsterdam, The Netherlands). MRI scans were obtained by T1 weighted sequence at the umbilicus level between L4 and L5 vertebrae in the supine position. The scanning thickness was 1 cm, the scanning field was 42 cm × 42 cm. Six layers were scanned. SliceOmatic software 4.2 (Tomovision, Montreal, Canada) was used to process images. Two trained observers analyzed the images independently. If the difference between their results was <10%, then took the averages as the recorded results. If the difference was larger than or equal to 10%, a third person who did not know the results would reanalyze the images and take the averages of the two results with a difference <10%.

Obesity was defined as BMI ≥ 28.00 kg/m2 [63].

Before stool sample collection, all participants confirmed they did not take probiotics or yogurt in the past week and antibiotics in the past month. PSP Spin Stool DNA Plus Kits (Stratec Molecular GmbH, Berlin, Germany) were used for stool sample collection, storage, and DNA purification. About 150 mg of stool was collected in a stool collection tube with stool DNA stabilizer. Samples were kept at room temperature for up to 24 h and then transferred to −80℃. Bacterial DNA was extracted and purified according to the kit manual. A NanoDrop 2000 spectrophotometer was used in the preliminary testing for DNA quality and abundance. Qubit 2.0 fluorimeter (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., MA, USA) and agarose gel electrophoresis were further used to analyze the concentration, integrity, and purity of DNA samples.

A total amount of 700 ng DNA per sample was used as input material for the DNA sample preparations. Sequencing libraries were generated using NEB Next® Ultra DNA Library Prep Kit for Illumina® (NEB, USA). Index codes were added to attribute sequences to each sample. Briefly, AMPure XP system (Beckman Coulter, Beverly, USA) was used to purify the Chip DNA. After adenylation of 3′ ends of DNA fragments, the NEB Next Adaptor with hairpin loop structure were ligated to prepare for hybridization. Then electrophoresis was used to select DNA fragments specified in length. 3 µL USER Enzyme (NEB, USA) was used with size-selected, adaptor-ligated DNA at 37 °C for 15 min followed by 5 min at 95 °C before PCR. Then PCR was performed with Phusion High-Fidelity DNA polymerase, Universal PCR primers and Index (X) Primer. At last, PCR products were purified (AMPure XP system) and library quality was assessed on the Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100 system. After the cBOT cluster is generated, the library preparations were sequenced on an Illumina Novaseq 6000 platform and 150 bp paired-end reads were generated. Raw sequencing paired-end reads passed through standard quality control measures after human contamination, adapter regions, and low-quality reads were removed, as per Li et al. [64], [65].

Taxonomic classification and quantification were performed using MetaPhlAn2 with default settings [66]. Relative abundances of taxa were extracted from original outputs for each taxonomic level. Prokaryotic community profiles were constructed at the phylum, family, genus, and species levels for statistical analyses.

Alpha diversity indices detailing microbial community composition within samples were calculated using vegan [67] in R. Shannon index was used for alpha diversity evaluation based on the relative abundance of each taxonomic level. Statistical comparisons of healthy controls vs. obese subjects and pre- vs. post-operative subjects were performed by Wilcoxon rank sum test and rank sum test paired Wilcoxon signed-rank test. For estimating community dissimilarities, Bray-Curtis distances were calculated by phyloseq [68] and vegan [67] and Aitchison distances were calculated by robCompositions [69] based on the relative abundance of each taxon at phylum, family, genus and species level. Adonis from vegan package [67] in R was used for PERMANOVA tests to evaluate differences among groups (number of permutation set to 999). Within-group distance (Bray-Curtis distance among samples from the same group) indicating the community divergence and between-group distances (Bray-Curtis distance among samples from each of the two groups) indicating the difference between two communities were determined and compared by Wilcoxon rank sum test, paired Wilcoxon signed-rank and Kruskal-Wallis tests, where appropriate.

Species were filtered by 10% prevalence across all samples and the relative abundances of remaining species were used for statistical comparisons of healthy controls vs. obese subjects and pre- vs. post-operative subjects by Wilcoxon rank sum test and paired Wilcoxon signed-rank tests, respectively. The Benjamini-Hochberg FDR correction [70] was applied to adjust p values for multiple tests in R. CoDA were further performed for statistical test for the significant result with the ALDEx2 package in R [71]. Datasets were first transformed based on centered log-ratio (clr). Wilcoxon rank sum test for comparisons between healthy controls and obese subjects and paired Wilcoxon signed-rank tests between pre- and post-operative subjects were performed. Expected p value and expected Benjamini-Hochberg corrected p value were used for significance evaluation.

To evaluate the potential effects of the gut microbiome on obese parameters, we calculated Spearman’s correlations between species abundance and 24 clinical characteristics relevant to obesity. FDR correction was applied to each obese parameter across species.

Co-abundance networks were created using BAnOCC based on prevalent species (in over 20% of participants) within microbial communities in four participant groups for comparisons (healthy controls vs. obese subjects and pre- vs post-operative subjects) [72]. BAnOCC was executed with 5 chains, 5000 iterations, and 1000 warmup cycles to read convergence. For posterior inference, we used a 95% credible interval. Only significant correlations with an absolute estimated coefficient of at least 30% were used for further analyses of obese and healthy communities. We increased the absolute estimated coefficient to 60% for pre- and post-operative communities, for illustration purpose.

HUMAnN2 [73] was used with metagenomic reads to estimate gene family abundances. Reads per kilobase (RPK) values for gene family abundances were copies per million (CPM) normalized. MetaCyc pathway and species-coding pathway profiles were further annotated. Functional alpha based on MetaCyc pathway profiles were analyzed with Wilcoxon rank sum test and paired Wilcoxon signed-rank tests as for taxonomic profiles. Wilcoxon rank sum tests were detecting statistically significantly different MetaCyc pathway and species-coding pathways among groups. Spearman’s correlations were determined between significant pathways and important clinical characteristics. The absolute coefficient values from the significant correlations of the 6 obese parameters were selected and compared by using Wilcoxon rank sum tests.

Packages ggplot2 and gplots in R and matplotlib in Python were used for visualizations. Cytoscape v3.7.1 was used for co-abundance network and correlation visualization.

All participants provided informed consent. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated Sixth People’s Hospital and performed in accordance with the Helsinki declaration. Clinical trials were registered in the Chinese Clinical Trial Registry (ChiCTR-COC-17011355; ChiCTR-SOC-17011356).

The metagenome sequencing data supporting the conclusions of this article is available in the Sequence Read Archive data repository with accession number PRJNA597839. The clinical data supporting our results of this article is included within the article (Suppl. Table 8).

All authors have seen and approved the final version of the manuscript being submitted. The manuscript is not under consideration for publication elsewhere. Its publication is approved by all authors and by the responsible authorities where the work was carried out. If the manuscript is accepted, it will not be published elsewhere in the same form, in English or in any other language, including electronically without the written consent of the copyright holder.

This work was funded by the National Key R&D Program of China (2016YFA0502003).

Xiaomin Nie: Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing - original draft. Jiarui Chen: Formal analysis, Writing - original draft, Visualization. Xiaojing Ma: Investigation, Resources. Yueqiong Ni: Formal analysis, Methodology. Yun Shen: Investigation. Haoyong Yu: Conceptualization, Data curation, Resources, Writing - review & editing. Gianni Panagiotou: Conceptualization, Supervision, Methodology, Data curation, Writing - review & editing. Yuqian Bao: Conceptualization, Supervision, Data curation, Funding acquisition, Writing - review & editing.

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

The following are the Supplementary data to this article:

