Clostridium butyricum Modulates the Microbiome to Protect Intestinal Barrier Function in Mice with Antibiotic-Induced Dysbiosis

Clostridium butyricum MIYAIRI 588 (CBM 588) is a probiotic bacterium that has previously been used to prevent antibiotic-associated diarrhea. However, the underlying mechanism by which CBM 588 protects the gut epithelial barrier remains unclear. Here, we show that CBM 588 increased the abundance of Bifidobacterium, Lactobacillus, and Lactococcus species in the gut microbiome and also enhanced the intestinal barrier function of mice with antibiotic-induced dysbiosis. Additionally, CBM 588 significantly promoted the expansion of IL-17A-producing γδT cells and IL-17A-producing CD4 cells in the colonic lamina propria (cLP), which was closely associated with changes in the intestinal microbial composition. Additionally, CBM 588 plays an important role in controlling antibiotic-induced gut inflammation through upregulation of anti-inflammatory lipid metabolites such as palmitoleic acid, 15d-prostaglandin J2, and protectin D1. This study reveals a previously unrecognized mechanism of CBM 588 and provides new insights into gut epithelial barrier protection with probiotics under conditions of antibiotic-induced dysbiosis.

The intestinal microbiota contributes to many host physiological processes, including nutrient acquisition, development of the gut-specific immune system, and protection from infectious pathogens. To maintain a mutually beneficial relationship between the host and commensal microorganisms, the host immune system shapes the compositional balance of symbiotic commensal bacteria (Hooper et al., 2012). Recent studies have revealed that an imbalance in bacterial composition (dysbiosis) triggers a host pro-inflammatory immune response and induces various inflammatory and metabolic diseases (Elinav et al., 2011, Garrett et al., 2007, Vijay-Kumar et al., 2010).

To elucidate this mechanism, we investigated the immunological and metabolic interaction between the host and gut microbiome under antibiotic-induced dysbiosis. This work reveals two novel protective mechanisms of epithelial cells in the colon under CBM 588 treatment. First, CBM 588 induces IL-17A-producing γδT cells and IL-17A-producing CD4 cells in the colonic lamina propria (cLP), thus enhancing gut epithelial barrier function under antibiotic-induced dysbiosis. Second, CBM 588 plays an important role in controlling antibiotic-induced gut inflammation through upregulation of anti-inflammatory lipid metabolites such as palmitoleic acid, 15d-prostaglandin J2, and protectin D1. This study provides new insights into gut epithelial barrier protection with probiotics under conditions of antibiotic-induced dysbiosis.

Mounting evidence suggests that commensal Clostridium strains have major effects on the development of the gut immune system, thereby regulating gut homeostasis (Atarashi et al., 2011, Ivanov et al., 2009). Although CBM 588 has a major impact on the treatment of gastrointestinal diseases, the precise mechanism by which it prevents epithelial damage remains to be elucidated. To determine whether colonization by CBM 588 has an immunomodulatory and metabolic role in regulating gut homeostasis, we administered clindamycin and/or CBM 588 to ICR mice for 4 days (Figure 1A). We confirmed that colonization of CB was retained in the colon even after clindamycin administration (Figure 1B). The spore colony counts for the CBM 588 administration group and combination (clindamycin + CBM 588) group were similar to the total CB colony count in each group throughout the study period. The CBM 588 administration group showed the highest CB colony counts at day 2, and the counts rapidly decreased after CBM 588 administration was discontinued. During the treatment period, CB counts also increased in the combination group and decreased after CBM 588 administration was discontinued. However, bacterial regrowth was observed in the combination group, and the highest CB colony counts were on day 8. During the study period, CBM 588 showed a slight effect on body weight and no effects on stool consistency. The body weight of ICR mice was increased by CBM 588 administration and was not attenuated in mice given clindamycin (Figure 1C). Macroscopic findings revealed a slightly shortened colon length in mice administered CBM 588 (Figure 1D). We expected the clindamycin administration group to show shorter colon compared with the other group. However, our study showed the opposite result with previous in vivo study with colitis model induced by DSS, whereas the reason was unclear (Hayashi et al., 2013). In histological examination, only the clindamycin administration group samples showed abnormalities at day 8, such as (1) superficial epithelial necrosis and (2) presence of inflammatory cells, including mainly neutrophil infiltration (Figure 1E). In contrast, CBM 588 administration group samples showed histologically normal colon mucosa, even though clindamycin was administered concurrently. Compared with the control and CBM 588 groups, the clindamycin administration group showed a significantly higher histological inflammation score (Figure 1F). Although there was no significant difference, the combination group showed a numerically lower score than that of the clindamycin administration group. Additionally, we also noticed that the clindamycin administration group had significantly more epithelial damage in the colon (Figure 1G). Protective effects of CBM 588 on colon mucosa have also been observed in the acute DSS colitis model (Hayashi et al., 2013). Similar to our previous study (Hagihara et al., 2018), we found that CBM 588 administration prevented the development of clindamycin-induced colitis. However, the mechanism by which CBM 588 protects the colon from antibiotic damage remains unclear. To address this, we assessed gut microbiome, cytokine profiles in isolated colon tissue, and metabolic profile alternations in gut microbiome and host gut colon tissue.

To reveal the impact of CBM 588 on the gut microbiome under antibiotic treatment conditions, we conducted gut microbiome analysis. Changes to the murine gut microbiome at the phylum level, after either 4 or 8 days, is shown in Figure 2A. Bar graphs depict the mean percent abundances of bacterial families (≥1% relative abundance). Intestinal flora mainly consisted of members of the Firmicutes (Clostridiales, Lactobacillus) and Bacteroidetes phyla (Bacteroidales, Bacteroides) in the control group and CBM 588-administered group, respectively. Clindamycin administration resulted in dramatic increases in Proteobacteria phylum. However, the presence of members of the Bacteroidetes phylum dramatically decreased, and Firmicutes phylum members also decreased, although a dramatic increase was observed at day 8. Gut microbiome modification for the combination group was similar to that of the clindamycin administration group, at the phylum level.

We then investigated murine gut microbiome changes at the genus and species level at day 4 (Figure S1). The relative abundance of various families with percentages of sequences ≥0.001% of the bacterial community was analyzed (Figure 2E). The intestinal flora mainly consisted of Enterobacteriales for the clindamycin administration group and combination group, and CBM 588 administration resulted in dramatic increases in the Lactobacillales and Bifidobacteriales genera. However, the Clostridiales genera were reduced in the combination group. The relative abundance (%) of three species (Bifidobacterium, Lactobacillus, and Lactococcus) in the combination group were significantly increased compared with that in the clindamycin administration group at day 4 (Figure 2F). Bifidobacterium abundance was increased in the combination group, but relative abundances of Bifidobacterium in the control and clindamycin administration groups were nearly zero during the study period. Lactococcus in the combination group showed a higher relative abundance at day 4 than that seen in the other groups. Lactobacillus for only the clindamycin administration group was reduced at day 4, and microbiome analysis revealed that clindamycin induced gut dysbiosis in mice. Microbiomes were similar at the phylum level between the clindamycin administration group and combination group. However, CBM 588 impacted the gut microbiome, and some species, such as Bifidobacterium, Lactobacillus, and Lactococcus, exhibited an inverse correlation between the combination group and clindamycin administration group. These results suggest that clindamycin administration reduces diversity in the gut microbiome, even with concurrent administration of CBM 588. However, the composition of the microbiome was significantly different between the clindamycin administration group and the combination group. Therefore, these results support the hypothesis that host physiological processes to maintain gut homeostasis are affected differently in the clindamycin group and combination group under CBM 588 treatment.

Next, we sought to elucidate the mechanisms of gut epithelial protection exerted by an altered gut microbiome after CBM 588 administration. To address this, we isolated colon tissues from mice and assessed cytokine profiles with qPCR (the sequences of primers are summarized in Table S1) and ELISA. CBM 588 is known to exhibit a colitis-preventing effect in different experimental colitis models (Hayashi et al., 2013), and a previous study revealed that CBM 588 promotes Treg cell generation through induction of transforming growth factor β1 (TGF-β1) by dendritic cells (DCs) in a DSS-induced acute colitis model (Kashiwagi et al., 2015). Consistent with this previous report (Kashiwagi et al., 2015), CBM 588 administration enhanced the expression of TGF-β1 RNA (Figure 3A) and TGF-β1 protein (Figure 3B), compared with the clindamycin administration group and control group in this study. Although CBM 588-mediated TGF-β1 induction was mainly Toll-like receptor-2 (TLR-2) dependent, and the ERK-AP-1 kinase pathway played an important role (Kashiwagi et al., 2015), our study revealed that TLR-2 RNA expression levels increased with CBM 588 administration (Figure 3C).

Additionally, we found that various inflammatory cytokines were upregulated in the clindamycin administration group (Figures 3D and S2). However, consistent with previous report findings for the concurrent administration of CBM 588 (Hayashi et al., 2013), we found that CBM 588 reduced RNA expression levels of inflammatory cytokines, including interleukin-1β, IL-6, interferon-γ (INF-γ), cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α), while increasing IL-10 RNA expression levels in colonic tissue on day 8 after antibiotic treatment (Figure 3D). Likewise, TNF-α protein levels were also reduced with CBM 588 administration (Figure 3E). Another previous study revealed that the TGF-β1 pathway regulates inflammatory cytokines and promotes IL-10 cytokine production (Hayashi et al., 2013, Huang et al., 2013). These data suggest that the anti-inflammatory effect of CBM 588 on clindamycin-induced colitis is associated with a TGF-β1-dependent reduction of inflammatory cytokine expression and increase in anti-inflammatory cytokines. Also, for the CBM 588 administration groups, including the combination group, regulation of NF-κB and HSP-70 RNA expression levels was observed (Figure 3F). Although RNA expression is not the standard method used to assess NF-κB activation, these results might support a suppressive effect of CBM 588 on the migration and infiltration of leukocytes in the colon tissue (Figure 3G). In addition, antibiotic-induced dysbiosis occurs rapidly within several days, leading to altered bacterial metabolism and an impaired host proteome in mice and humans (Ferrer et al., 2014, Lichtman et al., 2016). Taken together, we found that clindamycin administration caused gut inflammation and CBM 588 modulated gut cytokine expression under antibiotic-induced dysbiosis through the TGF-β1 pathway, which is similar to previous studies using other murine DSS-induced colitis models (Kashiwagi et al., 2015, Hayashi et al., 2013). However, this signaling pathway did not enhance IgA antibody production from Treg cells in this study (Figure S3), which was like a previous study using a DSS-induced colitis model (Kashiwagi et al., 2015). The reduction of some inflammatory cytokines in the CBM 588 administration groups indicates that CBM 588 may have an effect on tight junction proteins of epithelial columnar cells and may change metabolic profiles in colonic tissue to reduce inflammation.

The intestinal barrier is established by epithelial columnar cells and is built of monolayered columnar epithelial cells that are tightly connected by tight junction proteins (TJs) such as occludin (OCLD), zonula occludens-1 (ZO-1), and claudins-4 (CLDN4) (Whibley and Gaffen, 2015). TJs are the structural feature that help prevent the entry of laminal antigens and microorganisms (Deitch, 2002). The secretory protein mucin-2 (MUC-2) is also the primary component of the protective mucous layer in the colon (Willemsen et al., 2003). To further characterize the protective effects of CBM 588 on the epithelial layer during antibiotic administration in mice, we determined MUC-2, ZO-1, CLDN4, and OCLN RNA expression levels in mouse colon tissue by qPCR. Our results indicate that CBM 588 upregulated RNA expression levels for all these genes (Figure 4A). CBM 588 administration also enhanced MUC-2 and ZO-1 protein expressions (Figure 4D). Although TJs are normally considered part of the physical barrier, they are largely affected by mucosal immune homeostasis within cLP as well as the composition of gut microbes and thus can be regarded as a translator between the microbiome and immune system (Martini et al., 2017, Ni et al., 2017, Alvarez et al., 2016). Several studies have revealed impaired TJ complexity and the downregulation of TJs in ulcerative colitis (UC), which could be a mechanism contributing to dysfunction of the intestinal barrier. In this study, CBM 588 increased mucin production and TJ expression levels, which have been found to lead to greater epithelial barrier integrity (Pastorelli et al., 2013, Perse and Cerar, 2012).

Moreover, previous studies have shown that, after acute intestinal injury, the intestinal-protective cytokine IL-17A could regulate TJs to limit excessive permeability and maintain barrier integrity (Lee et al., 2015). We therefore tested IL-17A RNA expression levels and IL-17A protein levels in the colon tissue and found that CBM 588 induced an increase in IL-17A levels in colon tissue at day 8 (Figures 4B and 4C). Mucosal T cells in cLP are master cells that play an important role in maintaining intestinal barrier homeostasis. Among the immune cells dwelling in intestinal mucosa, γδT cells are rare T cell subsets that have been found to be involved in both pathogenic and protective networks in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) (Paul et al., 2015). γδT cells in intestinal LP were found to be the major source of gut-protective IL-17A, and this γδT cell-derived IL-17A was found to promote the repair of damaged intestinal epithelium through adaptor molecule Act1-mediated regulation of TJ subcellular localization (Lee et al., 2015). Therefore, we hypothesized that IL-17A-producing γδT cells may be involved in the protective mechanism of CBM 588 on colon mucosa. IL-17A-producing γδT cells provide an immediate source of IL-17A at barrier sites, which supports a pro-inflammatory immune function. To investigate whether protective effects of CBM 588 were associated with the upregulation of IL-17A-producing γδT cells, we further isolated the lymphocytes in cLP and found an upregulation of γδT cells and IL-17A-producing γδT cells in the mouse combination group (Figures 5A and 5B), whereas no IL-17A-producing γδT cells were detected in the clindamycin administration group (p < 0.05). Additionally, as some other immune cells can produce IL-17A, such as Th17 cells and ILC3, we conducted additional evaluations of IL-17-producing CD8, CD4, and ILC3 cells in lamina propria (Figures 5C, 5D, S4A, and S4B) to clarify that CBM 588 affects other IL-17-producing cell populations. Consequently, CBM 588 were associated with the upregulation of CD4 cells and IL-17A-producing CD4 cells (Figure 5D). On the other hand, CD8 cell and ILC3 cell frequencies were not changed with CBM 588 (data not shown). Previous study results revealed that IL-17A produced by γδT cells and CD4 cells also activated the Act-1 pathway in epithelial cells to maintain barrier integrity (Lee et al., 2015) owing to the upregulation of MUC-2 production and strengthening of TJs attachments (Whibley and Gaffen, 2015, Lee et al., 2015). Additionally, CBM 588 does not ameliorate the colitis induced by clindamycin by using anti-IL-17A antibody (Figures 6A and 6B). IL-1β, TNF-α, and COX-2 RNA expressions were upregulated with anti-IL-17 antibody in CBM 588-treated mice, whereas IL-6 RNA expression was unaffected. Hence, the results suggested that IL-17 produced by γδ T cells and CD4 cell play an important role in protecting the colon from inflammation damage. Taken together, this study indicates that potential protective effects of CBM 588 on the intestinal barrier can be elucidated using an antibiotic-induced colitis model in ICR mice. CBM 588 upregulated the expression of IL-17-producing γδT cells and CD4 cells. Previous study identified three major RORgt + populations (γδT cells, CD4 cells, and ILC3s) in the colon after DSS treatment, and intracellular staining for IL-17A and IL-22 revealed that γδT cells were the major source of IL-17A in the cLP after DSS-induced injury, with more than 30% of cells expressing the cytokine and very few IL-22-producing γδT cells. In contrast to γδT cells, CD4 T cells only had a minor contribution to IL-17 and IL-22. Very few ILC3 cells were positive for IL-17A (Lee et al., 2015). Our results show that CBM 588 administration results in elevation of γδT cells and CD4 cells in cLP of mice and also upregulates IL-17A-producing γδT cells and CD4 cells in cLP. This helps preserve the integrity of antibiotic-damaged epithelial surfaces through the upregulation of TJs as well as mucin production.

Next, to elucidate the impact of CBM 588 on the underlying epithelial barrier protective mechanism against antibiotic damage, we investigated gut metabolic alterations by the resident microbiome. Phylogenetic Investigation of Communities by Reconstruction of Unobserved States (PICRUSt) was used to obtain relative Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway abundance information derived from metagenomics data (Langille et al., 2013) (Figures 7A and 7B). We found that the activities of detailed metabolic pathways showed considerable variation. The combination group had a metabolic pathway activity similar to that of the clindamycin administration group. On the other hand, the combination group had higher relative activity compared with the clindamycin administration group, especially for “starch and sucrose metabolism” and “fructose and mannose metabolism” under carbohydrate metabolism (Figure 7C). Certain bacteria of the intestinal flora are beneficial for gut health. Apart from immunomodulating capacities, these bacteria can also improve mucosal barrier integrity (Madsen et al., 2001). Hence, microbiome changes during CBM 588 treatment may contribute to attenuation of colon epithelial damages. Antibiotic-induced alteration of the mucous layer can lead to breaches in the epithelial barrier by specific bacteria, resulting in immune responses leading to chronic inflammation (Hagihara et al., 2018). Considering the increased abundance, only in the combination group, of bacterial species such as Bifidobacterium, Lactobacillus, and Lactococcus, that can use starch, sucrose, fructose, and mannose as energy sources, it appears that CBM 588 indirectly enhanced starch, sucrose, fructose, and mannose metabolism to produce glucose. Since mucin is an important source of carbohydrates for commensal bacteria, gut mucosal microbiome in inflamed regions can shift toward bacteria that metabolize “starch, sucrose, fructose and mannose” to maintain fixed amounts of energy production through the activation of carbohydrate metabolism (Kamada et al., 2013). Therefore, we believe that CBM 588 caused gut microbiome functional shifts toward increased carbohydrate metabolism through gut microbiome alternations.

In addition, we detected various metabolites in feces produced by the resident microbiome. Short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) are the end products of microbial fermentation of non-digestible carbohydrates and have been reported to increase mucous secretion (Cummings and Macfarlane, 1991, Shimotoyodome et al., 2000). SCFAs are absorbed by the distal ileum and colon and are important sources of nutrition for epithelial cells (Cummings and Macfarlane, 1991, D’Argenio and Mazzacca, 1999) to promote mucosal restitution, induce differentiation, and inhibit inflammation (D’Argenio and Mazzacca, 1999, Awad et al., 1995). Organic acids in feces at day 4 and day 8 are shown in Figure 7D. Acetate concentration was decreased in the combination group, compared with the clindamycin administration group. Additionally, n-butyrate was seen only in the control group and CBM 588 administration group at day 4 but was found in all groups at day 8. The combination group showed a similar n-butyrate concentration as the clindamycin administration group. However, the combination group showed a higher ratio of n-butyrate/lactate than the clindamycin administration group at day 8 (Figure 7E). These results suggest that CBM 588 enhances the efficiency of lactate use for the production of butyrate, which is an anti-inflammatory SCFA that contributes to colon health and promotes the synthesis of mucin (Brown et al., 2011). Taken together, our results suggest that dysbiosis caused by antibiotics affects gut metabolite production in the resident microbiome. However, CBM 588 enhances carbohydrate metabolites and the production efficiency of n-butyrate, thus protecting the colon epithelial barrier, along with mucin production. Additionally, CBM 588 enhanced “lipid metabolism,” “arachidonic acid metabolism,” and “α-linoleic acid metabolism” pathways (Figure 7F). These results suggest that gut microbiome function shifts toward the production of prostaglandins and specialized pro-resolving lipid mediators (SPMs), including protectin D1 and resolvin E, to counteract colon mucosa inflammation (Srivastava et al., 1982).

Colon metabolites are the end products of cellular regulatory processes and have a strong correlation to phenotype. Levels of metabolites are also a predictor of a biological system's response to genetic and/or environmental changes. Since we found gut metabolic profile changes in lipid metabolites by the resident microbiome, we hypothesized that host colon tissue metabolic profiles would also change along with gut microbiome alternations. The PCA score plots for the control group and each treatment group are shown in Figure 8A. Samples clustered according to the treatment status of the mice (p < 0.05). The clindamycin administration group clustered separately (p < 0.05) from the CBM 588 administration group and combination group at day 4 but not at day 8 (Figures S5 and S6). As shown in Figure 8B, a heatmap was generated by hierarchical Pearson clustering of metabolites of colon tissue. The results showed a significant difference between the control group, clindamycin administration group, CBM 588 administration group, and combination group (p < 0.05) for 18 significant metabolites. Palmitic acid (C16) and palmitoleic acid (C16, ω-7), the monounsaturated fatty acid of palmitic acid that is classified as a lipokine, showed a higher concentration in the CBM 588 administration groups than in the clindamycin administration group and control group. Previous studies have revealed that palmitoleic acid suppresses inflammatory cytokine production and attenuates inflammation in metabolically active tissues (Cao et al., 2008, Chan et al., 2015). Additionally, it reverses macrophage polarization through the activation of AMP-activated protein kinase via peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ (PPARγ) activation (Chan et al., 2015). Previous study revealed that many intestinal bacteria can produce palmitic acid (Nagatake and Kunisawa, 2019). Bacteria-derived sphingolipids, which are endogenously produced from palmitic acid by serine-palmitoyl transferase, can act as signaling molecules to modulate host immune responses in the gut (Hosomi et al., 2019). Then, some kinds of gut commensal bacteria in the Bacteroidetes phylum produce sphingolipids through bacterial serine-palmitoyl transferase. Hence, our metabolic profile analysis suggests that CBM 588 enhances palmitoleic acid production to reduce colon inflammation (Figure 8C).

Since we found that gut metabolites enhanced “α-linoleic acid metabolism” after CBM 588 administration (Figure 7F), we hypothesized that CBM 588 also enhances the production of other anti-inflammatory metabolites derived from α-linoleic acid in colon tissue. Accumulating evidence has shown ω3 lipid metabolites to be potent anti-inflammatory lipid mediators, such as protectin D1 and resolvin E, which have been identified as new SPMs important in intestinal protection (Gobbetti et al., 2017). The resolution of inflammation is an active process with a mechanism partly linked to decreased leukocyte-endothelial interaction and reduced granulocyte trafficking by SPM that limits the host response within the affected tissue. Failure of effective resolution may lead to tissue injury (Gobbetti et al., 2017, Goto et al., 2015). In this study, CBM 588 enhanced protectin D1 levels in colon tissue (Figure 8G) at day 4 and day 8. These results demonstrate that many types of metabolites with anti-inflammatory effects in host colon tissue, such as palmitoleic acid, 15d-PGJ2, and protectin D1, have enhanced production under CBM 588 treatment in an antibiotic-induced colitis model. This is the first study to show that probiotics enhance anti-inflammatory lipokines, PGs metabolites, and SPMs, to protect colon tissues from epithelial damage.

The intestinal epithelium is a critical barrier for protection against potential harmful microbiota or pathogens (Peterson and Artis, 2014). The epithelial barrier can be damaged with antibiotics, and CBM 588, used as a probiotic in Japan, has been shown to protect the epithelial barrier (Hagihara et al., 2018). However, the mechanism of protection is not entirely clear. Here we demonstrate that CBM 588 indirectly induces the differentiation of lymphocytes to IL-17A-producing γδT cells and IL-17A-producing CD4 cells in cLP to repair the damaged epithelium. Additionally, many types of metabolites with anti-inflammatory effects in host colon tissue, such as palmitoleic acid, 15d-PGJ2, and protectin D1, have enhanced production under CBM 588 treatment in an antibiotic-induced colitis model.

In conclusion, this is the first report that CBM 588 enhances gut epithelial barrier function in mice with antibiotic-induced dysbiosis by expansion of IL-17A-producing γδT cells. Additionally, gut metabolic profiles were found to produce anti-inflammatory substances, such as palmitoleic acid, 15d-PGJ2, and procaine D1, and commensal metabolic alterations occurred between the host and gut microbiome. Our results will provide insight into the development of new probiotic treatments.

Our study revealed some new insights for the mechanisms to show anti-inflammatory effects and epithelial protection effects with CBM 588. However, there are some limitations. First, in microbiome analysis, it was difficult to know the exact number of total bacteria. This issue made it difficult to know if the changes of relative abundances represent an increase in these bacteria or merely a shift in hierarchy. Hence, we compared relative abundances of specific bacterial species not only for clindamycin administration group and combination group data, but also for control and CBM 588 administration group data. Since the microbiome study results revealed that CBM 588 treatment did not affect gut microbiome α-diversity and β-diversity, relative abundances results will answer several differences derived from increasing bacteria or merely a shift in hierarchy. Consequently, we thought Bifidobacterium and Lactococcus were increased in the combination group, because they were increased in the CBM 588 administration group, compared with the control group. On the other hand, Lactobacillus was hierarchy increased in the combination group, because Lactobacillus did not increase in the CBM 588 administration group . Second, γδ T cells are more abundant in the intraepithelial region than in cLP, suggesting that it would be worth investigating the effect of CBM 588 on intraepithelial γδ T cells. However, previous study provides evidences that γδT cell populations in cLP are readily able to produce IL-17A protein upon activation and that these innate T lymphocytes are the early source of tissue-protective IL-17A during gut epithelial injury (Lee et al., 2015). Hence, we evaluated lymphocytes in cLP. Third, since we did not evaluate specific mechanism with knockout mice, we cannot conclude a definitive pathway. Additional study with IL-17A knockout mice could answer the research question stringently. However, previous study revealed that CBM 588 enhanced TGF-β1 expression of dendritic cell (Kashiwagi et al., 2015), and Bifidobacterium, Lactobacillus, and Lactococcus have previously been found to induce the differentiation of lymphocytes to γδT cell and Th17 cells to protect colon epithelial cells (Roselli et al., 2009, Eberl et al., 2003, Yu et al., 2019, Veldhoen et al., 2006). Therefore, we speculate that TGF-β1, Bifidobacterium, Lactobacillus, and Lactococcus, induced by CBM 588, play a key role in the enhanced expression of IL-17-producing γδ T cells and CD4 in cLP to protect colon epithelial cells. Also, detailed study is needed to determine the most important metabolite and its mechanism. However, as we mentioned, each metabolite has been revealed to have anti-inflammatory effect in colon and they are related to the activation of PPARγ to show the effects. Hence, we speculate that PPARγ can play an important role, but further study needs to clear which metabolites have bigger impacts to show the effect.

All methods can be found in the accompanying Transparent Methods supplemental file.

M.H., R.Y., A.M., K.O., M.T., and H.M. contributed to the study design. M.H. performed and/or contributed critically to all experiments and analyzed the data. In some experiments, Y.K. assisted in performing r16S sequencing. T.A., K.F., K.M., N.Y., S.O., T.O., and S.T. assisted in performing mass-spectrum assays. K.I. assisted in conducting flow cytometry analysis. T.M. and T.N. assisted in conducting tissue evaluation. M.H. and H.M. wrote the manuscript. All authors read and approved the manuscript.

The authors declare no competing financial interests.

Supplemental Information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2019.100772.

