Role of diet and its effects on the gut microbiome in the pathophysiology of mental disorders

There is emerging evidence that diet has a major modulatory influence on brain-gut-microbiome (BGM) interactions with important implications for brain health, and for several brain disorders. The BGM system is made up of neuroendocrine, neural, and immune communication channels which establish a network of bidirectional interactions between the brain, the gut and its microbiome. Diet not only plays a crucial role in shaping the gut microbiome, but it can modulate structure and function of the brain through these communication channels. In this review, we summarize the evidence available from preclinical and clinical studies on the influence of dietary habits and interventions on a selected group of psychiatric and neurologic disorders including depression, cognitive decline, Parkinson’s disease, autism spectrum disorder and epilepsy. We will particularly address the role of diet-induced microbiome changes which have been implicated in these effects, and some of which are shared between different brain disorders. While the majority of these findings have been demonstrated in preclinical and in cross-sectional, epidemiological studies, to date there is insufficient evidence from mechanistic human studies to make conclusions about causality between a specific diet and microbially mediated brain function. Many of the dietary benefits on microbiome and brain health have been attributed to anti-inflammatory effects mediated by the microbial metabolites of dietary fiber and polyphenols. The new attention given to dietary factors in brain disorders has the potential to improve treatment outcomes with currently available pharmacological and non-pharmacological therapies.

Psychiatric disorders have traditionally been considered diseases of the brain, with little role of the body or individual organs in their pathophysiology. Exceptions to this brain-focused approach have been pre-scientific concepts in Traditional Chinese Medicine, Ayurvedic Medicine, and Hippocratic Medicine, all of which attributed a significant role of the body, in particular the digestive system and diet, in modulating mental processes. Modern psychosomatic medicine has posited that stress, emotional, and cognitive factors can influence body functions.

Early evidence suggesting a role of altered gut to brain signaling in anxiety, depression, and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) have come from clinical anecdotal observations in patients with these diagnoses and associated GI manifestations. In many of these studies, psychiatric conditions were viewed as co-morbid conditions to the primary diagnosis of a gut disorder. In addition, a number of large epidemiological studies have implicated dietary factors in some of these disorders [1–5], both in terms of risk factors [6] as well as potential therapies [2, 5, 7]. However, none of these studies have been able to establish a causative role of the gut or dietary factors in psychiatric disease to date.

The importance of sufficient macro- and micronutrients for normal brain development and the role of nutrient deficiencies early in life for compromised brain function have long been known [8, 9]. While the great majority of studies to date has focused on dietary components such as amino acids and micronutrients that are completely absorbed in the proximal small intestine, there has been a growing interest in food molecules that are too large to be absorbed intact in the proximal gut, and whose absorption largely relies on metabolism by the gut microbiota in the distal small intestine and colon. The health benefit of these non-absorbable dietary components is crucially dependent on the composition and functions of the gut microbiome.

In this review, we will first discuss the emerging science about the bidirectional communication within the BGM system, and then review the existing animal and human literature supporting a role for diet and supplements in influencing the brain, psychiatric pathophysiology, and symptoms. We will focus on a limited and non-exhaustive number of mechanisms which have been implicated in several brain disorders, and which illustrate different ways by which diet-related gut microbial molecules, metabolites and mechanisms can affect the brain, in particular short chain fatty acids, tryptophan (Trp) metabolites, bile acid (BA) metabolites, and immune-mediated processes. From the large number of psychiatric disorders which have been associated with diet and the microbiome, we have limited the discussion to those disorders for which sufficient scientific evidence from preclinical and clinical studies is available to suggest a causative role. We will point out the paucity of well controlled longitudinal, interventional clinical studies (RCTs), which identify a causality between a specific diet, or supplements, and a psychiatric disorder. We will also discuss potential future implications of Nutritional Psychiatry, such as the proposed role of diagnostic testing of the gut microbiome to identify targets for personalized treatments and will discuss the potential for integrative approaches combining dietary interventions, pharmacotherapy, and cognitive behavioral approaches.

Emerging evidence supports a model of bi-directional communication between the central nervous system (CNS), the gut, and its microbiome, collectively referred to as the BGM system (Fig.
1). As discussed throughout this review, a number of dietary effects on the brain are mediated by the BGM system, and a general knowledge of this system is required to better understand many aspects of dietary modulation of the brain. The gut microbiome has been shown to interact with the brain primarily through three interacting pathways, namely neuronal, endocrine, and immunoregulatory [12, 16]. In turn, the CNS can directly influence the composition and function of the gut microbiota through the autonomic nervous system [17]. This top-down modulation can occur indirectly via regulation of gastrointestinal (GI) motility and transit, mucus secretion and permeability of the intestinal barrier, and luminal release of neurotransmitters. In addition, direct modulation of gut microbial gene expression and function by norepinephrine and likely other neurotransmitters released from postsynaptic sympathetic terminals has been reported [18]. Evidence for a similar release of stress-induced serotonin from enterochromaffin cells into the gut lumen has been reported, with some microbes exhibiting a serotonin transporter in their cell membranes [19]. The functional consequences of this luminally released serotonin (as well as other signaling molecules stored in specialized gut cells) remains to be determined.

Many microbes produce metabolites from dietary components (complex carbohydrates, amino acids), bodily secretions (BAs, estrogens), or chemical substances, so called xenobiotics (including pesticides and some medications). Many of these metabolites have been shown to influence brain structure and function in preclinical studies [20, 21].

In summary, the interactions of gut microbes with dietary tryptophan leading to the generation of multiple neuroactive metabolites, some of which have been implicated in several brain disorders, clearly shows the intricate connection between diet, the gut and certain gut microbes, and brain diseases.

Lipopolysaccharides (LPS) and microbe associated molecular patterns (MAMPs) contained in the cell wall of gram-negative microbes can interact locally with receptors on enteric neurons or vagal afferents (so called toll-like receptors or TLRs), with cells of the gut-based immune system, or exert their effects distally throughout the body, including the brain. Many studies have investigated the complex interactions between the gut microbiota and CNS inflammation. The gut microbiome can influence central immune activation through direct activation of the gut based immune system and trigger pro- and anti-inflammatory systemic immune responses [35]. The involvement of neuroinflammatory and neurodegenerative mechanisms related to the BGM system which may play a role in various brain disorders has recently been reviewed (Fig.
3) [13].

In summary, the close link between inflammatory signals originating in the gut in response to certain diets, in particular the Standard American Diet, and the crucial role of the gut microbiota in the generation of both pro- and anti-inflammatory signals emphasize the important, but incompletely understood interactions between diet, the gut microbiome, and brain diseases.

In view of the key role that diet plays in the composition, richness, and function of the gut microbiome, and in view of the existence of multiple close communication between the microbiome and the brain via a network of interacting gut brain communication channels, it has become clear that the interactions of diet and the microbiota plays a crucial role in brain structure and function throughout the lifespan in multiple ways. While early (“first thousand days”) effects of nutrition on the developing brain have long been known, chronic dietary influences on the adult and aging brain have received increasing attention, in the context of cognitive decline, AD and Parkinson’s disease. Alterations in this influence on the brain as a result of unhealthy diets, or the opportunity to use gut microbiome targeted dietary interventions as a therapeutic approach have become the focus of Nutritional Psychiatry. There are several ways in which diet promotes healthy brain structure and function, which include reduction and prevention of metabolic endotoxemia, neuroactive metabolites, and essential micronutrients.

A number of preclinical and clinical studies have demonstrated a link between the Standard American diet (SAD), and an increase in markers of systemic immune activation, a phenomenon referred to as metabolic endotoxemia [37, 40], As reviewed elsewhere [12], metabolic endotoxemia results from a compromised gut barrier (“leaky gut”), allowing contacts between gut microbial cell wall components and Toll-like receptors on dendritic cells, or after translocation of intact microbes and activation of other cells in the gut-associated immune system. An increase in microbial taxa with anti-inflammatory function, such as Faecalibacterium prausnitzii (F. prausnitzii), Eubacterium rectale (E. rectale), E. hallii, and Ruminococcus bromii (R. bromii), contributes to a reduction in metabolic endotoxemia [41]. Dietary factors that increase the relative abundance of these anti-inflammatory and other health-promoting bacteria include prebiotics such as oligosaccharides and polyphenols some of which have prebiotic-like effects [42]. Prebiotics are defined as substrates which benefit host health because they are utilized by health-promoting microorganisms [43]. One of the main effect of prebiotics is to increase the relative abundance and activity of gut microbial taxa involved in the metabolism of complex carbohydrates into SCFAs [44]. Several clinical studies have shown the beneficial effects of a diet rich in prebiotics on the diversity and richness of the gut microbiome, and on the reduction of systemic immune activation [6, 45]. Such Mediterranean-like diets can promote healthy brain function as demonstrated in a variety of dietary intervention trials in depression and in cognitive decline [1–3, 6].

If supported by controlled longitudinal intervention studies, such a dietary approach combined with pharmacological and behavioral interventions holds significant promise as a new therapeutic comprehensive approach for psychiatric disorders, utilizing knowledge discovered in the novel field of Nutritional Psychiatry [14].

A healthy diet may change the synthesis and secretion of neuroactive metabolites by gut microbes, which affects brain function and health. As discussed under neuroendocrine pathways of the last section, 95% of the body’s serotonin is produced in the gut by ECCs and enteric nerve cells with help of the microbiome [19]. The gut microbiome influences serotonin production and secretion as a direct result of the food we eat (in particular the amount of Trp), as diet modulates microbial composition [46]. A higher Trp concentration in the gut leads to increased serotonin synthesis in ECCs [18, 47]. In a rodent study, it was found that mice without an enteric microbiome had only half the amount of serotonin in the circulation when compared to mice with normal gut microbiota [48]. Stimulation of ECCs by microbes or intestinal contents moving through the gastrointestinal tract trigger the secretion of serotonin onto vagal sensory nerve endings and into the circulation and gut lumen [19]. This stimulation of the vagus nerve can result in signal relay to emotion-regulating brain areas [49]. In the CNS, serotonin produced and stored in the raphe nuclei as well as vagal signals generated by release of serotonin from ECCs is crucial to the regulation of sleep, appetite, pain sensitivity and mood [18].

Specific micronutrients such as omega-3 fatty acids and zinc may have an important effect on brain development and function independent of the gut microbiome [50]. Nutritional research has moved away from focusing on single nutrients because they are never consumed in an isolated manner in real life [14]. Rather, a diet made up of a variety of different nutritious foods has been shown to have the most beneficial effect on both physical and mental health [11]. Nutrients derived from diet, such as vitamins, minerals, poly-unsaturated fats, and amino acids support healthy brain function [51–55]. Many of these nutrients serve as cofactors for enzymes, supporting for example the synthesis of neurotransmitters, myelination, cell signaling, and metabolic pathways [56]. A few specific nutrients have been intensely studied in their anti-depressant effect such as omega-3 fatty acids, folate, s-adenosyl-methionine, inositol, and vitamins B3, B6, and C and may be even beneficial if supplemented but only if adjunctive to a gut-healthy diet [50, 51, 57]. A high ratio of omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acids can contribute to a pro-inflammatory state due to the inflammatory properties of AA-produced eicosanoids and anti-inflammatory properties of EPA-produced eicosanoids [58]. Furthermore, low omega-3 fatty acid ingestion has been reflected in mental diseases such as depression [59].

In summary, a healthy diet rich in fiber, polyphenols and micronutrients has been shown to exert a positive effect on gut microbial composition, a reduction of metabolic endotoxemia and neuroinflammation, and has been associated with improvements in brain health. Fiber has been associated with improved brain health and function in a variety of small-scale observational and interventional studies [60]. Serotonin production and release in the enteric nervous system is greatly influenced by dietary choices as well, with the amounts of complex carbohydrates and tryptophan contained in the diet being the most important factors. Certain dietary micronutrients such as zinc, omega-3 fatty acids, folate, and B vitamins may further influence brain development and function, the lack of which can result in mental dysfunction and contribute to the development of brain disorders.

Diet-related alterations in BGM system interactions have been implicated in several psychiatric and neurological disorders summarized in Table
1. In the following, we will discuss a limited number of these disorders for which significant clinical evidence supports such a relationship.

Depression (major depressive disorder, MDD, or clinical depression) has been increasing in prevalence, in particular in younger age groups [61]. Traditional therapies consist of centrally acting medications often in combination with cognitive behavioral strategies or other psychological strategies.

In summary, the benefits of a largely plant-based diet in depression summarized above is likely to include anti-inflammatory effects mediated by increased production of SCFAs and polyphenols, an improvement of intestinal permeability and a resulting reduction in metabolic endotoxemia. Additional benefits from increased consumption of omega-3 fatty acids and trace minerals may relieve the deficiency of certain important nutrients for mood and overall brain health.

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disease which currently affects over 40 million people worldwide [74]. The disease is characterized by memory loss and a loss of executive function of the brain and can be comorbid with depression, anxiety, and insomnia [75].

In summary, evidence from preclinical, epidemiological, and a limited number of intervention studies supports the concept that a largely plant-based diet, like the Mediterranean diet is conducive to improved cognition, and a reduction in cognitive decline. These clinical benefits are associated with a reduction in levels of certain secondary BAs, alterations in brain structure, and positive changes in gut microbial composition.

Several clinical studies have shown a positive effect of a ketogenic diet on patients with AD or mild cognitive impairment (MCI), consistent with preclinical results [87–91] (Table
1).

In summary, evidence from both preclinical and early-stage clinical studies suggests a therapeutic benefit of a ketogenic diet in improving cognitive function in particular in patients with advanced AD despite the heterogeneity of interventional dietary studies. However, there is a paucity of evidence supporting the effect of a ketogenic diet on the prevention of AD development or in the treatment of MCI, an area of ongoing research.

Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is characterized by impaired social communication and persistent repetitive behavior present in early development and significantly interfering with proper social functioning [102]. Over the past decade and a half, the prevalence of ASD has been increasing dramatically with ASD affecting one in 54 children in the United States today [103]. ASD is often comorbid with gastrointestinal symptoms, anxiety and immune dysregulation [104]. The GI symptoms often associated with ASD include diarrhea, abdominal pain and discomfort, gastric reflux, and alterations in bowel habits [105, 106].

In summary, dietary interventions as assessed in these small-scale, poorly controlled clinical studies suggest that a gluten-free, casein-free diet may produce positive effects on symptomatology and severity in some ASD patients, as well as improvements in comorbid GI problems. However, due to the small sample size and the lack of blinding and randomization in most of these studies, dietary interventions in the treatment of ASD remain to be further researched in well-controlled, large-scale trials. Such studies should also evaluate the potential role of diet induced changes in gut microbial function in symptom improvement.

Although epilepsy is a treatable condition with 1–3% prevalence, 30% of patients continue to have drug‐resistant epilepsy (DRE), or recurrent seizure activity despite taking multiple antiepileptic drugs [124]. The pathophysiology has not been fully elucidated, but intestinal dysbiosis has been implicated, thus making ketogenic diet a potential therapy that can exert antiepileptic effects due to changes in the microbiota. A landmark study in mouse models of epilepsy showed that a ketogenic diet protected against refractory epileptic seizures only in mice that were colonized with certain gut microbiota compared to mice treated with antibiotics [125]. The underlying mechanism involved a change in microbial abundances, leading to a decline in the synthesis of GABA in the periphery while increasing GABA in the CNS to exert antiseizure effects.

When viewed together, there is emerging but mixed clinical evidence tying the ketogenic diet to changes in the gut microbiota and improvements in seizure activity in subsets of patients. Given the dysbiosis that is a consequence of the ketogenic diet, empirical trials of pre- or probiotics may be considered in conjunction with a ketogenic diet in children with DRE, and longer-term RCTs are needed to assess the feasibility, including side effects.

Published studies collectively show possible therapeutic benefits from nutritional interventions in chronic brain disorders, an important step in an area which has not seen major advances in the development of novel medications [130]. However, several challenges remain before the role of diet in the treatment of depression, anxiety, cognitive decline, epilepsy, AD and ASD is firmly established (summarized in Table
2). While a growing list of findings observed in animal models of these diseases strongly suggest a causative role of the gut microbiome and indirectly diet in behavioral and biological alterations, the translatability of preclinical findings into human psychiatric diseases has been challenging in part due to heterogeneity of human study populations, interindividual differences in genetic vulnerability, confounding environmental factors and considerable differences in structure and function between the human and mouse brain. In addition to the challenges to clearly identify a causative role of the gut microbiome, high quality reports about diet-induced normalization of disease-associated dysbiosis which result in behavioral improvements are largely missing. Detailed and standardized characterization of the gut microbial composition down to the strain level, and functional characterization using shotgun metagenomics, meta-transcriptomics and metabolomics has only been used in a minority of recent studies. Information about the benefits of certain diets largely comes from cross sectional, epidemiological studies. These studies have primarily shown a benefit of a largely plant based diet in slowing cognitive decline [6, 85], or in being associated with a lower rate of depression [1–3]. However, there is a paucity of high quality, randomized controlled clinical trials, and with the exception of a few studies in depression, cognitive decline and in intractable epilepsy, there is relatively little evidence to date that such dietary interventions show a significant therapeutic benefit. The implementation and control of a standardized diet over long periods of time is challenging. The assessment of dietary habits in most studies has relied on questionnaire data which have been notoriously unreliable. Furthermore, in the reviewed publications, the way diet was measured using different questionnaires and interviews varied greatly between each study, leaving many variables unaccounted for. Future studies may use metabolomics (“Fodomics”) to objectively determine the dietary habits of study participants [131, 132].

A major unresolved question is the disease specificity of altered gut microbial signaling mechanisms. As discussed in this review, there appears to be a limited number of such mechanisms, which have been identified in different brain disorders, including but not limited to immune signals, anti-inflammatory mechanisms (SCFAs), tryptophan metabolites, and secondary bile acids. Even though comprehensive assessment of gut microbial functions is not available for all disorders to date, it is plausible that a relatively limited number of such signaling mechanisms in genetically vulnerable individuals plays a role in such different disorders as ASD, depression, AD and MDD. Consistent with this hypothesis are reported findings from the American Gut Project showing that individuals who reported a mental disorder such as depression, schizophrenia, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) or bipolar disorder had more in common with other people with mental disorders, in terms of the bacteria makeup of their gut microbiomes, than they did with their mentally healthy pairs. This observation held true in both U.S. and UK populations as well as in males and females [133].

Until an objective therapeutic benefit of specific dietary interventions has clearly been established, practical implications are largely limited to the general recommendation of a healthy, largely plant-based diet similar to the traditional Mediterranean diet which has clearly been shown to be associated with an increased abundance of diverse and rich gut microbiome species with a high abundance of anti-inflammatory SCFA producers, including F. prausnitzii, E. rectale, Roseburia and A. mucinophilia (Table
3). As discussed extensively in this review, systemic low grade immune activation due to increased gut permeability and reduced abundances of SCFA producers appears to be a shared feature of several common chronic brain disorders and increasing the prevalence of butyrate producing microbes in the gut should be a general therapeutic strategy. High quality RCT demonstrating benefits beyond adherence to such a “microbiome-friendly” diet by the intake of supplements in the form of pre, pro- or postbiotics (substances produced through and released by the metabolic activity of the microbiome) are currently not available, even though they may have small additive therapeutic effects [134]. For example, the intake of a consortium of butyrate producers may improve metabolic abnormalities and reduce systemic immune activation [135]. The evaluation of the potential therapeutic benefit of fecal microbial transplants in brain disorders, mimicking such effects previously reported in animal models has shown inconsistent and time limited success [123], with the exception of the study in ASD discussed earlier. However, confirmation of these findings in a RCT is essential before recommending it as an effective treatment. Diagnostic testing of the gut microbiome to develop personalized dietary approaches, or to determine the future risk for the development of chronic brain disorders is in its early stages, and the benefits of such testing have not been demonstrated in prospective, longitudinal studies. The usefulness of basing personalized, specific dietary and supplement recommendations on stool microbiome assessments is awaiting objective evidence, even though such testing, together with assessment of genetic risk factors may become a useful approach in the future. For now, personalization of a largely plant based diet to avoid gastrointestinal side effects in particular bloating, gas and abdominal discomfort in patients with psychiatric diagnoses and often comorbid gastrointestinal symptoms, is best done empirically. Patients should be started on a Mediterranean-like diet and encouraged to carefully identify food items that reproducibly generate symptoms. Elimination of a small number of such foods will enable the patient to avoid GI symptoms, while eating the optimal, personalized diet for brain health. Despite the limitation of currently available information, there are several recommendations that are supported by a body of preclinical and clinical evidence, including the adherence to an anti-inflammatory, Mediterranean type diet, and the inclusion of dietary counseling in addition to pharmacological and behavioral multidisciplinary treatment strategies.

One of the major challenges of Nutritional Psychiatry Research is to gradually change the prevalent mindset shared by a majority of researchers and practitioners that psychiatric disorders are diseases of the brain, and do not involve the gut and its microbiome. An education of mental health professionals about the crucial role of diet and its effect on brain gut microbiome interactions, and the need for and interdisciplinary approach to this field is necessary to make progress in this area of psychiatry [136].

Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

