Research Progress of the Gut Microbiome in Hybrid Fish

Fish, including hybrid species, are essential components of aquaculture, and the gut microbiome plays a vital role in fish growth, behavior, digestion, and immune health. The gut microbiome can be affected by various internal and/or external factors, such as host development, diet, and environment. We reviewed the effects of diet and dietary supplements on intestinal microorganisms in hybrid fish and the difference in the gut microbiome between the hybrid and their hybrids that originate. Then, we summarized the role of the gut microbiome in the speciation and ecological invasion of hybrid fish. Finally, we discussed possible future studies on the gut microbiome in hybrid fish, including the potential interaction with environmental microbiomes, the effects of the gut microbiome on population expansion, and fish conservation and management.

The host and its microbiome are regarded as a unique biological entity holobiont, including the genome, which is called the hologenome [1]. The combination of complex microbiota and genes in the intestine are collectively referred to as the gut microbiome [2]. Animal hosts maintain a long, close, and complex relationship with their gut microbiome [3]. The gut microbiome plays a vital role in the nervous system development [4], behavior [5], immunity [6], food digestion, and metabolism [7] of the host. Gut microbiota are highly specialized microbial communities with a complex composition that is affected by many interactions among microorganisms, host, diet, and the environment [8]. Host phylogeny and diet are the two main factors shaping the animal gut microbiome [9,10,11,12,13,14].

The influencing factors and physiological functions of fish intestinal microbiota are two critical issues in NGS analyses [33]. Most studies have explored the effects of various host and environmental factors on the bacterial community composition of gut microbiota. Limited studies have analyzed the beneficial and harmful effects of the gut microbiota on the host [15]. However, there are many valuable bacterial species in the intestines of fish, including Cetobacterium spp. and Lactobacillus spp. [34]. Hybrid fish are indispensable components of fish species and are essential in aquaculture. We review recent research on the gut microbiome and ecological problems in hybrid fishes and discuss possible future research to improve our understanding of the gut microbiome in fish.

Hybridization is a basic step in the long-term evolution of organisms, which may lead to the production of new species. Heterosis is a complex biological phenomenon where the hybrid offspring show superior natural characteristics, when compared with their parents [35,36]. Heterosis occurs in fish, and hybrid fish have advantages of faster growth performance, higher immunity, improved ecological adaptability, and an enhanced tolerance for transportation. Therefore, as wild catch fisheries can no longer support the world consumption of seafood, fish heterosis has been widely assisting aquaculture since the 1980s [37,38,39,40,41]. However, even the improvements made by heterosis may not be enough for the growing world consumption rate of fish [35].

We, firstly, aimed to provide a whole picture of the diet or dietary supplement effects on the fish gut microbiome (Table 1) [15,20,49,50]. Then, we focused on the relationship between the diet and the hybrid fish gut microbiome. We found that many studies have explored changing the diet or dietary additives on the composition and function of the hybrid fish gut microbiome and their promotion of the growth and health of mixed fish (Table 2), but rare in the comparison between the hybrid and their hybrids’ origin.

Unknown, the information is unclear in the reference.

Infectious diseases caused by various pathogens have severely harmed the health of aquatic organisms around the world [125]. Antibiotics have been widely used as feed supplements to treat intestinal diseases in fish and have become indispensable in human health [33,126,127]. A short-term (6 days) dietary antibiotic mixture (vancomycin, neomycin sulfate, and metronidazole) can improve the lipid metabolism in hybrid groupers (Epinephelus fuscoguttatus ♀ × E. lanceolatus ♂) fed medium- and high-lipid diets. However, antibiotic treatments can also strongly alter intestinal microbiota by reducing the relative abundance and diversity of hybrid grouper gut microbiota, resulting in a significant increase in the proportion of Bacteroidetes and a decrease in the proportion of Firmicutes [93]. Long-term antibiotic supplementation can cause several side effects on fish health [127,128,129]. Presently, the pollution and spread of antibiotic-resistant genes caused by the long-term abuse of antibiotics have become a global problem [130]. Recently, probiotics and prebiotics are an emerging strategic approach for sustainable aquaculture, as they do not cause environmental pollution or public health hazards [51,131,132].

Probiotics are beneficial microorganisms that can modulate intestinal microbial composition and improve the host health status [133,134]. Probiotics are commonly used in the aquaculture industry as feed or water additives [20]. The essential probiotic microorganisms employed in aquaculture are lactic acid bacteria (LAB) species [135,136] and Bacillus spp. [52,137]. The other general probiotic species used in fish are Saccharomyces, Clostridium, Enterococcus, Shewanella, Leuconostoc, Lactococcus, Carnobacterium, and Aeromonas [20]. Fish are vulnerable to various pathogenic microorganisms, and innate immunity provides an initial line of defense [138]. The addition of probiotics to the diet plays a vital role in stimulating fish immune responses, and further promotes the innate and adaptive immune system [139]. For an example, Bacillus subtilis strain 7k, isolated from the gastrointestinal tract of hybrid hulong grouper (Epinephelus fuscoguttatus × E. lanceolatus), could be used in grouper culture to stimulate growth, enhance immunity and promote health in the fishes [94]. Studies reveal that O. mykiss fed different types of probiotics increased the expression of the TGF-β gene, which regulates fish immunity [140,141,142]. TGF-β levels increased in juvenile hybrid tilapia (O. niloticus ♀ × Oreochromis aureus ♂), after consuming a diet supplemented with Bacillus subtilis C-3102 [95], and the same occurred in Koi carp (Cyprinus carpio) [143]. HWF™ is a paraprobiotic and postbiotic supplementary diet using inactive and beneficial bacteria, and is considered an efficient therapeutic agent in fish. Feeding hybrid sturgeons (Acipenser baerii × Acipensers chrenckii) with HWF™ improved their growth and immunity by changing the composition and diversity of the gut bacteria, developing their healthy gut microbiota [96].

Prebiotics are an innovative strategy, providing a dietary supplement to improve growth development and the immune system by regulating gut microbiota [144]. Prebiotics are generally non-digestible oligosaccharides added to fish feed as dietary components to promote the proliferation of specific beneficial microorganisms in the intestine and, thus, enhance host health [145]. Previous research has shown that prebiotics can decrease the adherence and colonization of pathogenic microorganisms in the intestinal tract to improve the general immunity of the host by increasing the number of lactic acid bacteria, especially Bifidobacterium [20,146,147]. Fructo-oligosaccharides, galactooligosaccharides, mannan-oligosaccharides (MOS), xylooligosaccharides (XOS), inulin, lactulose, and lactosucrose are common prebiotics used in various animals, including humans [20]. The level of gut lactic acid bacteria was significantly increased in hybrid catfish (Pangasianodon gigas × Pangasianodon hypophthalmus) fed with diets containing 0.6% xylooligosaccharides (XOS) [97]. In addition, several studies have reported that inulin, fructooligosaccharides, xylooligosaccharides, galactooligosaccharides, and arabinoxylan-oligosaccharides can affect growth development, immune health, and the composition and/or diversity of the gut microbiota in different fish species [53,97,148,149,150,151]. Indeed, many researchers have reported the effect of prebiotics on the gut microbiota in fish, such as grass carp [54], Siberian sturgeon [53], Nile tilapia [55], and European sea bass [152].

It is worth noting that prebiotic supplementation is only beneficial when a moderate volume is provided; prebiotics at a high concentration can be harmful to the host. Excessive prebiotics may cause an imbalance in the gut microenvironment, which decreases the digestive capacity in fish intestines. A previous study revealed that a high concentration of inulin could damage the enterocytes of Salvelinus alpinus [157]. This may explain why 0.4–0.6% COS supplementation was optimum in hybrid groupers [100].

Fishmeal (F.M.) is the most widely utilized high-quality protein source in aquatic feed and has many advantages [158]. However, fishmeal production cannot meet the growing needs of the aquaculture industry due to its rapid development, which is causing a severe impediment to industry development [101,159]. Therefore, using plant proteins is an innovative solution for sustainable aquaculture [160,161].

Another fishmeal replacement protein is soybean meal (SBM). SBM has been widely considered an inexpensive FM replacement [164]. Nevertheless, anti-nutritional factors in SBM can negatively affect the intestinal morphology of fish [165]. Research reveals that bioprocesses (such as soybean meal ingredients) can reduce the intestinal microorganism diversity in hybrid striped bass (Morone chrysops × M. saxatilis) [105]. It is challenging to find a suitable fish meal substitute for various fish, and protein substitutes have excellent potential and are important future research topics.

No living organisms exist in isolation from the microbial world, and microbial symbiosis and speciation profoundly shape the biodiversity composition. Animal hosts and microbiomes are closely interconnected and interact over long evolutionary timeframes. They can even be regarded as a unique biological entity-holobiont and include their entire genome, called the hologenome [1]. Diverse and complex interactions exist between hosts and microorganisms. Microorganisms play essential roles in host physiology, health, and survival. Microorganisms can even alter host reproduction [166], resulting in host embryo death [167,168,169,170] and affect the host gametic integrity and embryonic viability, which may be closely related to the formation of new species [45,171]. The microorganisms and their interactions with hosts are potentially important factors in stimulating the formation of new species [172].

In the gut microbiome in hybrid fish research, differences in the gut microbiome between hybrid offspring and parents have been observed. In lake whitefish (Coregonus clupeaformis), the gut microbiome is significantly different between the F1 hybrids and their parents, especially the abundance difference between Firmicutes and Proteobacteria [106]. The research also found the interactions of the host-microbiota-environment demonstrated three different evolutionary paths in the gut microbiome [106]. Similarly, the gut characteristics of hybrid fish from herbivorous blunt snout bream (Megalobrama amblycephala) and carnivorous topmouth culter (Culter alburnus) differ from their parents. The microbial community in the hybrid topmouth culters was markedly distinct from their parents, and varied in the cellulose content in the gut [39]. One study found that the evolutionary characteristics of hybrid fish progeny from Megalobrama amblycephala and Culter alburnus may be manifested in dietary adaptation and choice; the interactions between gut microbiota and host genetics contributed to hybrid fishes adapting to herbivorous diets more than carnivorous diets [185]. Compared to the parents, the hybrid offspring of two invasive North American carp, Hypophthalmichthys nobilis and Hypophthalmichthys molitrix, harbor different gut microbiome compositions and display higher alpha diversity than their parents [107].

There are still few studies directly comparing gut microbiome between parental and hybrid progeny. However, it has been shown that existing differences in intestinal microbiota between captive parents and hybrid fishes’ offspring exist under a controlled environment [106]. There is no doubt that diet will affect the gut microbiome composition and growth performance of the host, and under the same dietary conditions (Artemia and mixed diet), the taxonomic composition of transient gut microbiota between both whitefish (Coregonus clupeaformis) parental species and their reciprocal hybrids showed a slight pattern of differentiation, which, within the Artemia diet group, meant a higher abundance for Firmicutes, but lower for Proteobacteria, was observed in hybrids in comparison with their parents’ whitefish, while the opposite result was found in the mixed diet group, where there was a higher abundance of Proteobacteria but it was lower for Firmicutes. In addition, in the abundance composition of some specific bacterial genera, the two reciprocal hybrids, and their parents also showed the opposite pattern, that F1 D♀N♂ has more specific bacterial genera than its parents, while F1 N♀D♂ with fewer specific bacterial genera than its parents. In the hybridization experiment between whitefish and omul (Coregonus migratorius), the researchers found that the hybrid progeny had a lower alpha diversity (e.g., Shannon index) in hindgut microbiota than the parents [186].

Recently, our study reported a direct comparison of the similarities and differences in gut microbiome (composition and potential function) among bighead carps (Hypophthalmichthys nobilis, B), silver carps (Hypophthalmichthys molitr, S) and their hybrid offspring (SB and BS) in ponding experiments [107]. The hybrid gut microbiome displays the admixed pattern at the community level and harbors the relatively high alpha diversity (e.g., phylogenetic diversity). For example, the hybrid fish had intermediate abundances of Cyanobacteria and Bacteroidetes in the foregut, while Fusobacteria are significantly enriched in parents in the hindgut. Moreover, the hybrid gut microbiome’s predicted function shows the enrichment in the genes coding for putative enzymes involved the diet utilization, which suggests the potential benefits to their local adaptation.

Gut microbiota can enhance the adaptability of the host to the environment and improve the successful invasion rate of some invasive species [187]. For invasion success, the species requires a dispersal ability, environmental tolerance, phenotypic plasticity, and associated epigenetics [188,189]. Host shifts can lead to phytophagous insects becoming invasive species [190]. It has already been demonstrated that the gut microbiome plays a vital role in phytophagous insect invasion success [191], and gut bacteria can assist in the successful invasion of insect species by regulating epigenetic factors related to the host [192]. Similarly, some biological mechanisms can enhance the success rate of invasive species, such as genetic diversity [193], reproductive rate [194], food resources [195], and hybridization [44,196].

Therefore, there are complex and close relationships between hybridization, the gut microbiome, and bio-invasion. Bighead carp and silver carp are invasive species, characterized by various hybridization in the Mississippi River Basin [107]. There is higher alpha diversity in the foregut microbiota in the hybrid offspring, and an increasing discrepancy also occurs between the foregut and hindgut. Similarly, the hybrids had a higher proportion of putative genes coding for putative enzymes related to the digestion of filter-feeding phytoplankton (Cyanobacteria, cellulose, and chitin) than their parents. The improved putative enzymes could encourage the utilization of new food resources by the gut microbiota and, therefore, improve survival, environmental adaptation, and invasion by hybrid fish. Therefore, the gut microbiome and host genome may synergistically promote bigheaded carp invasion in the United States [107].

The current research focuses on fish, not hybrid fish. However, environmental microbiota impacts may also occur in hybrid fish.

The main determinant of fish gut microbiota is the natural environment, and fish intestinal microbiota symbionts are generally obtained from the environment [197] by neutral processes, such as drift and diffusion, which produce most of the microbial diversity [198]. The microorganisms transmitted from the environment to the fish intestine are mainly derived from two paths: the foodborne microorganisms carried by prey and the microorganisms in the water, and most of the environmental microbiota remain temporarily in the fish gut [199]. In most fish species, the ontogeny and colonization of gut microbiota in the early stages of life rely on the horizontal transmission of environmental microbiota [200]. Juvenile zebrafish (Danio rerio) acquire gut symbiotic bacteria from the water environment after hatching, which may promote the development and function of their intestines [201]. Similar patterns are observed in wild Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar), discus (Symphysodon aequifasciata) [200], grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon idellus), Mucha perch (Siniperca chuatsi), and southern catfish (Silurus meridionalis). The composition of the gut microbiota community of juvenile fish was more similar to the habitat water environment than the adults [197,200]. However, fish gut microbiota often differ from their surrounding environment after becoming adults [202]. Therefore, environmental microorganisms play an important role in shaping the gut microbiota in the early juvenile fish stages and, as fish mature, the environmental factors are less influential because the gut microbiota gradually differentiate from the environmental microbiota, showing individual variations [197,203].

The gut microbiota of fish are mainly Proteobacteria and Firmicutes, whereas amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals contain mainly Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes. The excessive reproduction and presence of Proteus may be a sign of ecological imbalance in the gut microbial community of mammals [204], as many symbiotic Proteus bacteria can translate into pathogens, and infect and promote inflammation in the host under specific conditions. Many studies have demonstrated that, regardless of the fish living environment, the gut microbiome is composed of a common core microbiome [205]. Major environmental microorganisms are rarely observed in fish intestines [49]. Proteus dominate the gut microbiota of most fish species [206]. The Proteus abundance can increase with the growth and nutritional level of the fish (from herbivorous to carnivorous). Conversely, the abundance of Firmicutes usually decreases with increasing nutritional levels [202]. The gut microbiome not only reflects the microorganisms in its surrounding environment but also characterizes the specific selection of the environmental microbiome by the host in grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon idellus) [207], silver Prussian carp (Carassius auratus gibelio) [208], and zebrafish (Danio rerio) [209]. Notably, the higher proportion of Proteus in the fish intestines indicates the fish host has specifically selected Proteus from the habitat water or Proteus has outperformed the other environmental bacterial taxa in the water. This discrepancy is an urgent problem needing to be explored [16].

The gut microbiome can promote the successful ecological invasion of hybrid fish, which makes them occupy favorable ecological niches and further improves the potential for population expansion. Following Darwin’s theory of evolution, this process greatly improves the potential of hybrid fish to evolve into new species in the future (Figure 1). The gut microbiome plays a role in speciation, but its degree of impact remains unclear. Furthermore, the high genomic similarity between bighead and silver carp, and an over 90% embryonic viability in all crosses, indicate that interspecific hybridization between the carps might have promoted their range expansion [44]. In the future, the role of the gut microbiome in population expansion of hybrid species should not be ignored. It is highly significant for us to better combine the genome and metagenome to improve our understanding of the ecological problems of hybrid fish. The fish gut flora and fecal materials discharged into the water may reflect their diet preferences, physiological behaviors, and presence in the river [210], allowing gut microbiota to potentially monitor fish invasion and population expansion, which is an important research issue in fish conservation and management in the future (Figure 1).

For a long time, the source of gut microbiota has been an attractive research topic. Environmental microbiome transmission plays an important role in animal gut microbiota, and the differences between terrestrial and aquatic environments cause the gut of aquatic animals to be very different from that of terrestrial organisms, including fish and aquatic mammals. Research shows 13% of the gut microbiota of threespine stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus) comes from the surrounding water environment and 73% from prey [199]. In addition, in most fish species, the ontogeny and colonization by gut microbiota in the early stages of life mainly occur through the horizontal transmission of environmental microbiota [200]. Juvenile zebrafish (Danio rerio) acquire gut symbiotic bacteria from the water environment after hatching, potentially promoting the development and function of the intestines [201]. Similar patterns are observed in wild Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar), discus (Symphysodon aequifasciata) [200], grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon idellus), Mucha perch (Siniperca chuatsi), and southern catfish (Silurus meridionalis), and the composition of the gut microbiota community of juvenile fish was more similar to the habitat water than the adults [197,200]. In addition, different fish tissue types, such as skin, gills, and intestines, may also be the main determinants of microbiota diversity and composition [48]. Successful hybrid fish invasion depends on the relationships and interactions between an individual’s characteristics (age and gender), gut microbiome, environmental microbiome, and post-mating reproductive isolation, associated with environmental microbial transmission. Future research is required to assist our understanding of these interactions (Figure 1). In addition, the aquatic environment can become a reservoir of antibiotic-resistant genes (ARGs), providing an ideal path for the acquisition and dissemination of ARGs [211]. Aquatic animals, such as fish, are direct witnesses and victims of ARG-water pollution. Therefore, wild fish can be recipients and disseminators of ARGs in aquatic environments [130]. At present, there are few studies assessing ARG pollution and transmission in wild hybrid fish, providing great research potential in the future (Figure 1).

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

