Gut Microbiome-based Therapeutics in Liver Cirrhosis: Basic Consideration for the Next Step



Infections account for significant morbidity and mortality in liver cirrhosis and most are related to the gut microbiome. Fecal dysbiosis, characterized by an overgrowth of potentially pathogenic bacteria and a decrease in autochthonous non-pathogenic bacteria, becomes prominent with the progression of liver cirrhosis. In cirrhotic patients, disruption of the intestinal barrier causes intestinal hyperpermeability (i.e. leaky gut), which is closely related to gut dysmotility, dysbiosis and small intestinal bacterial overgrowth and may induce pathological bacterial translocation. Although the involved microbial taxa are somewhat different between the cirrhotic patients from the East and the West, the common manifestation of a shortage of bacteria that contribute to the production of short-chain fatty acids and secondary bile acids may facilitate intestinal inflammation, leaky gut and gut dysbiosis. Translocated endotoxin and bacterial DNA are capable of provoking potent inflammation and affecting the metabolic and hemodynamic systems, which may ultimately enhance the progression of liver cirrhosis and its various complications, such as hepatic encephalopathy (HE), variceal bleeding, infection and renal disturbances. Among studies on the microbiome-based therapeutics, findings of probiotic effects on HE have been contradictory in spite of several supportive results. However, the effects of synbiotics and prebiotics are substantially documented. The background of their effectiveness should be evaluated again in relation to the cirrhosis-related changes in gut microbiome and their metabolic effects. Strict indications for the antibiotic rifaximin remain unestablished, although its effect is promising, improving HE and other complications with little influence on microbial populations. The final goal of microbiome-based therapeutics is to adjust the gut-liver axis to the maximal benefit of cirrhotic patients, with the aid of evolving metagenomic and metabolomic analyses.

Liver cirrhosis is a consequence of long-lasting chronic liver diseases and is characterized by liver fibrosis and portal hypertension. Prognosis of patients with liver cirrhosis is affected by such serious complications as gastroesophageal varices, ascites, hepatic encephalopathy (HE) and renal disturbances, all of which are related to portal hypertension, hyperdynamic circulation and metabolic disorders.1 Bacterial infections including spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (SBP) account for significant morbidity and mortality,2 for which gut bacteria are commonly involved as the pathogenic factors.

Various microbiome-based therapeutics, such as probiotics, prebiotics, synbiotics and antibiotics, have been applied for the management of HE and other complications. Recent progress in metagenomic and metabolomic analyses, however, have shed light on the mechanisms of the gut-liver axis derangement and also on the action mechanisms of these microbiome-based therapeutics. This review summarizes the derangement of gut-liver axis related to gut dysbiosis and the recent progress in microbiome-based therapeutics.

Patients with liver cirrhosis frequently exhibit small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO).3 This condition is closely related to delayed intestinal transit and has some impact on the development of cirrhotic complications. In addition, marked alteration of the intestinal microbiome (i.e. dysbiosis) has been noted in these patients.4

Non-culture methods, such as pyrosequencing analysis of fecal contents, have revealed reduced gut microbial diversity and marked dysbiosis in patients with liver cirrhosis.5 The known changes in intestinal microbiota and their possible relations to intestinal dysfunction, bacterial translocation and cirrhotic complications are summarized in Fig. 1 (Fig. 1A: based on the microbial data from the China; Fig. 1B: based on the microbial data from the USA).

The cirrhosis dysbiosis ratio (CDR) proposed by Bajaj et al.17 consists of the amounts of beneficial autochthonous taxa (Lachnospiraceae + Ruminococaceae + Veillonellaceae + Clostridiales Incertae Sedis XIV) and potentially pathogenic taxa (Enterobacteriaceae + Bacteroidaceae), reflecting changes in the “good” versus “bad” bacteria in the intestine of cirrhotic patients. The CDR was found to be negatively correlated to the model of end-stage liver disease (MELD) score as well as the blood endotoxin level.17 A low CDR was also found to be associated with death and organ failure within 30 days.17

Bajaj et al.18 examined the rectosigmoidal mucosal microbiome in addition to the fecal microbiome, as the former may reflect the intestinal barrier condition more precisely. The rectosigmoidal mucosal microbiome in cirrhotic patients showed a lower abundance of autochthonous bacteria (Subdoligranulum, Dorea, and Incertae Sedis XIV other) and a higher abundance of potentially pathogenic bacteria (Enterococcus, Clostridium, Burkholderia, and Proteus) compared with healthy controls18 (Fig. 1B). Chen et al.19 recently examined the duodenal mucosal microbe and reported that Veillonella, Megasphaera, Dialister, Atopobium and Prevotella were increased in cirrhotic patients, and that Neisseria, Haemophilus and SR1 genera incertae sedis were enriched in healthy controls. All these taxa are commonly found in the oral cavity, suggesting a great impact of oral microbiota on duodenal microbiota19 (Fig. 1A).

Dysbiosis with reduced autochthonous taxa is found in saliva of cirrhotic patients, especially those with previous history of HE or hospitalizations.20 Qin et al.6 reported that a majority of bacteria found in the feces of cirrhotic patients was of buccal origin, suggesting invasion of the gut by oral bacterial species. Interestingly, the above-mentioned, presumably pathogenic Streptococcus spp. and Veillonella spp. are considered to be of oral origin.6 The invading bacteria, foreign to the niche, are found not only in the colon but also in the ileum and duodenum, which provoke SIBO in patients with liver cirrhosis.6 The mechanism of this invasion is not yet fully understood, but may be related to impaired bile acid (BA) and gastric acid output in cirrhosis.21

Lower abundance of 7α-dehydroxylating bacteria (Lachonospiraceae, Ruminococcaceae and Blautia) were reported as present in the stools of cirrhotics.22 These bacteria convert primary BAs, chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA) and cholic acid (CA) into secondary BAs, lithocholic acid (LCA) and deoxycholic acid (DCA), respectively (Fig. 1B). The abundances of Ruminococcaceae and Blautia were found to be positively correlated to DCA/CA and LCA/CDCA, respectively, suggesting that a reduced conversion of primary to secondary BAs was linked with an abundance of key gut microbiome constituents.

Secondary BAs have membrane destabilizing actions, both on the microbiome and on the gut epithelium.23,24 It is not evident at present if this reduction in secondary BAs is either a cause of overgrowth of pathogenic bacteria25,26 or a result of an adaptation to prevent gut epithelial disruption in liver cirrhosis.22 BT-induced inflammation suppresses the synthesis of total BAs by inhibiting CYP7A1 in the liver (Fig. 1A,
1B). BAs prevent bacterial translocation (BT) and inhibit the passage of microbial products from the intestinal lumen.27 A decrease in BAs entering the intestines is thus considered to favor overgrowth of pathogenic microbiome constituents, including Enterobacteriaceae and Porphyromonadaceae, in liver cirrhosis.28

Metagenomic and metabolomic analysis may be promising for evaluating the role of gut microbiome in host metabolism. However, reported data are still scarce and contradictory (Table 1). Metagenomic pyrosequencing of fecal microbiota has paved the way for the discovery of novel genes from uncultivated microorganisms, and the analysis of whole genomes from community DNA sequence data.29 Chen et al.29 reported that patients with alcohol-related and HBV-related cirrhosis showed marked depletion in the functional genes involved in nutrient processing, including amino acids, lipids and nucleotides metabolism. Qin et al.6 found that ammonia production and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) biosynthesis were enriched in patients with liver cirrhosis by their comparative metagenomic analysis with gene functional classification, suggesting a potential role of gut microbiome in the development of HE.6

On the other hand, Wei et al.30 surprisingly found increased bacterial metabolic activities of carbohydrate, branched-chain amino acids, pantothenate and CoA with the progression of diseases from Child-Pugh class A to class C by their metaproteome analysis. They thought that the changes in cirrhotic intestinal microenvironment enhanced the growth and the protein expression of gut microbiome. The findings suggested that the fecal microbiome had robust adaptability to the intestinal microenvironment and could compensate for the innutritious body of cirrhotic patients.30 In line with this concept, the kind of bacteria responsible for the supposed metabolic compensation is of utmost importance. Their results are contradictory to the concept that gut bacterial changes cause metabolic disturbances in liver cirrhosis and arouse a question of whether we can really improve the metabolic state of cirrhotic patients by correcting gut dysbiosis.

The intestinal barrier consists of intestinal epithelial cells and their mucinous components.27 Intercellular junctions (i.e. tight junctions (TJs) and gap junctions) allow selective passage of substances.27 Structural and functional changes in the intestinal mucosa that enhance intestinal permeability are found in patients with liver cirrhosis.27 This intestinal barrier dysfunction is a dominant pathogenetic factor for several complications of liver cirrhosis.31 Alcohol drinking, portal hypertension, changes in gut microbiome, inflammation, oxidative stress and endotoxemia can all affect the barrier function of the intestine.

BT, or microbial translocation, is defined as the migration of viable intestinal microorganisms or their products to the mesenteric lymph nodes (MLNs) or other extraintestinal sites.38 Passage of viable intestinal bacteria through the intestinal wall and their translocation to MLNs and other sites in liver cirrhosis is considered to provoke spontaneous infections such as SBP or bacteremia.27 Bacteria and their products translocate to extraintestinal sites and promote robust immunological responses. Pathological BT can predispose to complications of cirrhosis, not only infections but also other complications, by exerting an exacerbating effect on the immune system and hemodynamic state.27,39

Plasma endotoxin levels are elevated with the progression of liver cirrhosis,40,41 and the elevation is also detectable in the portal blood.42,43 Bacterial DNA present in the portal and hepatic venous blood predisposes to a profound immune reaction in patients with advanced cirrhosis and ascites.44 Cirrhotic patients with translocated bacterial DNA of Gram-positive taxa show increased pro-inflammatory cytokine levels unrelated to endotoxemia.45

A cytosolic multiprotein complex inflammasome is assembled upon recognition of PAMPs and accelerates inflammatory reactions by producing pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-1β and IL-18 through the activation of caspase-1.53 In macrophages from ascitic fluid, one of the inflammasome components, AIM2 (the HIN-200 domain-containing protein absent in melanoma 2) pre-activated by bacterial DNA fragments, produces high levels of IL-1β and IL-18, which predispose to SBP in liver cirrhosis.53

The mechanism of HE remains unclarified, although hyperammonemia and systemic inflammation related to gut dysbiosis have been proposed as contributors.54 Accumulating evidence indicates that systemic inflammation, neuroinflammation and endotoxemia play cardinal roles in the pathogenesis of HE.55–57 Endotoxin is known to increase permeability of the blood-brain barrier and to act on the brain microglia through endothelial cell receptors with the succeeding production of nitric oxide (NO) and prostanoid,57 which may ultimately enhance the astrocyte swelling in HE.58 Clinically, endotoxemia is associated with severity of minimal HE (MHE) and an increased incidence of overt HE.57 SIBO is closely related to MHE59 and the orocecal transit time (OCTT) is prolonged in cirrhotics with HE.60 Translocated bacterial DNA is considered to worsen neurocognitive scores in patients with MHE.61

Several studies have revealed altered gut microbiota in cirrhotic patients with HE.62 Liu et al.63 found an overgrowth of potentially pathogenic Escherichia coli (E. coli) and Staphylococcus spp. in the feces of patients with liver cirrhosis (70%–80% related to HBV or HCV) and MHE. Bajaj et al.11 showed that patients with cirrhosis and HE had a higher abundance of fecal Enterobacteriaceae, a known organism that produces potent endotoxin,26 and Alcaligenaceae compared with control subjects. Alcaligeneceae and Porphyromonadaceae were found to be positively correlated with cognitive impairment in patients with cirrhosis. Alcaligeneceae degrades urea to produce ammonia.11 Bajaj et al.18 next reported that cirrhotics with HE exhibited higher proportions of the potentially pathogenic genera Veillonella, Enterococcus, and Burkholderia and lower proportions of Roseburia in the colonic mucosa compared with those without HE, while fecal microbiota was not different between the groups. Increases in potentially pathogenic bacteria (Enterococcaceae, Enterobacteriaceae) and decreases in autochthonous families were also found in the saliva of patients with previous history of HE.20 Ahluwalia et al.54 reported that fecal Enterobacteriaceae was positively correlated and autochthonous taxa was negatively correlated with hyperammonemia-associated astrocytic changes on magnetic resonance spectroscopy and that Porphyromonadaceae was correlated with neuronal changes on diffusion tensor imaging.

Bacterial infections increase mortality 4-fold in cirrhotic patients.2 Although respiratory, urinary and ascitic fluid infections and bacteremia are common infectious complications of cirrhosis, SBP occurs most frequently. These infections are mostly related to enteric Gram-negative bacteria, mainly Enterobacteriaceae.3,64 Impaired motility of the small intestine and SIBO frequently occur in cirrhotic patients with a history of SBP.65 These patients commonly show increased intestinal permeability,35 which has been considered as a predictor of bacterial infection.36 Bacterial DNA was reported to be present in blood and ascites in one-third of cirrhotic patients with portal hypertension and culture-negative ascites.66 Presence of bacterial DNA is associated with increased pro-inflammatory cytokines in ascites,44 aggravation of peripheral vasodilation and worsening of intrahepatic endothelial dysfunction.67 Bacterial overgrowth predisposes to BT and increases the risk of SBP, together with intestinal hyperpermeability.68,69

Bajaj et al.17 found significant differences in the fecal microbiota (e.g., increased Enterobacteriaceae and decreased Coriobacteriaceae, Lachnospiraceae, Veillonellaceae and Clostridiales XIV), lower CDR and higher plasma endotoxin levels in cirrhotic patients admitted with infections compared with those without infections. In that study, routine culture detected Streptococcus spp., Klebsiella, Escherichia and Citrobacter spp. for SBP and E. coli, Enterococcus, Staphylococcus aureus and Lactococcus for urinary tract infections.17 Most bacteria causing SBP are Gram-negative bacilli, such as E. coli and other members of the Enterobacteriaceae family (Enterobacter, Klebsiella and Proteus), which are predominant in the gut microbiota of cirrhotic patients.5,7,11

Hyperdynamic circulation characterized by low systemic vascular resistance, high cardiac output and a reduced sensitivity to vasoconstrictors, are features of liver cirrhosis.3 A low systemic vascular resistance and a high cardiac output were more prominent in cirrhotics with endotoxemia than in those without endotoxemia.41 Oral administration of rifaximin was shown to improve the hyperdynamic circulation and endotoxemia.70 Further, the probiotic VSL#3 was found to improve the hyperdynamic circulation in patients with liver cirrhosis.72 Although the role of endotoxin in the process of hyperdynamic circulation is still debatable, endotoxemia, possibly related to gut dysbiosis and leaky gut, may stimulate NO synthase, inducing increased vascular NO production, which is the primary force to evoke vasodilatation and its clinical manifestations in cirrhosis.73

Endotoxemia is also postulated to increase portal pressure74 and to induce variceal bleeding.75,76 It is plausible that endotoxin may elevate portal pressure by inducing systemic and splanchnic vasodilation, and by triggering hepatic inflammatory responses.3,74 It may increase portal vascular resistance through the cytokine-induced release of endothelin, NO and cyclooxygenase products in the liver.77–79 In turn, portal hypertension can promote BT and endotoxemia in patients with liver cirrhosis.74 Portal endotoxin level was decreased by the transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt, suggesting that microbial translocation may be alleviated by the portal venous decompression.80 The effect of portal hypertension or portal venous decompression on gut microbiome has not been clarified yet.

Patients with cirrhosis and upper gastrointestinal hemorrhage have increased risk of bacterial infections, particularly SBP, during the first 7 days.81 Plasma endotoxin levels and intestinal permeability were reported to be increased after variceal hemorrhage.36,82 The latter was identified as an independent predictor for proven or possible infections by multivariate analysis.36 Prophylactic use of antibiotics can prevent infection and rebleeding and increase the short-term survival rate in patients with acute gastroesophageal variceal hemorrhage following endoscopic treatment.75,83

Hepatorenal syndrome (HRS) is a severe complication of patients characterized by a combination of systemic circulatory disturbance and renal dysfunction. Two types of HRS have been described: type 1 (a rapidly progressive acute renal failure, defined by a doubling of the initial serum creatinine level to greater than 2.5 mg/dL in less than 2 weeks) and type 2 (a slowly progressive moderate renal failure in patients with refractory ascites, showing initial serum creatinine level increase from 1.5 to 2.5 mg/dL).84 International Club of Ascites recently imported a concept of acute kidney injury (AKI) and defined AKI in patients with cirrhosis as having an acute increase of serum creatinine to ≥50% from baseline to a final value ≥1.5 mg/dl (133 μmol/L), aiming at early diagnosis and treatment of HRS.85

There has been a considerable debate surrounding the role of endotoxemia in the renal disturbance in cirrhosis. The close relationship suggested in the early period of Limulus amebocyte lysate (LAL) test86,87 was not always validated in the later period of quantitative LAL test. However, accumulating experimental evidence together with the observed beneficial effects of non-absorbable antibiotics support the pathogenetic roles of endotoxemia in the cirrhotic renal disturbance.88 Type 1 HRS often develops after a precipitating event, particularly SBP.1 Two-thirds of type-1 HRS associated with infections is not reversible and exhibits very poor outcome.89 Cirrhotic patients with culture-negative, non-neutrocytic ascites and bacterial DNA have a higher risk of HRS, SBP and mortality compared with those without bacterial DNA.90

Many studies have reported the effects of probiotics on HE and found that they are able to reduce blood ammonia levels, improve MHE and prevent overt HE.91 However, there exist other studies that deny these effects. Meta-analyses also have shown different conclusions. Shulka et al.92 reported that the administration of prebiotics, probiotics and synbiotics was related to improvement in MHE. Holte et al.93 concluded that probiotics and synbiotics improved HE more than placebo and lactulose. Xu et al.94 reported that probiotics reduced the incidence of overt HE. On the contrary, a Cochrane review by McGee et al.95 neglected the effects on the recovery from HE and the inhibition of HE; they concluded that probiotics have no role in the treatment of MHE or HE.95 These meta-analyses have analyzed variable randomized controlled trials (RCTs) with different inclusion criteria, regimens and observation periods. More RCTs with ideal settings aiming for the determination of the ideal combination of organisms, optimal dose, optimal duration of treatment and benefits on long-term follow-up are necessary. Although two meta-analyses denied the effect of probiotics on overall survival, further careful evaluations are needed worldwide because almost all death cases have been reported from India. One study96 described that all patients who died were decompensated at baseline, irrespective of probiotic use. In another study,97 causes of death were acute variceal bleed, severe infection with sepsis, HRS, and intracranial bleed.

Recently, the effect of VSL#3, a probiotic combination of eight strains of Lactobacilli, Bifidobacteria and Streptococcus, has been reported. Dhiman et al.99 found that VSL#3 reduced the incidence of hospitalization for HE and lowered Child-Pugh and MELD scores in cirrhotic patients who had completely recovered from an episode of overt HE. Lunia et al.97 reported that VSL#3 administration for 3 months was effective in preventing HE. It reduced arterial ammonia levels, ameliorated SIBO, shortened OCTT, and improved psychometric HE scores. Rincon et al.72 further reported that VSL#3 decreased the hepatic venous pressure gradient, cardiac index and heart rate, and increased systemic vascular resistance in patients with cirrhosis and ascites. This suggests that VSL#3 improves the hepatic and systemic hemodynamics in advanced cirrhosis.

The prebiotics are non-digestible food ingredients which selectively promote the growth of protective gut bacteria, such as Bifidobacteria and Lactobacilli, and increase the natural resistance to invading pathogens.100 They are resistant to gastric acidity but are susceptible to the metabolism by gut microbiota.100 At present, lactulose, lactitol, fructo-oligosaccharides (FOS) and galacto-oligosaccharides (GOS) are commercially available prebiotics.100 Among them, the synthetic disaccharides lactitol and lactulose have been used most widely in the treatment of HE. They remain undigested until they reach the large bowel, where they are metabolized by colonic bacteria and generate acetic and lactic acids.38 The resulting lower pH is considered to inhibit urease-producing bacteria and to promote the growth of non-urease-producing Lactobacilli.38,101 Chen et al.102 described that lactitol increased beneficial Bifidobacteria and Lactobacilli and decreased plasma endotoxin levels in patients with chronic viral hepatic diseases.

As described above, there is a great discrepancy between the remarkable effects of synbiotics and the controversial effects of probiotics on HE. Although further studies are needed, the substantial effects of either synbiotics or probiotics may have been related to the improvement of dysbiosis and/or metabolic derangement in the intestine. Metagenomic pyrosequencing of intestinal microbiota with an adequate metabolomic analysis may solve this problem.

Selective intestinal decontamination (SID) for management of complications of liver cirrhosis has a long history with the use of various antimicrobial drugs, which have ranged from neomycin, polymixin B and paromomycin to norfloxacin and rifaximin.88 Long-term use of norfloxacin has been found to abolish aerobic Gram-negative bacilli from the feces, without significant effect on other microorganisms, and to reduce the recurrence of SBP.106 In cirrhotic patients with low ascitic fluid protein concentrations (≤ 1 g/dL) or hyperbilirubinemia (> 2.5 mg/dL), long-term prophylactic norfloxacin administration also prevented the first episode of SBP.107 However, these promising effects were challenged by the problem of quinolone-resistant infection.107,108 Prior antibiotic therapy and norfloxacin prophylaxis were shown to enhance the risk of infection by methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus.109 Along this line, the primary prophylaxis of SBP with norfloxacin has been indicated only for high-risk cirrhotic patients.

Ahluwalia et al.117 evaluated the effect of rifaximin on the gut-liver-brain axis in MHE by the use of functional magnetic resonance imaging, diffusion tensor imaging and magnetic resonance spectroscopy in an open-label study. Rifaximin was then demonstrated to improve cognition, including working memory performance and inhibitory control, and white matter integrity, through modulation of fronto-parietal and subcortical activation and connectivity in MHE.117 Dong et al.79 recently reported that long-term use of rifaximin decreased the incidence of AKI and HRS, and the need for renal replacement therapy in cirrhotic patients. The effect of rifaximin on other cirrhotic complications are now under investigation.26

The first important question is, if we can truly normalize the gut microbiome in patients with advanced liver cirrhosis. Although Bajaj et al.71 reported Lactobacillus GG improved gut dysbiosis of cirrhotic patients in association with alterations of metabolite/microbiome correlations, no other trials of probiotics have examined the gut microbial changes by the treatment. Although some authors have even denied the effects of probiotics on liver cirrhosis, it is not evident if their treatment protocols really improved gut dysbiosis or metabolic state. Future trials of probiotics, prebiotics and synbiotics are recommended to include metagenomic and/or metabolomic analysis for evaluation of their effects and their possible backgrounds.

Finally, it should be answered if any combination of probiotics, prebiotics and rifaximin could improve the clinical situation more effectively. The improvement of gut dysbiosis and bacterial function is theoretically promising as final microbiome-based therapeutics.

More attention should be paid to the fact that the gut greatly impacts the clinical state of cirrhotic patients through gut dysfunction and dysbiosis, mobilizing the gut-liver axis profoundly. We are now beginning to understand that an adequate management of this gut-liver axis through microbiome-based therapeutics may have potential to improve a range of cirrhotic complications, mitigate annoying complaints, and ultimately prolong survival. Much should be examined in the future to explore an ideal strategy along these lines. Rapid progresses in metagenomic and metabolomic analyses, which can be further refined and unified, may finally enable us to evaluate the true function of gut microbiome as closely related to each patient’s state. If we can adjust the gut-liver axis in the utmost interest of patients in the future, improving bacterial overgrowth, dysbiosis and leaky gut, we may even prolong the survival of patients with advanced cirrhosis.

