The Gut Microbiome–Brain Crosstalk in Neurodegenerative Diseases

The gut–brain axis (GBA) is a complex interactive network linking the gut to the brain. It involves the bidirectional communication between the gastrointestinal and the central nervous system, mediated by endocrinological, immunological, and neural signals. Perturbations of the GBA have been reported in many neurodegenerative diseases, suggesting a possible role in disease pathogenesis, making it a potential therapeutic target. The gut microbiome is a pivotal component of the GBA, and alterations in its composition have been linked to GBA dysfunction and CNS inflammation and degeneration. The gut microbiome might influence the homeostasis of the central nervous system homeostasis through the modulation of the immune system and, more directly, the production of molecules and metabolites. Small clinical and preclinical trials, in which microbial composition was manipulated using dietary changes, fecal microbiome transplantation, and probiotic supplements, have provided promising outcomes. However, results are not always consistent, and large-scale randomized control trials are lacking. Here, we give an overview of how the gut microbiome influences the GBA and could contribute to disease pathogenesis in neurodegenerative diseases.

The gut–brain axis (GBA) refers to a complex network of bidirectional interactions between the gut microbiome and the central nervous system (CNS). The GBA involves multiple biological systems and is crucial in maintaining the overall body homeostasis [1]. Signals travel from the gut to the CNS and vice versa, either directly through the autonomic nervous system or indirectly through metabolites and chemical transmitters [1,2]. Both of these interactions can modulate and be influenced by the gut microbiome composition. The GBA has recently attracted interest due to its emerging role in mediating health and disease and potential use as a therapeutic target. The gut microbiome impacts many aspects of brain development and function, including microglia and astrocyte maturation and polarization, blood–brain barrier (BBB) formation and permeability, neurogenesis, and myelination [3,4,5,6,7,8,9]. GBA disruption may participate in the pathophysiology of several brain disorders, including neurodegenerative diseases [5,10,11,12]. However, controversy exists surrounding the extent and the exact mechanisms through which an altered gut microbiome may influence the development of CNS inflammation and degeneration. This review summarizes the current literature exploring the GBA’s role in neurodegenerative diseases, focusing on current and potential therapeutic strategies targeting the GBA.

The gut microbiome is constituted by a huge community of bacteria, archaea, fungi, and viruses [13], with a great deal of variability among individuals. Unfortunately, there is no agreement on which populations should prevail in a healthy adult microbiome. Cross-sectional studies have shown that gut microbiome composition in individuals with various neurological diseases is different compared to healthy controls [1] (Table 1). Moreover, preclinical studies in animal disease models have confirmed that the gut microbiome obtained from patients with neurological diseases can precipitate brain pathology and behavioral changes in mice [14]. Gut microorganisms can influence CNS functions by producing metabolites, neuroactive molecules, and hormones [15] (Figure 1).

Gut microbes can either modulate or directly synthesize neuroactive substances such as dopamine, noradrenaline, acetylcholine, histamine, melatonin, and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) [15]. GABA-producing pathways are expressed by Bacteroides, Parabacteroides, and Escherichia species [56]. Evidence of their influence on CNS synaptic transmission, through the gut–brain axis, is derived from studies on subjects with major depressive disorder (MDD), a disease strongly associated with GABA dysregulation. In MDD patients, the relative abundance of fecal Bacteroides is inversely correlated with the functional connectivity between the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and the default mode network [56]. Furthermore, modulation of the gut microbiome composition has been demonstrated to influence both circulating and central levels of GABA [57,58]. Treatment of mice with the probiotic strain Lactobacillus rhamnosus (JB-1) showed a reduction of stress and depression-like behavior (assessed by the forced-swim test), associated with the modulation of GABA receptor expression in the prefrontal cortex, the amygdala, and the hippocampus [57]. In another study, the administration of Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium increased the levels of GABA inside the CNS and ameliorated memory performances in mice [59]. Gut bacteria and enteroendocrine cells (EECs) are also important in the production of serotonin (5-HT), and even if the majority of 5-HT is produced in the gut and cannot bypass the BBB, GF mice have decreased concentrations of 5-HT and tryptophan in the CNS, suggesting a modulating role of the gut microbiome on central serotonin levels [60]. The production of 5-HT by EECs is influenced by the levels of secondary bile acids [61].

Microbiome composition is age-sensitive, and humans show marked differences in microbial profiles during infancy, adolescence, adulthood, and aging [62,63,64]. Many factors shape the developing microbiome: Genetics [65], stress [66], mode of birth [67], diet [68], medication [69], and the environment [70]. Before birth, bacteria present in the placenta, amniotic cavity, umbilical cord, and meconium start to shape the characteristics of the future microbiome [71].

Furthermore, many of the benefits observed in learning and memory after the administration of probiotics occurred alongside reductions in biomarkers of stress (glucocorticoids) or inflammation (proinflammatory cytokines) [76]. Both glucocorticoids and proinflammatory cytokines impair cognitive performance under numerous conditions [78]. As stated above, dysbiosis is associated with impaired gut barrier function that allows bacteria or bacterial products to infiltrate into systemic circulation [79]. The resulting inflammatory states have been associated with behaviors such as social isolation, depression, apathy, and attentional impairments.

Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disease characterized by the loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra and striatum, with abnormal accumulation of α-synuclein in the brain. The main symptoms of PD are resting tremors, stiffness, bradykinesia, and postural instability [80]. With disease progression, cognitive decline might ensue [81]. In addition, non-motor symptoms such as behavioral changes, sleep disorders, and gastrointestinal and autonomic dysfunction may precede the motor symptoms [82]. More than 80% of patients with PD experience gastrointestinal symptoms [83]. As in other neurodegenerative diseases, PD has been associated with inflammation, specifically the inflammatory state resulting from the senescence of the immune system, defined as inflammaging [84]. In 2003, Braak and collaborators introduced the hypothesis that PD originates in the gut [85] and dysbiosis and gut inflammation are now considered important contributors to the disease pathogenesis [86,87]. Inflammatory responses have been described in the colonic tissues of animal models of the disease, including the elevation of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines such as TNF-α, IL-1b, and leukocyte infiltration and activation [88,89]. In people with PD, serum levels of calprotectin, a marker of intestinal inflammation, were reported elevated compared to healthy controls (HCs) and correlated with monocyte count in the peripheral blood [90]. In another study, calprotectin, alpha-1-antitrypsin, and zonulin were also increased in people with PD [91]. Studies focused on gut microbiome changes in people with PD described a significant increase in the proinflammatory bacteria Ralstonia, Akkermansia, Oscillospira, and Bacteriodes [26]. Bacteroides and Verrucomicrobiaceae abundance have also been associated with plasma TNF-α and IFN-γ levels, respectively [33]. Another consistently reported alteration in PD patients is a decrease in Roseburia abundance [12]. Roseburia can enhance intestinal barrier function and reduce intestinal inflammation by upregulating antimicrobial peptide genes and toll-like receptor (TLR)-related genes, such as TLR5, and downregulating the NF-kB pathway [92]. Consistently, sigmoid mucosa biopsies obtained from patients with PD showed an increase in the expression of TLR4 mRNA compared to HCs [93]. In the rotenone mouse model, loss of the TLR4 gene significantly improved intestinal barrier integrity and reduced intestinal and CNS inflammation, α-synuclein aggregation, and dopaminergic cell loss in the substantia nigra, thus alleviating the impairment of motor function [93].

Several animal studies have reported the spread of α-synuclein pathology from the gut to the brain, and pathological changes in the CNS can be observed after the injection of α-synuclein into the intestinal wall [94,95,96]. However, the exact route through which pathological deposits of α-synuclein may spread to the brain remains vastly hypothetical. According to Braak’s original hypothesis, environmental factors may contribute, triggering the pathological process via the olfactory bulb or the intestinal nerve plexus [97]. Supporting this theory, vagotomy can prevent the transmission of pathological alpha-synuclein to the CNS in animal models [95].

AD is the most common cause of cognitive decline worldwide [98]. It is characterized by the deposition of Amyloid beta (Aβ) plaques and hyperphosphorylated tau protein tangles, leading to neuroinflammation, synaptic dysfunction and, ultimately, neuronal loss [98]. As with PD, AD pathogenesis has also been linked to GBA dysfunction and increased intestinal inflammation [99]. The evidence of the possible role of the gut microbiome in AD pathogenesis came from the mouse model of the disease. GF APPPS1 mice showed a reduction in Aβ pathology compared to specific pathogen-free (SPF) mice [100]. Moreover, some recent studies have reported an altered gut microbiome composition in people with AD compared to HCs [10,17,18,19]. Aging itself impacts the gut microbiome composition, favoring proinflammatory bacteria, such as Bacillus fragilis, Bacteroides fragilis, and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, to the detriment of more immune-regulatory bacteria [101]. Indeed, in patients with evidence of amyloid deposition, an increase in the proinflammatory taxa Escherichia and Shigella was associated with an increase in peripheral inflammatory markers such as interleukin-1β, NLR Family Pyrin Domain Containing 3, and C-X-C Motif Chemokine Ligand 2 (IL-1β, NLRP3, and CXCL2) [16,17,18]. The alterations most consistently reported by other studies include a decrease in Firmicutes and Bifidobacteria, together with an increase in Proteobacteria and Enterobacteria [16,17,18]. However, the results regarding Bacteroidaceae abundance seem to be less reproducible, with studies reporting either a decrease [22] or an increase [21], variably associated with alteration in Actinobacteria or Prevotella. The lack of consistency can be explained by the different geographical origins of the participants and the difference in comorbidities [102]. Interestingly, a pronounced difference in Enterobacteriaceae abundance between AD and MCI has been reported, suggesting the changes in gut microbiome composition might be gradual during disease progression [19].

Lastly, as outlined in the previous paragraph, strains of bacteria derived from the gut microbiome can produce amyloids and favor Aβ peptide aggregation [101]. The proteins curli, TasA, CsgA, FapC, and phenol soluble modulins produced by E. coli, B. subtilis, S. typhymurium, E. fluorescens, and S. aureus, respectively, are only some of the bacteria-derived amyloids with the ability to promote the formation of Aβ oligomers and fibrils in vitro [110]. Bacterial-derived amyloids can act in concert with other bacterial-derived products, such as LPS, to trigger inflammation and increase Aβ deposition in the CNS, as it has been extensively demonstrated in animal models of AD [111,112,113].

Compared to other neurodegenerative disorders, little evidence supports the implication of the gut microbiome in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal lobar dementia (FTD).

Finally, microbiome studies on Drosophila flies carrying the transgenic mutant human FTDP-17-associated tau showed reduced gut motility and subsequently increased gut bacterial load in aged tau transgenic compared to control flies [121].

Alterations in the GBA have been reported in Lewy body dementia (LBD), Huntington’s disease (HD), and Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease (CJD). LBD is associated with impaired control of gastrointestinal and cardiac functions that might be linked to the loss of cholinergic dorsal vagal nucleus (DMV) neurons. The degree of DMV cell loss has been found to be similar in LBD patients with or without gastrointestinal symptoms [122].

Prion diseases, also known as transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs), are a group of fatal neurodegenerative diseases affecting humans and animals. Studies from three decades ago showed how germ-free mice infected with prions have increased survival compared to conventional mice, suggesting a role of microbes in enhancing the disease [125]. Moreover, the prion disease mouse microbiome is significantly different from non-infected mice, alongside SCFA and bile acid production [126].

Fecal microbiome transplantation (FMT) is a procedure where a solution of fecal material from a donor is transferred, through colonoscopy, nasogastric tubes, or oral pills, into the intestinal tract of a recipient, aimed at directly changing the gut microbiome composition [127]. FMT has shown promising results in C. difficile infection [128] and could potentially be applied to all the diseases associated with gut microbiome dysbiosis, including neurodegenerative diseases. The most robust results on the effects of FMT on neurodegenerative diseases have been obtained from studies on animal models [101]. FMT from mouse models of AD to GF or antibiotic-treated specific-pathogen-free (SPF) recipient mice resulted in impaired neurogenesis, memory impairment, increased levels of proinflammatory cytokines, and Aβ plaque deposition [129,130]. Furthermore, when FMT was carried out from people with AD to GF mice, an accelerated cognitive decline was observed [131]. On the contrary, ADLPAPT and APPswe/PS1dE9 Tg mice receiving FMT from WT mice showed less cognitive decline, lower Aβ burden, and lower levels of systemic inflammation [132,133,134]. In humans, only two single-case report studies have been published so far. Both showed improvement in cognitive function in people with AD receiving FMT from HCs [135,136].

FMT from animal models of PD into healthy mice could induce synaptic loss and motor dysfunction. On the contrary, FMT from healthy mice to MTPT-treated mice showed a neuroprotective effect and suppressed the activation of TLR4/TNF-α pathway in the gut and the brain [137]. Moreover, α-synuclein-overexpressing mice colonized with the gut microbiome of people with PD showed exacerbated motor dysfunctions [138]. Based on the few case reports published, FMT is reported to be safe and effective at reducing constipation and temporally relieving motor symptoms in people with PD [139,140,141]. Despite promising results in preliminary studies on animal models and human subjects, caution is needed when drawing conclusions, and future randomized clinical trials are needed to clarify the role of FMT in neurodegenerative diseases. FMT is associated with minor adverse events and side effects, including diarrhea, abdominal pain, fever, and flatulence [139,140,141]. However, the exact mechanisms behind its effects on the CNS are still poorly understood and the effect of a single treatment is only temporary. Significant challenges include the timing of transplantation, the high costs of sample preparation and preservation, and the difficulties in defining the criteria to select fecal donors [12].

Probiotics are defined as non-viable food components that confer health benefits to the host and are associated with modulating the microbiome [12]. Studies on human and animal models have shown that probiotics can help maintain intestinal homeostasis, by stabilizing the epithelial barrier, increasing the production of SCFAs, modulating the mucosal immune system towards a more immunoregulatory response, and inhibiting the production of proinflammatory cytokines [101]. In animal models of AD, the administration of a probiotic mixture showed enhancement of cognitive functions, modulation of the gut microbiome composition, and reduction of oxidative stress and CNS inflammation [142,143,144]. In addition, the administration of a probiotic mixture of Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium has proven capable of influencing the concentration of neurotransmitters, such as GABA and glutamate, directly in the CNS [145]. In a recent randomized trial on people with AD, the daily administration of a probiotic mixture of Lactobacillus acidophilus, Lactobacillus casei, Bifidobacterium bifidum, and Lactobacillus fermentum for 12 weeks determined a statistically significant improvement in the mini-mental state exam (MMSE) score compared to controls. Positive changes in plasma metabolic markers were also reported [146]. Again, another recent meta-analysis reported positive effects on the cognitive function of probiotic administration in people with AD [147]. However, another recent study reported contrasting results. The authors did not observe any effect of a 12-week probiotic treatment in people with AD in terms of either cognitive functions or inflammatory markers [148].

Finally, in a study on ALS patients, the Rikenellaceae family, belonging to Bacteroidales phylum, significantly increased after 6 months of probiotic administration [153].

Diet is a rapid and direct way to modify the gut microbiome composition and function. With diet alteration, the gut microbiome composition and the abundance of SCFAs and gut metabolites can change drastically [154]. Diet can influence inflammation inside the CNS through the GBA, and many different types of diets have been proposed as beneficial in preventing or ameliorating neurodegenerative diseases [154,155]. Among them, the Mediterranean diet is a well-known healthy diet rich in vegetables, whole grains, low in dairy, with olive oil as the main source of fat [156]. Recent studies reported how adherence to a Mediterranean diet can improve motor and cognitive symptoms in PD [157]. Moreover, a Mediterranean diet seems to reduce the risk of PD [158]. The Mediterranean diet has also shown beneficial effects on other forms of neurodegeneration, such as AD. Many, but not all, epidemiological studies confirmed a protective effect of the Mediterranean diet on neurodegeneration [101]. However, only a few large randomized clinical trials have been conducted so far, often with contrasting results [101].

Lastly, as has been extensively reviewed elsewhere, a calorie restriction (CR) regimen has been shown to have beneficial effects on both neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration [157].

Studies in human and animal models of neurodegenerative diseases showed how the GBA might be involved in disease pathogenesis and a target for possible therapeutic approaches. The evidence linking the gut microbiome to neurodegeneration is compelling. However, studies on possible therapeutic manipulations of the gut microbiome are scarce and lack consistency. Despite being promising, this field is in its infancy, and more randomized clinical trials are needed to really understand its entire potential.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

