The Relationship between the Gut Microbiome and Metformin as a Key for Treating Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus

Metformin is the first-line pharmacotherapy for treating type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM); however, its mechanism of modulating glucose metabolism is elusive. Recent advances have identified the gut as a potential target of metformin. As patients with metabolic disorders exhibit dysbiosis, the gut microbiome has garnered interest as a potential target for metabolic disease. Henceforth, studies have focused on unraveling the relationship of metabolic disorders with the human gut microbiome. According to various metagenome studies, gut dysbiosis is evident in T2DM patients. Besides this, alterations in the gut microbiome were also observed in the metformin-treated T2DM patients compared to the non-treated T2DM patients. Thus, several studies on rodents have suggested potential mechanisms interacting with the gut microbiome, including regulation of glucose metabolism, an increase in short-chain fatty acids, strengthening intestinal permeability against lipopolysaccharides, modulating the immune response, and interaction with bile acids. Furthermore, human studies have demonstrated evidence substantiating the hypotheses based on rodent studies. This review discusses the current knowledge of how metformin modulates T2DM with respect to the gut microbiome and discusses the prospect of harnessing this mechanism in treating T2DM.

Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is one of the most common chronic metabolic disorders and is characterized by hyperglycemia resulting from the combination of insulin resistance and inadequate insulin secretion [1,2,3,4]. The number of people with T2DM has drastically increased over the past several decades [1]. Metformin, a biguanide class drug, is recommended by the American Diabetes Association and European Association for the Study of Diabetes as a first-line medicine for the treatment of T2DM [2]. Metformin is a derivative of phenformin and buformin from galegine in Galega officinalis, traditionally used to decrease blood sugar and relieve the symptoms of diabetes (Figure 1) [3,4]. Among the three biguanides, phenformin and buformin were withdrawn from the market due to the high frequency of lactic acidosis in the 1970s. However, metformin showed superior safety and better efficacy in the treatment of T2DM [5,6,7,8,9]. These advantages for clinical use have resulted in metformin being widely used for more than 60 years [5]. Metformin does not target a specific pathway or disease mechanism [4]; therefore, studies have aimed to reveal the mechanism of action of metformin related to the treatment of cancer and cardiovascular diseases [1,2,3,4,5]. Metformin exhibits the peak plasma concentrations in 3 h with Cmax 1.0–1.6 mg/L for dose of 500 mg and approximately 55% of bioavailability ([6] and refences therein). After absorption, metformin is distributed in the liver, kidneys, adrenal glands, and pancreas at about seven-fold higher concentration than that of the serum [7,8]. Based on the evidence suggesting a higher accumulation of metformin in the liver as well as another report by Rena et al. [9], the liver is a potential target organ of metformin [10,11,12]. Several studies have suggested that metformin suppresses the hepatic gluconeogenesis resulting from glucose tolerance modulation mediated by the adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK) activity [3,13,14]. Recent evidence from three studies suggests that the gut is a major target of metformin action and not the liver. First, metformin when administered intravenously, instead of orally, demonstrated no glucose-lowering effects [15,16,17]. Further, the jejunum tissue was found to exhibit a metformin concentration of up to 2000 μmol/kg of tissue, which was 30–300 times higher than the plasma concentrations [18,19,20]. The jejunum biopsy under pre-dose and post-dose of metformin demonstrated the gastrointestinal tract as a prominent target of metformin [18]. Second, the organic cation transporter (OCT) 1, expressed in the membrane of enterocytes, might be possibly involved in the absorption of metformin from the intestinal lumen [10,21]. According to Dujic et al. [22], a reduced function of OCT1 might increase the intestinal metformin concentration and the risk of gastrointestinal intolerance in the metformin-treated patients. Finally, the gut-restricted glucose-lowering effect of metformin was observed for intermediate-release metformin, extended-release metformin, and delayed-release metformin, and the same dose of metformin was more effective through those dosage forms than extended-release form [23]. Although various putative mechanisms of glucose homeostasis modulation in the gut by metformin have been proposed, more studies are needed to establish these hypotheses.

Microbiome in the human body assist in the expansion of host genomes, by facilitating the host’s metabolism and physiology [24,25]. Over the last few decades, the development of sequencing technologies and drastic progress in population-scale studies have revealed the host and microbiome relationship. Large-scale research projects on the microbiome have been actively conducted, such as the Human Microbiome Project (HMP) consortium funded by the United States National Institutes of Health (NIH) and the Metagenomics of the Human Intestinal Tract (MetaHIT) consortium funded by the European Commission [24]. A microbiome study demonstrated that the human gut microbiome abundance correlates with metabolic markers, such as adiposity, insulin resistance, and dyslipidemia [26]. Furthermore, gut dysbiosis has also been observed in T2DM patients [27,28,29,30,31,32,33,34,35]. Based on the hypothesis that metformin targets the human gastrointestinal tract, the gut microbiome has attracted attention as a key factor in the treatment of T2DM [36,37,38,39,40,41]. Thus, this review focused on the various studies related to the gut microbiome and its association with the anti-diabetic effects of metformin.

Over the past decade, several studies have demonstrated that patients with T2DM, obesity, or inflammatory bowel diseases often show dysbiosis in the gut microbiota [42,43,44,45]. The report by Larsen et al. [30] differentiated the composition of the gut microbiota in the T2DM patients from that in the non-diabetic adults (Table 1), and other studies have demonstrated dysbiosis in T2DM patients under different conditions, such as subject’s race and co-administration with other drugs. According to Larsen et al. [30], at the phylum level, the abundance of Firmicutes in T2DM patients was lower than that in the control group, and Bacteroidetes and Proteobacteria were more abundant than in the control group. The tendency of abundance at the phylum level was similar among the other clinical trials [29,30,33,34,35]. Furthermore, at the genus level, Roseburia, a butyrate-producing bacterium, was less abundant in the T2DM patients [27,29,30,32]. These results were in line with the other studies showing an increase in the abundance of Roseburia and insulin sensitivity after intestinal microbiota transplantation from lean donors to recipients with metabolic syndrome [46]. In addition, the abundance of Lactobacillus spp. was higher in T2DM patients than in the control groups [28,29,30]. The abundance of Lactobacillus spp. was positively correlated with blood glucose levels in the two clinical trials [29,30] and these results were consistent with those evident in a mice study [47]. The positive correlation between Lactobacillus spp. and the glucose levels might be due to the immunomodulatory role of Lactobacillus spp. [48]. Similarly, dysbiosis in T2DM patients might be due to the interaction of the gut microbiota with the host immune system, which was supported by several animal studies. In particular, the gut microbiota, which communicates with the host through pattern recognition receptors, such as toll-like receptors (TLRs), contributes to the development of insulin resistance with increased plasma LPS concentration [49,50]. According to Larsen et al. [30], the abundance of Gram-negative bacteria, which can stimulate the immune system like TLRs, was increased in T2DM patients. The role of TLRs in insulin resistance has been established through various studies. The TLR-5 deficient mice became obese and exhibited a metabolic syndrome. Further, when the gut microbiome from the TLR-5 deficient mice was transplanted to the germ-free mice, the germ-free mice showed a similar phenomenon as the TLR-5 mice [51]. In addition, Song et al. [52] reported that TLR-4 activation is associated with insulin resistance in adipocytes. Previously cited clinical studies have identified SCFA-producing bacteria as the key for dysbiosis in T2DM patients in response to the immune responses [27,28,29,32,33,34]. The gut microbiota has been considered as one of the factors affecting T2DM; thus, the gut microbiota might be considered a potential target for the treatment of T2DM. Several studies have demonstrated the positive effects of probiotics for the treatment of T2DM, such as the decrease in systemic LPS levels and improvement in insulin resistance [53,54].

Based on the knowledge regarding metformin’s gut-restricted glucose-lowering effects, further investigations have been undertaken to understand the role of metformin in the gut (Figure 2) [23]. In particular, the upper small intestine is responsible for triggering gut peptide-dependent negative feedback signals, followed by nutrient intake [62,63]. One of the signals is glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) release via sodium-glucose cotransporter-1 (SGLT-1), which plays a dominant role in GLP-1 secretion via the transport of 3-O-methyl glucose [64,65,66,67,68]. In this regard, metformin exhibited an increase in GLP-1 secretion and SGLT1 expression in the upper small intestine, suggesting that metformin might interact with the upper small intestinal SGLT-1 mediated glucose-sensing pathway [69,70,71,72]. According to this hypothesis, the germ-free mice, physiologically used for the “microbial knockout” model, showed alterations in the glucose metabolism-related genes in the gut when the microbiota was inoculated from the healthy mice [73]. In addition, prebiotics and probiotics changed the gut microbiome in relation to changes in GLP-1 secretion [53,74,75]. Based on these relationships, Bauer et al. [76] demonstrated that metformin altered the upper small intestinal microbiota, resulting in the upregulation of SGLT-1 expression. Additionally, a high-fat diet in rodents reduced SGLT-1 expression, which was recovered on metformin administration [76]. This effect might be due to the alteration in microbiota in the upper small intestine, demonstrated by the transplantation of microbiota in the metformin-treated high-fat diet (HFD)-fed rats to untreated HFD-fed rats. In particular, the abundance of Lactobacillus exhibited significant recovery from dysbiosis, suggesting that Lactobacillus is related to SGLT-1 modification after metformin administration. This result was also observed in the metformin-treated HFD-fed mice with increased Sglt1 mRNA levels in the upper small intestine [59]. In addition, a previous study revealed that upregulation of SGLT-1 mediated metabolites produced by Lactobacillus resulted in the increased glucose uptake in Caco-2 cells, and this study supported that Lactobacillus might be related to the glucose modulation of metformin [77]. In terms of modulating the glucose-sensing pathway, Lactobacillus was shown to modulate the glucose-sensing machinery related to other pathways, not only for SGLT-1. When Caco-2 cells were incubated with the supernatant from the cultured Lactobacillus, there was an increase in the expression of the GPR120 gene, known to affect the expression of GLP-1 [78,79]. Furthermore, L. gasseri, one of the species in the genus Lactobacillus, was shown to affect the long-chain acyl-CoA synthetase (ACSL)-dependent glucoregulatory fatty acid-sensing pathway [80]. Thus, this evidence suggests that Lactobacillus plays a role in modulating glucose metabolism and might be associated with the improvement of glucose parameters in rodents and humans treated with probiotic supplements containing Lactobacillus [74,75].

In conclusion, metformin recovered dysbiosis in HFD-rats, and the genus Lactobacillus was identified as key for modulating the glucose-sensing pathway [76]. However, the mechanism by which metformin alters the abundance of Lactobacillus remains unknown. Thus, future studies might be required to elucidate the mechanism by which metformin affects the abundance of the gut microbiota. Furthermore, alteration of Lactobacillus by metformin and T2DM was not consistent between the animal and human studies, as shown in Table 1 and Table 2. For these results, Sato et al. [28] suggested that in human studies, the innate bacteria and bacteria originating from foods such as yogurt were not distinguished. In addition, Bauer et al. [76] investigated the anti-diabetic effect of metformin on the upper small intestine, comparing changes in the gut microbiome in the upper and distal intestines. Hence, these confounding factors were also regulated to unveil the relationship between metformin and the genus Lactobacillus.

Short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), including acetate, propionate, butyrate, and lactate, are the major products of fermentation of undigestible food by the anaerobic bacteria. Based on the increasing number of studies on the relationship between the gut microbiota and metabolic disease, the effects of SCFAs produced by the gut microbiota on metabolic disease have attracted interest [81]. Indeed, SCFAs exhibit beneficial effects on glucose metabolism via multiple pathways, including activation of gut hormone receptors (e.g., Ffar2 and Ffar3) [81,82,83,84,85]. In particular, SCFAs can bind to the G protein-coupled receptor (GPR)-41 (referred to as FFAR3) and GPR-43 (referred to as FFAR2), expressed on enteroendocrine L cells, stimulating the release of GLP-1 and peptide YY that regulate glucose metabolism and insulin secretion [86,87].

In summary, an increase in the abundance of gut microbiota-producing SCFAs might be considered as an anti-diabetic mechanism mediated by metformin treatment. Although gut microbiota producing SCFAs (e.g., the genus Allobaculum, Bacteroides, and Parabacteroides) might impart beneficial metabolic homeostasis in the host, the mechanism by which metformin affects the gut microbiota is unclear.

Several studies have revealed that metabolic disorders are associated with increased gut permeability, which further increases the intestinal LPS permeability and induces chronic inflammation that causes insulin resistance [49,111,112,113]. The mucus layer plays an important role in maintaining gut permeability and gastrointestinal functions by providing substrates for bacterial growth adhesion and protection [114,115,116]. From this perspective, several studies suggest that colonization of several gut microbiota on the mucus layer induces diabetes or metabolic disorders from a dysbiosis-mediated high-fat diet [110,117,118].

In conclusion, the increase in the abundance of A. muciniphila by metformin treatment promotes mucin production, which might recover the increased gut permeability induced by high-fat diets or metabolic disorders. However, until now, the direct effects of metformin on cellular pathways to increase A. muciniphila remain unclear. Thus, further investigation to identify the physiological pathway by which metformin increases A. muciniphila will help understand the unidentified effects of metformin on the gut microbiota.

In the past decade, accumulating evidence from a variety of animal models or clinical studies has shown that metabolic disorders, including T2DM, are associated with chronic or subacute tissue inflammation in the adipose tissue and liver, causing insulin resistance [137,138,139,140,141]. Several studies in T2DM, have reported that metformin modulates inflammation via inflammatory modulating signaling pathways, such as STAT3 signaling [142] or the NF-κB (nuclear factor kappa light chain enhancer of activated B cells) signaling pathway [94,143,144]. Metformin directly suppresses the release of an inflammatory cytokine such as interleukin 6 (IL-6), interleukin 1β (IL-1β), and TNF-α (tumor necrosis factor– α) [92,127,128]. Thus, several studies have reported alterations in the expression of IL-6 following metformin treatment, and some reports have even showed that the alteration of microbiota due to metformin treatment was related to the modulation of inflammation.

To conclude, various inflammatory markers were correlated with the alteration of bacteria on metformin treatment. Furthermore, these effects have also been supported by other studies that demonstrated the therapeutic effects of metformin on inflammatory diseases (e.g., non-alcoholic fatty liver disease and polycystic ovary syndrome) through interaction with the gut microbiota [99,158].

Bile acids are synthesized from cholesterol in the liver and secreted into the intestine, following which cholic acid and chenodeoxycholic acid are converted to secondary bile acids, such as deoxycholic acid and lithocholic acid, via enzymes and gut microbiota. For several decades, bile acids have been shown to play a role in glucose, lipid, and energy metabolism [159]. The modulation effects of bile acids on several metabolic pathways are mainly via binding to several intracellular nuclear receptors, including farnesoid X receptor (FXR), pregnane X receptor (PXR), and cell surface G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) ([160] and references therein). In this regard, metformin showed an inhibitory effect on the bile acid resorption, resulting in increased exposure of the gut to bile acids [92,161,162,163]. Napolitano et al. [55] demonstrated the effect of metformin on bile acid in a clinical trial in T2DM patients. Extended exposure to bile acid might allow bile acids to bind to the intestinal FXR. Thus, the glucose-modulating effect of metformin via bile acids seems to be related to the FXR signaling. However, the glucose-modulating effect mediated by FXR remains controversial. There is some evidence that inactivation of FXR results in better glucose control and increased GLP-1 secretion [164,165,166]. For example, FXR-deficient mice exhibit increased GLP-1 expression and improved glucose metabolism [164]. In contrast to these results, some studies suggested that activation of FXR via FXR agonists improves glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity [167,168,169,170,171]. Thus, the glucose-modulating effect of metformin via bile acid circulation has not yet been clarified. Recently, a study revealed that metformin acts on the B. fragilis-glycoursodeoxycholic acid (GUDCA)-intestinal FXR axis, improving hyperglycemia [59]. GUDCA, a conjugated bile acid, is deconjugated by the gut microbiome and is demonstrated to be an FXR antagonist. Sun et al. [59] revealed that metformin inhibited the deconjugation of GUDCA through the activity of the bile salt hydrolase of B. fragilis, resulting in an increased GUDCA concentration. This result is consistent with the correlation between GUDCA levels in stool and the presence of B. fragilis. Additionally, the abundance of Lactobacillus sanfrancisensis, contained in the genus Lactobacillus known to affect intestinal FXR signaling, was increased in the metformin-treated HFD-fed mice [80].

Taken together, metformin has a role in modulating glucose homeostasis via the regulation of the bile acid circulation. Conflict in the function of FXR in glucose homeostasis might be due to different agonists and antagonists for FXR (e.g., intestinal FXR agonist or whole-body FXR agonist) [160]. Furthermore, bile acid pools in mice and humans are known to be quite different and might have a conflicting role in FXR. As a result, further studies could be conducted by considering these confounding factors.

The glucose-modulating effect of metformin on the gut microbiome has been evaluated in various clinical trials. The first clinical study that observed the relationship between metformin and the gut microbiome was conducted as an open-label, single-group study in T2DM patients [55]. In this study, they demonstrated alterations in the composition of the gut microbiome, glucose hormone, glucose-related parameters, and bile acid concentration in feces. A similar tendency was observed in the present study, despite minor differences in the gut microbiome composition (Table 1).

These differences might be derived from the dosage, study duration, disease state, race differences, and sample size. Thus, to elucidate the anti-diabetic effect of metformin via modulation of the gut microbiome, clinical studies in ethnic-controlled environments or comparisons among ethnicities are required. Indeed, clinical studies in various populations have been conducted at ClinicalTrial.gov (assessed on 30 March 2021) (Table 3). Most of the research to date has revealed taxonomic groups in the gut at the genus level, and not at the species level, due to technical limitations. To counter this limitation, recent studies introduced a gut microbiome analysis method to make a possible profile at the species level [190,191,192]. In the future, these methods to analyze the gut microbiome could help clarify the relationship between metformin and the gut microbiome.

Metformin, the first-line medicine for T2DM, has been investigated to elucidate its antidiabetic effects. In the recent decade, with progress in metagenomic technology, the role of the gut microbiome in host metabolism has been highlighted. Several studies have demonstrated that some medicines alter the composition of the gut microbiome, and this phenomenon might be considered as one of the mechanisms for treatment. In this regard, some scientists have also investigated the relationship between metformin and the gut microbiome. In this review, we focused on the current knowledge about the glucose-modulating effect of metformin on the gut microbiome. Taken together, metformin might affect the intestinal microbiome via the modulation of inflammation, gut permeability, glucose homeostasis, and abundance of SCFA-producing bacteria. However, it is still not clear how metformin modulates glucose homeostasis via the gut microbiota. Hence, elucidation of the mechanism to treat T2DM with intestinal microbiota remains a challenge for future research. In addition, without metformin, the composition of intestinal microbiota is affected by several factors, including genetics, sex, foods, lifestyle, and other medications [193,194,195]. Thus, to fully elucidate the mechanism, these confounding factors must be taken into account to determine the sole effects of metformin on the gut microbiota. However, control of the interventions is quite difficult in clinical studies. Furthermore, fecal microbiome transplantation could be recommended to validate the mechanism of action via gut microbiome-based Koch’s postulates [89,196]. However, it is difficult to conduct fecal microbiome transplantation to validate the mechanism of action via the gut microbiome in clinical settings. In addition, most of the studies dealt with within this review conducted functional annotation, categorizing microbial functions at the community level; however, it is difficult to suggest a mechanistic explanation for how these functions arise [197,198,199]. In this context, computational methods have been used as supportive tools to help elucidate the mechanism of action, and several experiments could be supportive to validate the hypothesis. Pryor et al. [98] suggested a notable approach to identify drug-nutrient interactions, combined with the in silico microbial modeling. Additionally, the results from the suggested methodology are consistent with those of other human studies [31,56,98]. In addition, Rosario et al. [122] showed the contribution of four bacteria (Escherichia spp., Akkermansia muciniphila, Intestinibacter bartlettii, and Subdoligranulum variable) in the physiology of metformin-treated T2DM patients through genome-scale models, and this study was in line with the previous observations [200,201]. Recent studies have demonstrated the drug-microbiome-host relationship via various in silico studies [122,202,203]. Hence, combined with computational methods and experimental methods, it might be helpful to understand the mechanism of action of metformin on the gut microbiome.

Understanding how metformin modulates glucose metabolism through gut microbiota may be helpful for patients with T2DM who fail upon metformin treatment, and it is possible to inform dietary guidelines to maximize the therapeutic effects, such as using probiotic products and reducing the gastrointestinal side effects [38,98,204].

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

