Gut Dysbiosis in Pancreatic Diseases: A Causative Factor and a Novel Therapeutic Target

Pancreatic-related disorders such as pancreatitis, pancreatic cancer, and type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) impose a substantial challenge to human health and wellbeing. Even though our understanding of the initiation and progression of pancreatic diseases has broadened over time, no effective therapeutics is yet available for these disorders. Mounting evidence suggests that gut dysbiosis is closely related to human health and disease, and pancreatic diseases are no exception. Now much effort is under way to explore the correlation and eventually potential causation between the gut microbiome and the course of pancreatic diseases, as well as to develop novel preventive and/or therapeutic strategies of targeted microbiome modulation by probiotics, prebiotics, synbiotics, postbiotics, and fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) for these multifactorial disorders. Attempts to dissect the intestinal microbial landscape and its metabolic profile might enable deep insight into a holistic picture of these complex conditions. This article aims to review the subtle yet intimate nexus loop between the gut microbiome and pancreatic diseases, with a particular focus on current evidence supporting the feasibility of preventing and controlling pancreatic diseases via microbiome-based therapeutics and therapies.

Pancreatic diseases, including pancreatitis, pancreatic cancer, and type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM), not only exert an outsized adverse effect on human health because of marked morbidity and mortality, but impose a heavy societal burden worldwide (1). Pancreatitis is one of the most common gastrointestinal (GI) disorders seen in U.S. hospitals, ranking third after GI hemorrhage and gallbladder disease (1). Globally, the annual incidence rates of acute pancreatitis (AP) and chronic pancreatitis (CP) are 34 cases and 10 cases per 100,000 person-years, respectively (2). Around 80–85% of patients with AP develop interstitial edematous pancreatitis, with a mortality rate of <2%. Other patients might evolve into necrotizing pancreatitis of varying severity, and, in severe cases, where patients develop persistent organ failure, the mortality rate rises to 15–20% (3). In the cases of CP, there is an 8–9-fold increased risk of developing pancreatic cancer (4, 5). Pancreatic cancer is a common and fatal malignancy of the pancreas and is considered to be the third leading cause of death in the U.S. According to the “Cancer Facts & Figure 2020” issued by the American Cancer Society, the estimated number of deaths for pancreatic cancer is 7.8%, which is secondary to that of lung cancer (22.4%) and colorectal cancer (8.8%) (6). Notably, the incidence rate for pancreatic cancer increased by 1% per year from 2007 to 2016 and is projected to be the second biggest cancer killer in the U.S. by 2030 (6, 7). Another pancreatic disease, T1DM, does not directly manifest as gastrointestinal symptoms, but polyuria, polydipsia, and polyphagia (8). As one of the most common chronic disorders among children and youths (9, 10), the global incidence of T1DM has an average annual increase of 3–4% over the past three decades (11).

This review summarizes existing evidence supporting the hypothesis that there is a close relationship between the gut microbiome and pancreatic diseases, and it further discusses the feasibility of preventing and controlling pancreatic diseases via microbiome-based therapeutics and therapies.

The fact that Helicobacter pylori-related disease (73–75) and recurrent Clostridium difficile-associated disease (76–78) are closely related to the gut microbiome has pushed the research into the functional interplay between the gut microbiome and human health/disease to a climax. An active role of the gut microbiome in influencing extraintestinal diseases has been increasingly recognized. More recently, research focus has thus shifted to investigate the relationship between the gut microbiome and extraintestinal manifestations like pancreatic diseases (79). Anatomically, the pancreas is located behind the stomach, where it connects the duodenum through the pancreatic duct and communicates with the liver through the common bile duct, forming a subtle gut-pancreas-liver axis for bidirectional communications. Experimental evidence also supports the existence of direct pancreas-gut microbiome interactions (Figure 2). For example, the production of cathelicidin-related antimicrobial peptide (CRAMP) by insulin-secreting beta-cells was controlled by gut microbiota-originated short-chain fatty acids (SCFA), highlighting a direct role of the gut microbiota in shaping the pancreatic immune microenvironment (80). On the other hand, Ahuja and colleagues demonstrated that ORAI calcium release-activated calcium modulator 1 (Orai1) produced by pancreatic acinar cells mediated secretion of antimicrobials that shaped the intestinal microbiota and intestinal immunity (81). These two seminal studies shed light on the existence of a gut-pancreatic axis, which warrants further preclinical and clinical investigations.

Collectively, these works suggest that a gut-pancreatic axis may exist, which plays a role in determining the onset and severity of pancreatic diseases. Untangling this subtle yet intimate communication loop requires further preclinical and clinical studies.

A common inflammatory disorder of the pancreas is AP, in which pancreatic enzymes are activated locally due to a variety of etiologies, causing autodigestion, edema, hemorrhage, and even necrosis of pancreatic tissue, as well as dysfunction of remote organs and systems (86). Although the pathophysiology of AP has been well-described (87), none of these has pointed to the attribution to the gut microbiome. However, patients with AP, especially severe AP (SAP), are often accompanied by intestinal barrier dysfunction and subsequent bacterial translocation into the pancreas and/or peripheral blood (88, 89), and since the intestinal microbiome plays a vital role in maintaining intestinal epithelial barrier integrity and shaping intestinal mucosal immune system (90–92), the importance of the gut microbiome in the aetiology of AP should not be neglected.

Despite the investigators have observed changes in intestinal microbiome in the setting of AP, few studies exist that have explored the effect of intestinal microbiome on AP. A few exceptions do exist, a seminal experimental study showed that antibiotic-treated mice and germ-free (GF) mice exhibited attenuated pancreatic injury after AP induction, and subsequent FMT worsened the severity of AP, demonstrating that the gut microbiota was a mediator in AP (94). This notion is underpinned by another recently published study where the authors reported that the gut microbiota and the NLRP3 inflammasome acted together to exacerbate the severity of AP (96). Specific intestinal species even appeared to be critical for the pathogenesis. For example, the gut commensal species, Escherichia coli, exacerbated acute necrotizing pancreatitis through targeting intestinal epithelial cells (97). These pioneering studies strongly support that the gut microbiota and dysbiosis are associated with the severity of AP.

Another common pancreatic disorder is CP. It is a progressive fibroinflammatory condition characterized by gradual replacement of pancreatic secretory parenchyma by fibrous tissues, resulting in endocrine and exocrine dysfunction (98). Similar to AP, the pathogenesis in CP might be associated with the gut microbiome (99–101). A seminal study systematically investigated the fecal microbiomes of patients with CP by 16S rRNA gene sequencing (102). The 16S rRNA microbiota in patients with CP had diminished gut microbial diversity and richness, and the dysbiosis was accompanied by alterations in the taxonomic microbiota profiles (102). A similar outcome was also observed for the first time in mice with CP where authors showed that CP mice had significantly reduced bacterial species richness and diversity (103). Specifically, the abundance of Bacteroides and Alloprevotella genera increased, while the abundance of Lachnospiraceae_NK4A136, Ruminiclostridium, and Roseburia decreased (103). A recent study also demonstrated a distinct difference in gut microbiota between CP mice and control mice (104). However, to our knowledge, no study to date has yet examined the role of intestinal microbiome on CP in humans or animals, which is worthy of future investigation.

Altogether, research on the gut microbiome of individuals with pancreatitis is still in its infancy, but current evidence does implicate that the host gut microbiome and pancreatitis are closely linked. Applications of GF mouse models and metagenomic sequencing approaches rather than relying on biomarker sequencing will likely provide a better insight into the intricate relationship between the gut microbiome and pancreatitis.

T1DM is an autoimmune disorder, characterized by T cell-mediated destruction of insulin-producing beta cells in the pancreas, resulting in a reliance on exogenous insulin throughout life (105). Genetic variation is a well-established risk factor for T1DM as more than 50 diverse genetic loci have been identified (106), many of which are located in the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) region (107). Apart from genetic predisposition to T1DM pathogenesis, environmental factors also play an integral role (108). In fact, genetic susceptibility and environmental events, conspire together to provide fertile ground for the initiation and progression of T1DM (109), and since both environmental factors (e.g., dietary habits) (110–113) and genetic risks (114–116) profoundly affect the human gut microbiome, it would be of interest to find out the role of the gut microbiome in T1DM.

Thus, it will be necessary to conduct more mechanistic studies to confirm the causal role of gut microbiome in the onset of T1DM not only by 16S rRNA gene sequencing, but also in combination with metagenomics, metabolomics, and metaproteomics approaches to decipher the functionality of the gut microbiome in T1DM.

Pancreatic cancer refers to tumors that start in the cells of the pancreas, including exocrine tumors. Generally, it is classified into PDAC (about 95% of pancreatic cancers) and endocrine tumors (about 5% of pancreatic cancers) (136). In PDAC, alterations in gut microbiota were observed both in humans and animals. For example, genetically engineered PDAC mice exhibited gut dysbiosis characterized with the predominance of Proteobacterial and Firmicutes as well as elevated serum polyamine metabolism (137). A previous study found that the 16S rRNA fecal microbiota of patients with pancreatic carcinoma (n = 85) exhibited significantly diminished alpha-diversity compared with matched healthy controls (n = 57), accompanied by increases in certain pathogens and lipopolysaccharides-producing bacteria, and decreases in probiotics and butyrate-producing bacteria (138). Patients with PDAC had an increased phylum Proteobacteria (such as Gammaproteobacteria) and a decreased phylum Firmicutes (such as butyrate-producing bacteria, including Eubacterium rectale, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, and Roseburia intestinalis) when compared with healthy controls (139). Additionally, several recent review articles have underscored the importance of the gut microbiome in the development and progression of PDAC (140–142).

In summary, a subtle yet intimate nexus loop exists between the gut microbiome and pancreatic diseases, including pancreatitis, pancreatic cancer, and T1DM (Figure 3). Gut dysbiosis has been consistently reported in patients of pancreatic diseases; however, causal relationships between the gut microbiome and pancreatic disorders, as well as the mechanism of gut microbiome in contributing to the onset, progression, and pathogenesis of this spectrum of diseases, merit further elucidation. The expansion of our knowledge in the field will help identify novel treatment targets and deepen our insights into the development of personalized therapies.

Given the close link between the gut microbiome and pancreatic disorders, it may be feasible to ameliorate pancreatic diseases by modulating the gut microbiome via application of products and treatments like probiotics (150), prebiotics (151), synbiotics (152), postbiotics (153), and FMT (154) (Figure 4). A better understanding of the causal relationship in gut microbiome-pancreatic disease interactions will improve the precision of novel target therapies.

Probiotics are defined as “live microorganisms that, when administered in adequate amounts, confer a health benefit on the host,” according to the International Scientific Association for Probiotics and Prebiotics (ISAPP) consensus in 2013 (150). The role of probiotics in human health and disease has received increasing attention, especially in the prevention and treatment of acute gastroenteritis (155), Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhea (156–158), irritable bowel syndrome (159, 160), neonatal sepsis (161), and acute respiratory infection (162), which have shown beneficial clinical efficacy. Although less studied, clinical evidence also shows beneficial effects of administering probiotics in pancreatic-related disorders.

A number of preclinical studies have reported beneficial effects of probiotic application in mitigating AP (Table 1). For instance, ingesting Lactobacillus plantarum for 4 days before and after induction of AP could reduce microbial translocation in experimental pancreatitis (163). Consuming a microbial consortium comprising Streptococcus thermophilus, Lactobacillus acidophillus, Bifidobacterium lactis was capable of reducing the severity of experimental AP (164). A similar outcome was observed in rats that received Ecologic 641 probiotic formulations 5 days prior to the induction of AP (165). Modification of gut microbiota via administration of Ecologic 641 probiotic formulations reduced bacterial translocation, morbidity, and mortality in the course of experimental AP (166). In two independent studies, the authors observed that Saccharomyces boulardii could diminish bacterial infections and ameliorate pancreatitis (167, 168). A systematic review and meta-analysis strengthened the findings of the aforementioned studies by showing that probiotics did exhibit efficacy in animal models of AP (169). Although the probiotic product, Ecologic 641 probiotic formulations, has been widely promoted as beneficial for AP, a rat experimental model aiming to investigate the association between probiotic prophylaxis (by feeding Ecologic 641 probiotic formulations) and enteral nutrition with AP mortality did not find significant differences between groups in terms of histological severity of pancreatitis, degree of discomfort, weight loss, histological examination of small bowel and bacterial translocation, suggesting probiotic application was ineffectual nor harmful to AP-induced rats (170). Another study found that Clostridium butyricum and its major metabolite, butyrate, could reduce intestinal injury possibly by altering the functions of the intestinal mucosal barrier (171).

Overall, there are discrepant results regarding the effects of probiotics on AP. Larger scale studies would be necessary to clarify whether probiotics intake could improve AP and if there are strain-specific effects in alleviation of AP-associated symptoms. It is noteworthy that there is scarce data on the effect of probiotics on CP in preclinical and clinical trials; thus, whether probiotic treatment has any clinical efficacy in CP remains to be confirmed.

The available literature reveals that the mechanisms of probiotic effects in AP are exerted via improving the intestinal barrier function, inducting inflammatory responses, and modulating the gut microbiome (Figure 5).

Finally, probiotics might serve as a gut microbiota modifier, regulating the gut function and homeostasis (190), particularly in the presence of pancreas-gut microbiota cross-talk and interactions (143). Notably, few studies have investigated the effects and mechanisms of action of probiotics on the gut microbiome in AP. Large-scale animal models and high-quality clinical trials are therefore needed to determine the interactions between probiotics, host gut microbiome, and AP development and pathogenesis.

The NOD mouse model is one of the most important animal models in T1DM research (191). A myriad of evidence regarding the role of probiotics in T1DM stems from NOD mouse models and human studies (Table 3). Female NOD mice receiving the probiotic mix, VSL#3, orally could prevent spontaneous autoimmune diabetes via an IL-10-dependent mechanism and gut microbiota modulation (192, 193). A previous study in NOD mice showed that Lactococcus lactis could serve as a potential immunotherapeutics for autoimmune T1DM (194). As one of the examples, oral administration of Lactococcus lactis secreting the beta-cell antigen glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD)-65 along with anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 to newly diabetic NOD mice led to a significant diabetes reversal, which was fortified up to 67% when in combination with low-dose anti-CD3 antibody (195). Importantly, this effect that persisted after treatment discontinuation (195). Clostridium butyricum has been reported to protect against T1DM by modulating intestinal immune homeostasis and inducing pancreatic regulatory T cells (196). The development of autoimmune diabetes in NOD mice could be alleviated by taking a probiotic combination comprising five bacterial strains that acted by reducing gut permeability, inducing gut-homing Treg cells, and reducing Th1 polarization (197). Akkermansia muciniphila, a candidate of next-generation probiotics, appeared to slow the progression of T1DM in NOD mice (198, 199).

Similar to AP, contradicting results have been obtained regarding the clinical efficacy of probiotics in management of T1DM. The discrepancies should be taken into account in future studies and in design of novel treatment strategies.

Studies of the beneficial effects of probiotic consumption on pancreatic cancer seem to be just beginning, and most published works were conducted in animal models. Probiotic Lactobacillus could enhance gemcitabine-mediated antitumor efficacy in mice with pancreatic cancer (204). This finding is strengthened by another recently published study where authors further observed that probiotics could reduce gemcitabine-induced side effects by restoring a favorable microbiota (205). In addition, probiotic-treated super-charged NK cells could prevent the growth of pancreatic tumors through lysis and differentiation in humanized-BLT mice (206). The MAPK-p38 and transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) signaling pathways have been hypothesized to be the mechanisms by which probiotics exert their anti-tumor effects (207, 208). Whether probiotics have a role in slowing or inhibiting the progression of pancreatic cancer needs to be further investigated and warrants future preclinical and clinical studies.

The ISAPP consensus statement (2016) defined the term prebiotics as “a substrate that is selectively utilized by host microorganisms conferring a health benefit,” including conjugated linoleic acids, polyunsaturated fatty acids, oligosaccharides such as fructooligosaccharides, inulin, galactooligosaccharides, mannanoligosaccharides, xylooligosaccharides, human milk oligosaccharides, phenolics, and phytochemicals (151). Administration of chitosan oligosaccharides to mice for 4 weeks prior to induction of SAP significantly reduced the severity of pancreatic injury by reducing oxidative stress and modulating the gut microbiota (209). Correlations between prebiotic fiber supplementation and hospital stay, duration nutrition therapy, acute phase response and overall complications were identified in patients with SAP in a randomized prospective double-blind controlled clinical trial (210). Inulin-type fructans were thought to play a role in preventing the development of AP and T1DM (211, 212). Supplementation of low-methoxyl pectin in NOD mice alleviated T1DM by increasing colonic SCFA production (213, 214). Similar results have been reported in a separate study investigating the effect of human milk oligosaccharides on T1DM in NOD mice (215). A randomized, placebo-controlled trial showed that the administration of prebiotics (oligofructose-enriched inulin) could improve glycemic control in children with T1DM (216). A series of investigations have also shown that a diet rich in resistant starch was significantly associated with decreased risk of experimental pancreatic malignancies (217, 218).

The definition of symbiotic is “a mixture comprising live microorganisms and substrate(s) selectively utilized by host microorganisms that confers a health benefit on the host,” according to the ISAPP consensus statement issued in 2019 (152). Enteral feeding with Synbiotic 2000 not only reduced organ dysfunctions in patients with SAP, but also improved intestinal barrier function (219, 220). Administration of synbiotics composed of Lactobacillus casei, Lactobacillus rhamnosus, Lactobacillus acidophilus, Bifidobacterium bifidum, and fructooligosaccharides in patients with CP increased the serum concentrations of hemoglobin, hematocrit, erythrocytes, total count of lymphocytes, magnesium, and albumin, and meanwhile reduced the total cholesterol values, without altering the nutritional status of the patients (221). In another single-blind prospective randomized control trial, synbiotics containing Streptococcus faecalis, Clostridium butyricum, Bacillus mesentericus, Lactobacillus sporogenes, and fructooligosaccharides significantly reduced septic complications, hospital stay, and antibiotic requirement in patients undergoing pancreatic surgery for CP (222). A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial showed that synbiotic supplementation in patients with T1DM might be effective in improving fasting blood glucose, hemoglobin A1c, insulin, hypersensitive C-reactive protein, and total antioxidant capacity (223).

The nomenclature of postbiotics was not clear until 2021 when the ISAPP defined a postbiotic as a “preparation of inanimate microorganisms and/or their components that confers a health benefit on the host” (153). Evidence is emerging that postbiotics have multiple health benefits and are considered to be the next horizon in microbial therapeutics and functional foods (224). In a cerulein-induced AP mouse, oral administration of probiotic Lactobacillus brevis SBL88-derived polyphosphate for 24 days prior to induction of AP mitigated the severity of AP, which was not only associated with modulation of the intestinal microbiome but also enhancement of the gut barrier integrity (225). A postbiotic, heat-killed Lactococcus chungangensis CAU 1447, could facilitate wound healing in type I diabetic mice; however, the authors did not investigate its effect on T1DM (226). Ferrichrome, derived from Lactobacillus casei ATCC334, has been shown to inhibit the growth of pancreatic cancer cells (227).

Fecal microbiota transplantation is a procedure in which stool from a healthy donor is placed into another patient's intestine (228). FMT to both antibiotic-treated mice and GF mice resulted in an aggravated AP (94). Heparanase-transgenic mice had more severe AP than wild-type mice; however, transfer of feces from the former to the latter worsened the disease (229). Parallels have also been observed in Western-type diet in combination with acute necrotizing pancreatitis (ANP) mice (230). However, a case report showed that FMT could be an effective therapeutic strategy in MSAP patients (231). The exact implication of FMT in the onset of pancreatitis remains to be proven in animal and human studies. In specific pathogen-free NOD mice, females have 1.3–4.4 times higher incidence of T1DM. Gavage transfer of gut microbiota from adult males to immature females altered the recipient's microbiota, elevated the testosterone, caused metabolomic changes, reduced islet inflammation and autoantibody production, and protected against T1DM (133). Transplanting fecal samples from diabetes-protected MyD88-deficient NOD mice to wild type female NOD/LtJ mice led to a delayed onset of diabetes and a reduced insulitis (119). Early-life antibiotic exposure not only perturbed the intestinal microbiota, but also accelerated the development of T1DM in the NOD mouse model; however, maternal cecal microbiota transfer to antibiotic-induced NOD mice restored the enhanced disease risk to baseline levels (232, 233). A randomized controlled trial published in 2021 found that FMT halted the onset of T1DM in human (234). Some other human FMT trials are ongoing for T1DM (NCT04124211; NCT04749030). A paucity of studies have investigated the application of FMT in pancreatic cancer, except those mentioned earlier.

In summary, research on the application of probiotics in pancreatic diseases has spawned a great deal of data; however, the data from prebiotics, synbiotics, postbiotics, and FMT is rather limited. Although heterogeneity exists in some studies, the application of probiotics, prebiotics, synbiotics, postbiotics, and FMT for improving pancreatic diseases remains promising.

Recent metagenomics and metabolomics studies have highlighted the complex interplay between the gut microbiome and pancreatic-related disorders. However, these approaches have several limitations. Firstly, they are association studies rather than causal research, which is needed to show whether alterations in the gut microbiome and its metabolites are a cause or a consequence of the disease. Secondly, although it is possible to describe the full spectrum of microorganisms through metagenomics studies, targeting strains like traditional culture approaches is difficult. Thirdly, metabolomics has almost become a golden standard used to depict metabolic profiles of the gut microbiome, but it is not easy to identify sources of specific metabolites on the species or strain level. To address these constraints, GF animal model and culturomics have become essential tools for exploring potential causality between host-microbial interactions (235, 236). The GF animal model is an attractive model, which is devoid of microorganisms per se. Excluding interference introduced by the host indigenous microbiome makes GF animal an indispensable key model for causality research. Culturomics has enabled laboratory cultivation and characterization of the vast majority of intestinal microbes, which is integral to research into microbiome (237). Additionally, application of other complementary technologies, such as metatranscriptomics and metaproteomics, will expand our understanding of the gut microbiome and its function.

Modulation of the gut microbiome by probiotics, prebiotics, synbiotics, postbiotics, and FMT has reinforced the potential for improving pancreatic diseases. However, animal and human data with respect to probiotics are equivocal in some cases, which could be due to several reasons. Firstly, discrepancies in probiotic strains, dosage, duration and frequency of administration in studies investigating effects of probiotic application are likely responsible for the inconsistent findings. Secondly, probiotics are supposed to act on the gut microbiome; however, the large variation in the indigenous gut microbial landscape between individuals is another major confounder. Consistency of the baseline microbiota should be taken into account given that environmental factors [such as diet (238–240), age (241), geography (241), and birth mode (242, 243)] that determine the gut microbiome differ between individuals. Finally, heterogeneity in the host per se exists. Collectively, these limitations should be taken into account in future study design (Box 1).

There is growing appreciation of the fact that the gut microbiome imprints pancreatic diseases including pancreatitis, pancreatic cancer, and T1DM based on a multitude of preclinical and clinical studies. Evidence of the intestinal microbiome in driving pancreatic diseases further supports the significance of the extensive gut-pancreas crosstalk, leading to intense interest in microbiome characterization and engineering via application of probiotics, prebiotics, synbiotics, postbiotics, or FMT. Researches over the last decades have advanced our understanding of the relationship between the gut microbiome and pancreatic diseases. Such advent would also bring about novel strategies in improving pancreatic diseases via modulating the gut microbiome. Despite this breakthrough, potential causality between the gut microbiome and pancreatic diseases remains obscure. Efforts to untie the causality and microbiota-mediated mechanisms of pancreatic diseases have critical clinical implications, enabling us to better constitute a new and targeted approach to modulate the gut microbiome. Moreover, a body of preclinical research and high-quality clinical trials are needed to further elucidate mechanisms by which the gut microbiome influences pancreatic diseases, as well as mechanisms of probiotics, prebiotics, synbiotics, postbiotics, and FMT in improving disease outcomes. Ultimately, future development in the field will aim to harness microbiome engineering in clinical practice on a personalized level.

GG and HS: conceptualization. TZ: writing—original draft preparation. L-YK and ZS: writing—review and editing. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

This project was supported by the Science and Technology Major Projects of Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region (2021ZD0014) and China Agriculture Research System of MOF and MARA.

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

