Mapping the early life gut microbiome in neonates with critical congenital heart disease: multiomics insights and implications for host metabolic and immunological health

The early life gut microbiome is crucial in maintaining host metabolic and immune homeostasis. Though neonates with critical congenital heart disease (CCHD) are at substantial risks of malnutrition and immune imbalance, the microbial links to CCHD pathophysiology remain poorly understood. In this study, we aimed to investigate the gut microbiome in neonates with CCHD in association with metabolomic traits. Moreover, we explored the clinical implications of the host-microbe interactions in CCHD.

Deep metagenomic sequencing and metabolomic profiling of paired fecal samples from 45 neonates with CCHD and 50 healthy controls were performed. The characteristics of gut microbiome were investigated in three dimensions (microbial abundance, functionality, and genetic variation). An in-depth analysis of gut virome was conducted to elucidate the ecological interaction between gut viral and bacterial communities. Correlations between multilevel microbial features and fecal metabolites were determined using integrated association analysis. Finally, we conducted a subgroup analysis to examine whether the interactions between gut microbiota and metabolites could mediate inflammatory responses and poor surgical prognosis.

Gut microbiota dysbiosis was observed in neonates with CCHD, characterized by the depletion of Bifidobacterium and overgrowth of Enterococcus, which was highly correlated with metabolomic perturbations. Genetic variations of Bifidobacterium and Enterococcus orchestrate the metabolomic perturbations in CCHD. A temperate core virome represented by Siphoviridae was identified to be implicated in shaping the gut bacterial composition by modifying microbial adaptation. The overgrowth of Enterococcus was correlated with systemic inflammation and poor surgical prognosis in subgroup analysis. Mediation analysis indicated that the overgrowth of Enterococcus could mediate gut barrier impairment and inflammatory responses in CCHD.

We demonstrate for the first time that an aberrant gut microbiome associated with metabolomic perturbations is implicated in immune imbalance and adverse clinical outcomes in neonates with CCHD. Our data support the importance of reconstituting optimal gut microbiome in maintaining host metabolic and immunological homeostasis in CCHD.

Video Abstract video file.(110M, mp4)

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s40168-022-01437-2.

The early life gut microbiome is a crucial modulator in the health and development of the host [1]. Mounting evidence suggests that multilevel microbial traits that underpin host–microbiome crosstalk during infancy have far-reaching effects on host metabolic and immunological homeostasis, such as facilitating nutrient acquisition, promoting immune maturation and tolerance development [2, 3], enabling pathogen clearance [4], and nourishing intestinal epithelial cells [5]. By contrast, the absence or disruption of optimal host–microbiome interactions during this critical window of development would therefore be expected to have detrimental effects on specific functions or potentially on regulation of the host system as a whole. From this perspective, deciphering the clinical implications of the early life gut microbiome is of critical importance in guiding health promotion and disease prevention.

In this study, we performed an integrated analysis of fecal metabolomics and metagenome sequencing of paired samples from neonates with CCHD and healthy controls (HCs). We aimed to (i) systematically characterize the early life gut microbiome in neonates with CCHD in three dimensions (microbial composition, functionality, and genetic variation) and uncover its implications on the host metabolic phenotype; (ii) reveal the ecological interaction between the gut viral and bacterial communities and unravel its impacts on the overall microbial configuration. To gain further biological insights, we profiled serum levels of proinflammatory cytokines and biomarkers of intestinal permeability in the patient cohort, and used metagenome-wide association analysis and bi-directional mediation analysis to infer the potential regulatory relationships among gut microbiota, epithelial barrier impairment, inflammatory response, and surgical prognosis.

The detailed information about study design, settings, and methods of bioinformatic analyses is available in Additional file 1.

This study was approved by the Human Research and Ethics Committee of Fuwai Hospital Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences (Approval No. 2019–1300) and Shanghai Children’s Medical Center (Approval NO. SCMCIRB-K2021021). Full-term neonates with CCHD [17] admitted to the Pediatric Cardiac Surgery Center from December 2019 to August 2021 were enrolled. The exclusion criteria included (i) diagnosed with any extra-cardiac medical condition that could affect metabolism, nutritional status or physical health; (ii) previous usage of probiotics, antibiotics or immunosuppressant which could potentially affect gut microbial composition. The enrollment flowchart is shown in Additional file 1: Figure S1. A total of 45 neonates with CCHD were finally included. Fifty matched healthy controls were recruited simultaneously. Informed consent was obtained from all the guardians of the participants for samples and data collection. Fecal samples were scrapped from diapers and immediately frozen at – 80 °C until analysis. Blood samples were collected on admission from CCHD patients and preprocessed to obtain serum (centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 10 min and collected the supernatant), and then stored at – 80 ℃ until analysis. The baseline demographics and clinical metadata were collected from electronic medical records.

Briefly, genomic DNA was isolated from fecal samples using QIAamp PowerFecal Pro DNA Kit (QIAGEN, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Concentration and purity of extracted DNA were confirmed by TBS-380 and NanoDrop2000, respectively. Paired-end library was constructed using NEXTFLEX Rapid DNA-Seq (Bioo Scientific, USA). Sequencing was performed on a Novaseq 6000 platform (Illumina, USA) and generated a sequencing depth of approximately 117 million raw reads per sample. Fastp (https://github.com/OpenGene/fastp, version 0.20.0) was utilized to remove the adaptors and low-quality reads. Host reads were removed after alignment with the human genome assembly (GRCh38.p13) using Burrows-Wheeler Aligner (http://bio-bwa.sourceforge.net). The high-quality non-host reads were assembled using MEGAHIT (https://github.com/voutcn/megahit, version 1.1.2) and contigs with lengths greater than 300 bp were used for gene (ORFs) prediction by Prodigal (version 2.6.3) [18]. Only ORF longer than 100 bp was considered in downstream analyses. Gene sequences were clustered into a non-redundant gene catalogue using CD-HIT (version 4.6) [19] at 95% identity and 90% coverage. The high-quality reads were mapped to the non-redundant gene catalogue with 95% identity using SOAPaligner (http://soap.genomics.org.cn/, version 2.21).

Bacteria taxonomic and functional profiles were obtained with the resulted gene sets aligned to the NCBI NR database and KEGG database (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/) using Diamond (version 2.0.11) at the e value = 1e − 5. The microbiome diversity analyses (including alpha and beta diversity) were conducted and visualized using the vegan and ggplot2 packages in R (version 4.0.2). The discriminative bacterial species and KEGG orthology between the two groups were identified using LEfSe with a LDA score > 2.0.

Untargeted metabolomics analysis was conducted as previously described [20]. Briefly, metabolic extracts were obtained from fecal samples following methanol-assisted protein precipitation and then analyzed by an UHPLC system (Vanquish, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a UPLC BEH Amide column. The raw data were converted to the mzXML format using ProteoWizard and processed with R package xcms [21], for peak detection, extraction, alignment, and integration. The in-house MS2 database was applied for metabolite identification. The OPLS-DA was performed using the statistics function prcomp in R (version 4.0.2). In order to avoid overfitting, a permutation test (200 permutations) was performed. The discriminative metabolites between the two groups were identified with variable importance in the projection (VIP) > 1 (determined by OPLS-DA) and P < 0.05 (determined by Student’s t test). The KEGG database (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/) and MetaboAnalyst database (http://www.metaboanalyst.ca/) were used for pathway enrichment analysis.

The SCFA concentrations were determined by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. The detailed methodology is available in Supplementary file.

The Luminex Human Discovery multiplex assay kit (Catalog Number: LXSAHM; R&D Systems, Inc, USA) was used for simultaneous measurement of cytokines IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8, TNF-α, and INF-γ in serum samples. Upon completion of each multiplex assay, the amounts of serum cytokines were analyzed via Luminex. The commercially available ELISA kits (Bio-swamp Life Science, Wuhan, China) were used to measure the intestinal permeability biomarkers according to manufactures’ instructions, including zonulin, D-lactate, iFABP, LPS, and LBP.

SGV-Finder pipeline [22] was applied to classify the microbial structural variations (SVs). The SV-screening procedure is mainly divided into two steps: (1) run ICRA, which is an ‘iterative coverage-based read assignment’ algorithm, to resolve ambiguous read assignments to regions that are similar between different bacteria. (2) run SGV-Finder, which analyses coverage depth across all microbial genomes in all samples to characterize SVs with respect to the standardized coverage of a genome in a given sample (https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1065-y). The variability of microbial SVs between individuals were determined by Canberra distance.



Prophage-based bacteria-phage association analysis was conducted as previously described [28, 29]. In brief, the prophage sequences in bacterial contigs were predicted using VirSorter (version 1.0.3) [30]. Initially, the bacterial contigs (≥ 5 kb) were analyzed by VirSorter using both RefSeqABVir (− db 1) and Viromes (− db 2). Then the predicted prophage sequences of VirSorter categories 4 or 5 (presence of viral hallmark genes or enrichment of viral-like genes in a prophage region) were extracted. The positions of the predicted prophage sequences on bacterial contigs were determined through megablast (BLAST + version 2.7.1) searches (E value < 10−100 and ≥ 95% identity), and prophage sequences were merged if their positions overlapped. Prophage sequences longer than 3 kb were extracted and listed as final prophage sequences.

Gene annotation of viral contigs was based on open reading frames (ORFs). The ORFs on the viral contigs were predicted by MetaProdigal (version 2.6.3) [31]. The identified ORFs were then queried by hmmscan in HMMER3 (version 3.3.2) [32] against the PfamA database (version 34.0) [33], VFDB [34], and CARD [35] with an E value < 10−5.

The CRISPR-based bacteria-phage association analysis was conducted as previously described [28, 29]. Briefly, we first identified CRISPR spacers on bacterial contigs (≥ 5 kb) using CRISPRDetect [36]. To identify the target phages of the CRISPR spacers, we then queried the identified spacers using blastn (BLAST + version 2.12.0) (https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-10-421) against the viral contigs and extracted the aligned spacers with > 90% of their length aligned with a minimum identity level of 95% and a maximum E value of 5 × 10−3.

Enterotype analysis was performed at the genus level using the Jensen-Shannon divergence (JSD) distance and the Partitioning Around Medoids (PAM) clustering algorithm in the R package cluster. The optimal number of clusters was determined by Calinski-Harabasz (CH) index using the R package clusterSim. PCoA was performed to visualize the clusters of samples using the R package ade4 [37]. The top 10 most abundant species enriched in each enterotype were selected for Spearman’s rank correlation analysis. For plotting purpose, only correlations with coefficient >  + 0.6 or <  − 0.6 were plotted in the network using Cytoscape 3.9.0.

The significant associations between continuous microbial variables (microbial abundance, KEGG pathway abundance, microbial vSVs) and fecal metabolites were determined by Spearman’s rank correlation analysis. Two-sided Mann–Whitney U test was used to calculate significance of associations between binary variables (dSVs) and the same metabolites.

To investigate the mediation linkages between continuous microbial features, fecal metabolites, and host pathological phenotypes (i.e., serum biomarkers of inflammation and intestinal permeability), we first identified microbe-metabolite-biomarker groups in which all variables significantly correlated with each other as candidate groups with a potential mediation effect. Then we performed bi-directional analysis on the candidate groups using the R package mediation (version 4.5.0).

Basic statistical analyses (including Student’s t test, Wilcoxon test, chi-square test, and Fisher’s exact test) were performed as appropriate to compare continuous and categorical variables using SPSS (version 25). Univariable and multivariable logistic regression analyses were performed to evaluate the predictive value of Enterococcus abundance in prognostic stratification in the study cohort (SPSS version 25). Receiver-operating characteristic curve was used to evaluate the discriminative performance of the predictive model. Other statistical details related to metagenomic and metabolomic data can be found in the figure legends and methods. P values of < 0.05 were considered significant.

Forty-five full-term neonates diagnosed with CCHD and 50 HCs matched by age and gender were enrolled in this study. The enrollment flowchart and cohort characteristics are shown in Additional file 1: Figure S1 and Table S1, respectively. In brief, no significant differences were observed in birth weight, delivery mode, and breastfeeding status between the two groups.

We first investigated the gut bacterial composition and diversity between the two groups (CCHD and HD groups) and observed a significant increase in α-diversity in the CCHD group (Fig. 1A). In addition, principal coordinates analysis (PCoA) of bacterial composition also suggested a significant separation between the two groups, which was largely driven by a subset of bacterial species, including Bifidobacterium ramosum, Bifidobacterium biavatii, Lactobacillus delbrueckii, Bacteroides caccae, Enterococcus asini, Pseudomonas oleovorans, and Lachnoclostridium sp.An14 (Fig. 1B). To further delineate the differences in bacterial configurations between groups, we performed enterotype analysis using unsupervised clustering at the genus level. Intriguingly, two clusters driven by a relatively high abundance of the genera Enterococcus (enterotype 1) and Bifidobacterium (enterotype 2) were identified (Fig. 1C–E). The Bifidobacterium enterotype was predominant in the HC group and displayed a convergent microbial community enriched with multiple Bifidobacterium species, whereas the CCHD group was dominated with the Enterococcus enterotype and showed a relatively discrete microbial community enriched with Enterococcus, Klebsiella, and Streptococcus. Next, we identified 58 discriminative bacterial species between the CCHD and HC groups (Fig. 1F). Compared to that in HCs, CCHD patients were characterized by 34 enriched species mainly belonging to the genera Enterococcus (6 species), Enterobacter (5 species), and Clostridium (four species), and by 24 depleted species mainly belonging to the genera Bifidobacterium (9 species), Lactobacillus (4 species), and Veillonella (4 species). Then, a species co-abundance network was constructed to provide an overview of the interplay among these discriminative bacterial species. As shown in Fig. 1G, bacterial species belonging to the same genus clade were closely correlated with each other. For instance, several Bifidobacterium species enriched in HC were closely correlated to generate a covarying cluster. Notably, we observed that species belonging to the genera Bifidobacterium, Lactobacillus, and Veillonella were positively correlated and constituted a symbiotic bacterial community in HC, whereas the species corresponding to the genera Enterococcus, Enterobacter, and Clostridium were discretely enriched in the CCHD group.

The gut virome is an essential component of the human gut microbiome; however, the ecological interaction between gut viral and bacterial communities remains poorly understood. Here, we characterized the gut virome in both CCHD and HC groups, and investigated its interaction with gut bacteria. We first explored the richness of the gut virome and found a relative increase in α-diversity in the CCHD group (Additional file 1: Figure S2A). As expected, the PCoA of viral composition at the family level also revealed a distinct separation between the two groups, mainly driven by Siphoviridae, Myoviridae, and Herelleviridae (Additional file 1: Figure S2B). After filtering out the low-abundance taxa, 37 viral species responsible for discriminating the two groups were identified, of which 25 species were enriched in CCHD relative to that in HC (Additional file 1: Figure S2C). Notably, Enterococcus and Escherichia phages are the predominant bacteriophages among CCHD-enriched viruses, which is corresponding to the overabundance of Enterococcus and Enterobacter in CCHD group. To initially assess the ecological interaction, we compared bacterial richness with viral richness and found a strong positive correlation in the CCHD group (Additional file 1: Figure S2D). Additionally, positive correlations in community richness between Enterococcus phages and their bacterial host (i.e., genus Enterococcus) were also confirmed in both groups, with the relative abundance consistently higher in CCHD (Additional file 1: Figure S2EF).

Collectively, these findings suggest that a temperate core virome represented by Siphoviridae can act as an intrinsic force mediating the infectious kinetics and co-evolutionary relationship between gut bacteria and phages, and further implicates early life bacterial perturbations in CCHD by modifying microbial adaptation with a complex repertoire of functional genes.

Fecal metabolomics analysis can provide a functional readout of the gut microbiome. Here metabolomic profiling of paired fecal samples was conducted to characterize the metabolic signatures of both the groups. A total of 748 metabolites were identified by liquid chromatograph-mass spectrometry (LC–MS)–based untargeted metabolomics analysis. PCoA of metabolite distribution demonstrated that the overall metabolic signatures between the two groups were significantly different (Additional file 1: Figure S4A). By leveraging the orthogonal partial least-squares discriminant analysis (OPLS-DA), 120 discriminative metabolites between CCHD and HC groups were identified (Additional file 1: Figure S4B). Specifically, the CCHD group displayed enrichment of 36 metabolites and depletion of 84 metabolites compared to those in the HC group. Moreover, pathway-based differential abundance analysis highlighted that the metabolic pathways of thiamine metabolism, linoleic acid (LA) metabolism, biosynthesis of unsaturated fatty acids, galactose metabolism, phenylalanine metabolism, and tyrosine metabolism were downregulated in the CCHD group, whereas the metabolic pathways of arachidonic acid (AA) metabolism and primary bile acid biosynthesis were upregulated (Additional file 1: Figure S4C).

To explore the potential relevance between bacterial composition and metabolomic phenotypes, we calculated Spearman’s correlation matrices and constructed a co-occurrence network of differential bacterial species and metabolites (Additional file 1: Figure S5). To visualize strong associations between bacteria and metabolites, only results showing Spearman’s correlation coefficients >  + 0.6 or <  − 0.6 with a significance (i.e., P < 0.05) were plotted. Consistent with our initial findings, the differential bacterial species mainly generated four covarying clusters corresponding to their genus annotations (Bifidobacterium, Lactobacillus, Enterococcus, and Enterobacter), and the differential metabolites were clustered according to the metabolic pathways they were involved in. Interestingly, most bacterium–metabolite associations converged to the Bifidobacterium, Lactobacillus, and Enterococcus clusters. Strong positive correlations were observed between the genus Bifidobacterium and fecal metabolites belonging to amino acid and carbohydrate metabolism through some node species (Bifidobacterium longum CAG:69, Bifidobacterium bifidum, and Bifidobacterium catenulatum) and metabolites (l-arginine, N-acetyl-l-glutamate, l-fucose, and rhamnose). Notably, fecal levels of aromatic lactic acids (including hydroxyphenyllactic acid and indolelactic acid [IAA]), newly recognized probiotic-associated metabolites derived from phenylalanine and tryptophan metabolism, were positively correlated with the abundance of Lactobacillus paragasseri and most Bifidobacterium species, while consistently displaying negative correlations with Enterococcus gallinarum.

In addition to microbial abundance, the investigation of microbial functionality and genetic variations can provide an extra layer of information that facilitates mechanistic insights into the role of the gut microbiome in host metabolism. To this end, we first functionally profiled gene families in all metagenomes and identified 6103 Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) orthologs (KOs). Based on the PCoA of KEGG pathways, the overall microbial functionality between the two groups was significantly different (Additional file 1: Figure S6A). In addition, 840 differential KOs were identified, most of which were involved in metabolic pathways, especially amino acid metabolism, carbohydrate metabolism, and the metabolism of cofactors and vitamins (Additional file 1: Figure S6B). Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) showed that 33 metabolic pathways were differentially depleted in the CCHD group, most of which belonged to amino acid metabolism (aromatic amino acids (AAAs), branched chain amino acids, lysine, and arginine biosynthesis) and vitamin metabolism (riboflavin, vitamin B6, and pantothenate metabolism), whereas the other 29 metabolic pathways enriched in the CCHD group mainly belonged to carbohydrate and lipid metabolism, such as glycerolipid metabolism and lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis (Additional file 1: Figure S6C).

Collectively, these findings indicate that the aberrant gut microbial composition in neonates with CCHD, characterized by the overgrowth of Enterococcus and depletion of Bifidobacterium, together with the alterations in microbial functionality and genetic makeup, considerably impact early life immune development and metabolism. Moreover, microbial metabolites are important agents involved in host–microbe interactions. An in-depth analysis of microbial genetics provides mechanistic insights into the metabolomic perturbations.

To further investigate the role of the gut microbiome in clinical outcomes of neonates with CCHD, we first separated our patient cohort into two subgroups based on surgical prognosis and conducted a comparative analysis. Specifically, composite adverse events were used to define the poor prognosis (Additional file 1: Table S2). Nineteen patients who had one or more adverse event/s were classified as having a poor prognosis. The perioperative clinical metadata are summarized in Additional file 1: Table S3. In brief, no significant differences were observed in the demographic data and preoperative and intraoperative variables, including median age at operation, blood oxygen saturation (SpO2), cardiac surgery complexity (RACHS-1 and ABC categories), cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) time, and intraoperative blood loss.

Interestingly, these findings were in accord with the initial evidence we observed from the comparative analysis between CCHD patients and HCs, which further prompted us to hypothesize that gut microbiota dysbiosis in neonates with CCHD, characterized by the overgrowth of Enterococcus, is implicated in worsening surgical outcomes by mediating inflammatory responses and microbial metabolites. To verify this hypothesis, we first examined the inflammatory status of the patients. Blood samples collected on admission were used to quantify the serum levels of inflammatory cytokines (including interleukin-1β [IL-1β], interleukin-6 [IL-6], interleukin-8 [IL-8], tumor necrosis factor-α [TNF-α], and interferon-γ [INF-γ]) and biomarkers of intestinal permeability (including zonulin, D-lactate, intestinal fatty acid binding protein [iFABP], lipopolysaccharide [LPS], and lipopolysaccharide binding protein [LBP]) [13, 50, 51]. Notably, although at low titers, the serum levels of all these biomarkers were significantly increased in CCHD-P relative to those in CCHD-G (Additional file 1: Figure S11, S12), indicating that subclinical systemic inflammation and gut barrier impairment existed prior to cardiac surgery in neonates with poor prognosis. To investigate an aberrant gut microbiota-disrupted gut barrier–systemic inflammation axis, we employed an integrated correlation analysis of differential microbial features and serum biomarkers of inflammation and intestinal permeability. Notably, strong positive associations were observed between Enterococcus abundance and the serum levels of multiple proinflammatory cytokines and biomarkers of intestinal permeability (Fig. 4F). Furthermore, univariable and multivariable logistic regression analyses were performed to investigate whether there is predictive value of Enterococcus species in prognostic stratification for neonates with CCHD (independent of traditional clinical risk factors, e.g., SpO2, cardiac surgery complexity indexes, and CPB time, Additional file 1: Table S4). Intriguingly, a predictive model comprising of Enterococcus faecium abundance, CPB time, and intraoperative infusion volume was constructed and yielded an area under the curve (AUC) of 0.86 (95% CI 0.74–0.97) in the study cohort (Additional file 1: Figure S13), indicating that Enterococcus faecium abundance could be an independent predictor of surgical prognosis for neonates with CCHD.

By profiling the fecal metabolites of both subgroups, we identified significant differences in the overall metabolic signatures between the two subgroups (Additional file 1: Figure S14A, B). Accordingly, pathway-based differential abundance analysis revealed that most metabolic pathways associated with amino acids, vitamins, and unsaturated fatty acids were downregulated in the CCHD-P group (Additional file 1: Figure S14C). To initially investigate the pivotal bacterial species that were highly associated with metabolomic alterations, we constructed a co-abundance network of differential bacteria and metabolites. Notably, the interplay between bacteria and metabolites was largely attributed to the negative associations between CCHD-P-enriched Enterococcus species and metabolites involved in lipid and vitamin metabolism (Additional file 1: Figure S15), indicating that antagonistic relationships between Enterococcus and lipid and vitamin metabolism could be central to the metabolomic perturbations in neonates with poor prognosis.

Collectively, these findings indicate that the overgrowth of Enterococcus together with genetic variations is highly associated with the depletion of probiotic-associated metabolites, especially aromatic lactic acids, LA derivatives, and B vitamins, thereby implicating an active inflammatory response.

To further evaluate whether metabolites can mediate the microbial impact on the inflammatory response and gut barrier impairment in neonates with CCHD, we performed a bi-directional mediation analysis and revealed 23 mediation linkages (Pmediation < 0.05, Pinverse mediation > 0.05, Fig. 6A). Interestingly, most of these linkages were related to Enterococcus faecium (four linkages), Enterococcus columbae (three linkages), and the microbial functionality of glycine, serine, and threonine metabolism (three linkages). Our mediation analysis suggested that Enterococcus faecium might contribute to gut barrier impairment (characterized by increased serum levels of D-lactate and iFABP) by decreasing fecal levels of 13-HODE (26%, Pmediation < 0.05, Fig. 6B) and α-dimorphecolic acid (9(S)-HODE; 17%, Pmediation < 0.05, Fig. 6C), both of which are LA derivatives. Furthermore, the microbial fatty acid degradation pathway may also contribute to decreased intestinal permeability by affecting fecal AA level (14%, Pmediation < 0.05, Fig. 6D).

We also identified several metabolite mediation effects on the microbial impact on systemic inflammation. An interesting example here is Enterococcus columbae, a bacterium enriched in CCHD-P, which may contribute to the systemic inflammatory response by decreasing fecal levels of 9(S)-HODE (23%, Pmediation < 0.05, Fig. 6E) and dodecanoylcarnitine (25%, Pmediation < 0.05, Fig. 6F). By contrast, the microbial functionality of glycine, serine, and threonine metabolism probably contributes to alleviating the systemic inflammatory response through l-targinine (an arginine derivative; 18%, Pmediation < 0.05, Fig. 6G).

CCHD is a composite of complex inborn heart defects that imposes a huge burden on quality of life. In addition to multiple clinical factors being associated with CCHD prognosis, the gut microbiota remains an important but yet lesser-known aspect that likely influences the pathophysiology of CCHD. Given the critical role of the early life gut microbiome in maintaining host metabolic and immune homeostasis, we undertook in-depth analyses to elucidate the implications of the gut microbiome in neonates with CCHD.

We acknowledge several limitations in our study. First, the patient cohort of this study was comprised neonates with CCHD, and whether these findings may be applicable to other types of CHD remains unknown. Future research on the entire spectrum of CHD is required to provide a comprehensive understanding of the impacts of the gut microbiota in CHD. Second, this study was observational and the associations were not proof of causation, although we did perform bi-directional mediation analysis to infer the mediation linkages. Moreover, we provided some potential biological mechanistic hypotheses by integrating multi-omics datasets, including metagenomics and metabolomics, which require further experimental validation.

We demonstrate for the first time that an aberrant gut microbiome associated with metabolomic perturbations is implicated in immune imbalance and adverse clinical outcomes in neonates with CCHD. Our data support the importance of reconstituting optimal gut microbiome in maintaining host metabolic and immunological homeostasis in CCHD.



Publisher's note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Yuan Huang, Wenlong Lu, and Min Zeng contributed equally and are joint first authors.

