Relationship between gut microbiome characteristics and the effect of nutritional therapy on glycemic control in pregnant women with gestational diabetes mellitus

The purpose of this study was to explore the relationship between the characteristics of gut microbiome and the effect of medical nutrition therapy (MNT) on glycemic control in pregnant women with gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM). Seventy-four pregnant women newly diagnosed with GDM received MNT for one-week. The effect of glycemic control was evaluated by fasting and 2-hour postprandial blood glucose; and stool samples of pregnant women were collected to detect the gut microbiome before and after MNT. We used a nested case-control study design, with pregnant women with GDM who did not meet glycemic standards after MNT as the ineffective group and those with an age difference of ≤5 years, matched for pre-pregnancy body mass index (BMI) 1:1, and meeting glycemic control criteria as the effective group. Comparison of the gut microbiome characteristics before MNT showed that the ineffective group was enriched in Desulfovibrio, Aeromonadales, Leuconostocaceae, Weissella, Prevotella, Bacillales_Incertae Sedis XI, Gemella and Bacillales, while the effective group was enriched in Roseburia, Clostridium, Bifidobacterium, Bifidobacteriales, Bifidobacteriaceae, Holdemania and Proteus. After treatment, the effective group was enriched in Bifidobacterium and Actinomycete, while the ineffective group was enriched in Holdemania, Proteus, Carnobacteriaceae and Granulicatella. In conclusion, the decrease in the abundance of characteristic gut microbiome positively correlated with blood glucose may be a factor influencing the poor hypoglycemic effect of MNT in pregnant women with GDM. Abundance of more characteristic gut microbiome negatively correlated with blood glucose could help control blood glucose in pregnant women with GDM.

Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) is the first identification or occurrence of different degrees of impaired glucose tolerance during pregnancy, which is a common complication of pregnancy. According to the diagnostic guidelines recommended by the International Diabetes and Pregnancy Research Organization (IADPSG) [1], the incidence of GDM is as high as about 18% in the U.S. A systematic study indicated that the overall prevalence of GDM in the Chinese population was 14.8% [2]. In addition, an increasing number of pregnant women worldwide are being diagnosed with GDM. Prevention and treatment of GDM have received widespread attention. Untreated or poorly treated GDM may result in the inability of body to maintain normal glucose metabolism, with significant impact on maternal and infant health, including increased incidence of caesarean section, shoulder dystocia, birth injuries, major bleeding, and increasing the risk of large infants, intrauterine distress, and small-for-gestational age infants [3,4]. Moreover, pregnant women with GDM who have poor glycemic control are at increased risk of postpartum type 2 diabetes and their offspring are more likely to suffer from obesity and metabolic syndrome [5,6]. Therefore, it is important to actively and scientifically control the blood glucose of pregnant women with GDM.

However, there are no studies focused on changes in the characteristics of gut microbiome in pregnant women with GDM before and after MNT, or in pregnant women with poor glycemic control. Thus, this goal of study was to analyze the changes in gut microbiome characteristics in pregnant women with GDM before and after MNT and to explore the relationship between the gut microbiome characteristics and the glycemic control effect before and after MNT in pregnant women with GDM, in order to clarify the gut microbiome’s close relationship to MNT hypoglycemic effect and to provide a reference for a targeted gut microbiome intervention program.

A nested case-control study design was adopted in this study. Between July 2018 and May 2019, 120 pregnant women with a first diagnosis of GDM were recruited from the obstetrics clinic of the First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical University for regular obstetric examinations. All participants signed an informed consent. This study was approved by the ethics committee of Anhui Medical University.

During one-week of MNT, 25 subjects were failed to comply with the overall process of MNT, or they did not follow the principles of diet and exercise in MNT, and 21 subjects were lost to follow-up. Finally, 74 pregnant women were included in this study.

Subjects were recruited by completing a general information questionnaire that included age, education level, whether they were passive smoker, economic income, gravida, parity, history of hyperemesis gravidarum, history of delivery of macrosomia, history of delivery of low-birth-weight infants, and family history of diabetes, body mass index (BMI), etc. Passive smoking was defined as exposure to smoke from smokers for at least 15 minutes per day and >1 day per week among non‐smokers [25].

To ensure the therapy compliance of the subjects, the pregnant women were informed by telephone on the day of diagnosis to attend obstetric clinic on the same day or the next day. The expert and researchers worked together to provide dietary guidance and establish management of Wechat platform. The subjects were required to record their daily dietary intake in detail, and upload photos of all food intake to the WeChat platform for dietary assessment. They also typed up a daily exercise log on the WeChat platform. Researchers should provide timely feedback and adjust the subjects’ dietary intake and record it.

One-week later, the fasting and two-hour postprandial blood glucose levels were measured. At the end of one-week of MNT, the blood glucose profile was used to evaluate the effect of glycemic control.FBG<5.1mmol/L, one-hour postprandial blood glucose<7.8mmol/L, and two-hour postprandial blood glucose<6.7mmol/L are the blood glucose standard conditions; reaching all of these criteria means glycemic management was up to standard [6], otherwise it was not up to standard.

A nested case-control study design was adopted, in which pregnant women with GDM who did not meet the glycemic control results after one-week of using MNT were considered as the ineffective group (group N), and pregnant women with GDM whose age difference was less than 5 years and whose BMI was at the same level as that of the pregnant women who met the glycemic standard were considered as the matching requirement, and the number of effective groups (group Y) was matched 1:1.The Y group consisted of pregnant women with GDM whose glycemic control effect was on target and was separated into Y1 and Y2 based on before and after therapy, respectively. The N group was classified into N1 and N2 based on before and after therapy.

Stool samples from subjects before and after MNT were collected uniformly by trained study personnel. We distributed disposable sterile bowls for stool collection to the subjects beforehand and introduced points to note. Subjects picked up approximately 1 g of stool with a small spoon after a natural bowel movement. Fresh stool samples were collected from recruited subjects and transported to the laboratory in ice packs within 2 hours. All samples were then frozen immediately and stored at—80°C prior to analyses.

DNA was extracted from each fecal samples using improved protocol based on the manual of QIAamp Fast DNA Stool Mini Kit (Qiagen, Germany). In detail, 1ml of InhibitEX Buffer and proper amount of glass beads (0.5mm diameter, Qiagen) was added to each 200mg of feces. The mixture was homogenized and beat with 60Hz for 1 min twice with a Homogeneous instrument (FASTPREP-24, Aosheng Biotech, China). Afterwards, the DNA purification was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

HiSeq/MiSeq platform PE250 strategy (Illumina, Inc., CA, USA) was used for double terminal sequencing, and PANDAseq software was used to produce the high-quality assemblies from Illumina paired-end reads.

The V3-V4 region of the bacteria 16S ribosomal RNA genes were amplified by PCR using barcoded primers 341F 5’-CCTACGGGRSGCAGCAG-3’ and 806R 5’-GGACTACVVGGGTATCTAATC-3’. Negative controls consisted of empty sterile storage tubes for DNA extraction and amplification using the same procedures and reagents as for the fecal samples.No amplification was detected in the negative controls.

Assembled tags, trimmed of barcodes and primers were further checked on their rest lengths and average base quality. The 16S sequence were restricted between 220 bp and 500 bp to ensure the average quality value of each reads was not less than 20 and the number containing N was not exceed three. Operational Taxonomic Units (OTUs) were clustered based on 97% similarity through using UPARSE and chimeric sequences were identified and removed through Usearch (version 7.0.1090). Each representative sequence was assigned to a taxa by RDP Classifer against the RDP database setting confidence threshold to 0.8. The copy number of sequences was enumerated, and redundant parts of the repeated sequences were removed. Only the sequences with frequency more than 1 (which tend to be more reliable) were clustered into OTUs, each of which had a representative sequence. OTU profiling table and alpha diversity analyses were also achieved by python scripts of QIIME (version 1.9.1).

The data were analyzed by SPSS 21.0 statistical software. In the clinical case data, normal distributed continuous variables were described as mean and standard deviation, and the non-normal distribution continuous variables were described as the median and interquartile range. Statistical inference group independent-sample t-test was used for inter-comparison; frequency and percentile were used for statistical description of counting data, and chi-square test was used for inter-group comparison. The gut microbiome parameters were tested by rank sum test. A P value less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

A total of 74 pregnant women newly diagnosed with GDM completed an one-week MNT and recorded a diet diary. After one-week of MNT, 12 subjects failed to meet the standard of glycemic control, and 62 subjects met the standard. There was no significant difference in age, pre-BMI, weight gain during pregnancy, education level, passive smoker, economic income, pregnancy frequency, parity, abortion, hyperemesis gravidarum and family history of diabetes mellitus between the two groups (Table 1).

SD: Standard deviation.

The comparison of FBG, 1-hour and 2-hour postprandial blood glucose levels between the two groups before MNT and FBG, 2-hour postprandial blood glucose levels after MNT is shown in Tables
2 and
3. The 1-hour postprandial blood glucose level in ineffective group was significantly higher than that of effective group before MNT (P < 0.05). The FBG and 1-hour postprandial blood glucose level in effective group was significantly lower than those in the ineffective group after MNT (P < 0.05).

FBG: Fasting blood glucose.

FBG: Fasting blood glucose.

The gut microbiome of pregnant women with GDM before and after therapy were compared between effective group and ineffective group after 1:1 matching. Alpha diversity of N1 and Y1 groups is shown in Fig 1A. Before MNT, the biodiversity of effective group was higher than that of ineffective group, but the Shannon index and Simpson index of the two groups were not statistically different. The beta diversity of gut microbiome was not significantly different between the two groups according to the weighted UniFrac distance (Fig 1B).

As shown in Fig 2A, the differences in species richness between the two groups were mainly Bifidobacteriaceae and Bifidobacteriales in the effective group and Bacillus_Incertae Sedis XI, Bacillales, Leuconostocaceae, and Aeromonadales in the ineffective group. Further statistical analysis on the LDA scores of these groups showed that Roseburia, Clostridium, Bifidobacterium, Bifidobacteriales, Bifidobacteriaceae, Holdermania and Proteus were enriched in the effecitve group, while Desulfovibrio, Aeromonadales, Leuconostocaceae, Weissella, Prevotella, Bacillales_Incertae Sedis XI, Gemella and Bacillales were enriched in the ineffective group (Fig 2B).

After one-week MNT, alpha diversity (Simpson diversity index) of the effective group showed an increasing trend but was not statistically significant. There was an increasing trend, but no statistical significance, and no significant change in the beta diversity of the gut microbiome (Fig 3). The alpha diversity and beta diversity of the gut microbiome in the ineffective group did not change significantly before and after MNT (Fig 4A and 4B). Further species difference analysis showed that there was no species difference in the ineffective group before and after MNT, however, the abundance of Oscillatoria in the gut microbiome of the effective group was significantly reduced after MNT nevertheless (Fig 4C).

After MNT, the alpha diversity index of the effective group appeared to be higher than that of the ineffective group, but Shannon index and Simpson index were not statistically different between the two groups (Fig 5A). The first and second principal coordinates allowed discrimination between the two groups, but the difference was not statistically significant after weighting N2 and Y2 groups (Fig 5A). The species abundance differences between the two groups were mainly derived from Bifidobacteriaceae, Bifidobacteriales and Actinobacteria in Y2 group and Carnobacteruaceae family in N2 group (Fig 5B). Further statistics on the LDA scores of these groups were shown in Fig 5C, showing that Bifidobacterium, Bifidobacteriales, Bifidobacteriaceae and Actinobacteria were enriched in the effective group, while Holdemania, Proteus, Carnobacteriaceae and Granulicatella were enriched in the ineffective group. The different species that were more abundant in group N and group Y were showed in Table 4.

“*” means higher level of abundance.

The changes in the gut microbiome in pregnant women with GDM before and after MNT have not been studied. The features of the gut microbiome in pregnant women with GDM whose glycemic control was effective and ineffective were investigated and compared in this study to discover target gut microbiome that may influence the efficiency of MNT glycemic control. The findings revealed that lower Oscillatoria abundances and higher Bifidobacterium abundances were advantageous to the effect of glycemic management in pregnant women with GDM.

This is a first study that focused on the changes in gut microbiome characteristics of pregnant women with GDM before and after MNT, and the relationship between the gut microbiome characteristics and the effect of MNT on glycemic control. There are still some limitations in our study. First, gestational age was judged according to the time of the last menstruation period and ultrasound (Nuchal Translucency time, NT), mainly according to the time displayed by ultrasound. If the results obtained by the two methods differ by more than one-week, gestational age calculation will favor the time displayed by the NT. However, these two methods are not perfect, and we will further optimize the way of evaluating gestational age in the future. Second, the participants in this study were recruited from a single obstetrics clinic, the results may not be generalizable to a broader population of women with GDM. In future studies, we will conduct multicenter studies with expanded sample size to further elucidate the role of the gut microbiota and its relationship with GDM. Third, compared with the current clinical MNT, the present study MNT has higher requirements for the study subjects. MNT ended up in the form of recipes and was difficult to implement, which led to low adherence and easy loss to follow-up, thus reducing the sample size of this study. In addition, it is imperative to develop a more adaptive MNT regimen with the addition of Bifidobacterium dominated probiotic or prebiotic intervention. In conclusion, this study explored the relationship between gut microbiome characteristics and glycemic control effect before and after MNT in pregnant women with GDM, in order to provide a new reference basis and method for effectively improving glycemic control effect of MNT in clinical pregnant women with GDM from the perspective of gut microbiome.

