The Combination of Berberine, Tocotrienols and Coffee Extracts Improves Metabolic Profile and Liver Steatosis by the Modulation of Gut Microbiota and Hepatic miR-122 and miR-34a Expression in Mice

Non-alcoholic-fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is spreading worldwide. Specific drugs for NAFLD are not yet available, even if some plant extracts show beneficial properties. We evaluated the effects of a combination, composed by Berberis Aristata, Elaeis Guineensis and Coffea Canephora, on the development of obesity, hepatic steatosis, insulin-resistance and on the modulation of hepatic microRNAs (miRNA) levels and microbiota composition in a mouse model of liver damage. C57BL/6 mice were fed with standard diet (SD, n = 8), high fat diet (HFD, n = 8) or HFD plus plant extracts (HFD+E, n = 8) for 24 weeks. Liver expression of miR-122 and miR-34a was evaluated by quantitativePCR. Microbiome analysis was performed on cecal content by 16S rRNA sequencing. HFD+E-mice showed lower body weight (p < 0.01), amelioration of insulin-sensitivity (p = 0.021), total cholesterol (p = 0.014), low-density-lipoprotein-cholesterol (p < 0.001), alanine-aminotransferase (p = 0.038) and hepatic steatosis compared to HFD-mice. While a decrease of hepatic miR-122 and increase of miR-34a were observed in HFD-mice compared to SD-mice, both these miRNAs had similar levels to SD-mice in HFD+E-mice. Moreover, a different microbial composition was found between SD- and HFD-mice, with a partial rescue of dysbiosis in HFD+E-mice. This combination of plant extracts had a beneficial effect on HFD-induced NAFLD by the modulation of miR-122, miR-34a and gut microbiome.

In parallel to the global epidemic of obesity during the last decades, the increased prevalence of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) has brought this pathology to the forefront of health care concerns [1,2]. Since it has a close association with obesity and insulin resistance, NAFLD has been described as the hepatic manifestation of the metabolic syndrome [3].

The aim of this study was to evaluate the effects of a combination of plant extracts, composed by Berberis Aristata, Elaeis Guineensis and decaffeinated green coffee from Coffea Canephora (Trixy®, Nathura S.p.A., Montecchio Emilia, RE, Italy), added to a high fat diet (HFD) in a mouse model of NAFLD. The effects of this extract combination on the development of obesity, hepatic steatosis and insulin resistance have been investigated. Moreover, the hepatic levels of specific miRNAs and the gut microbiota composition have been also studied.

Twenty-four male 4-week-old C57BL/6J mice were purchased from Envigo Italy (Milan, Italy). Mice were housed in standardized condition for animal facilities with a 12-h light/dark cycle, temperature conditions of 22 ± 1 °C. Food and water were provided ad libitum. After 1 week of acclimation the mice were divided into three groups (n = 8 each) and assigned into one of the following 24 weeks diets: (1) Standard diet (SD); (2) HFD; (3) HFD enriched with plant extracts (HFD+E) (140 mg/Kg/die) The HFD composition was 60% of energy derived from fats, 23% from proteins and 17% from carbohydrates, 5.6 kcal/g (Mucedola, Italy). The SD composition was 3% of energy derived from fats, 18.5% from proteins and 78.5% from carbohydrates, 3.3 kcal/g (Mucedola, Italy). A detailed composition of the diets is reported in Supplementary Table S1. The weight and food intake of mice were recorded weekly. At the end of the treatment, the mice were fasted overnight, and then euthanized by an overdose of avertin. Animal experiments were approved by the local ethics committee (Prot. n. 432/2016-PR) and the procedure were conducted within the animal welfare regulations and guidelines of the Italian National law D.L. 04/03/2014, n.26, about the use of animals for research.

A mixture of plant extracts in powder form, consisting of Berberis Aristata, Elaeis Guineensis and decaffeinated green coffee from Coffea Canephora, were added to diet preparation. The plant extracts were generously donated by Nathura S.p.A., Italy. The concentration of plant extracts was 140 mg/Kg of body weight per day, of which 103.3 mg of Berberis Aristata (87.84 mg of berberine), 25.1 mg of Elaeis Guineensis (5.27 mg of tocotrienols), and 11.8 mg of decaffeinated green coffee from Coffea Canephora (5.28 mg of chlorogenic acid). The dose of the extracts was chosen based on the effective quantities of the plant extracts adjusted to the body surface area of the mouse [29].

At the end of diet protocol, mice were fasted for 4 h and then received an intraperitoneal injection of insulin (0.75 U/kg body weight) to test the insulin tolerance. Blood samples (5 μL) were collected from the tail vein before and at 15, 30, 45, 60, 90 and 120 min after the bolus of insulin. Blood glucose was measured using a portable glucometer (OneTouch Verio Flex System Kit, Johnson & Johnson Medical S.p.a., Pomezia, RM, Italy).

At the time of sacrifice, mouse livers were fixed in 10% buffered formalin and embedded in paraffin. Liver tissue was cut into 4-μm-thick sections that were stained with hematoxylin and eosin. All slides were evaluated using a light microscope by an experienced pathologist who was blinded to the experiments. Specimens were scored for the severity of hepatocellular steatosis (percentage of affected hepatocytes), ballooning degeneration (present or absent), and necro-inflammation (present or absent). Steatosis was evaluated as percentage of affected hepatocytes on a 0> to 3 scale: 0 = absent ≤ 5%, 1 ≥ %–≤ 33%, 2 ≥ 33%–≤ 66%, 3 ≥ 66%.

At 24 weeks of diet, alanine aminotransferase (ALT), glucose, total cholesterol, low- and high-density lipoproteins (LDL and HDL) cholesterol serum levels were measured using a Modular Autoanalyzer (Pentra 400, HORIBA ABX, HORIBA Medical, Rome, Italy). Serum insulin was determined using an ELISA assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.

In order to investigate the molecular mechanisms underlying the improvements in hepatic steatosis and serum metabolic profiles due to the supplementation of HFD with the plant extracts, the hepatic levels of miR-122 and miR-34a have been analyzed in the three groups of mice. In this analysis, miRNA selection criteria are based on their well-documented role in or association with lipid metabolism, steatosis and NAFLD [30,31]. Disruption and homogenization of mouse liver samples were performed in QIAzol Lysis Reagent (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany) using the TissueLyser LT (QIAGEN srl, Hilden, Germany). Total RNA was isolated from mouse liver samples by miRNeasy mini kit (QIAGEN srl, Hilden, Germany), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After quantification by NanoDrop 2000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), reverse transcription of 1 μg of total RNA was performed using the miScript II RT Kit (QIAGEN), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Quantitative real-time PCR assays were performed in triplicate using miScript SYBR Green PCR Kit (QIAGEN) on iCycler Real-Time Detection System (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA) and relative quantification of miRNA expression was calculated by the ΔΔCt method [32]. Each Ct value was normalized to the respective U6 snRNA Ct value of a sample to account for variability in the concentration of RNA and in the conversion efficiency of the RT reaction. Data were reported as arbitrary units (REU). Specific primers used for amplification were purchased from QIAGEN: Mm_miR-34a_1 miScript Primer Assay, MS00001428; Hs_miR-122a _1 miScript Primer Assay MS00003416; RNU6B_13 miScript Primer Assay, MS00014000.

The cecal content was collected from each mouse at time of sacrifice, immediately cooled in dry ice and stored at −80 °C until time of the analysis. Genomic DNA was obtained from each collected stool sample. DNA extraction was performed using the 16 LEV Blood DNA kit and the Maxwell 16 instrument (both from Promega, Madison, WI, USA). In particular, 100 mg of each sample were treated with 400 μL of lysis buffer, v ortexed to completely homogenize it, and incubated at 95 °C in thermomixer for 5 min at 800 rpm. After a centrifugation step at 13,000 rpm for 5 min, 300 μL of supernatant/sample were transferred into a new tube, treated with 30 μL of proteinase K, vortexed and incubated at 56 °C in thermomixer for 20 min at 500 rpm. Then, the samples are added to the LEV cartridge to complete the extraction and eluted in 100 μL of elution buffer. Genomic DNAs concentration and quality were assessed by Nanodrop spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Next, all DNA samples were diluted to 2 ng/μL before to proceed with libraries preparation. The DNA libraries were obtained using the Microbiota Solution B reagents (Arrow Diagnostics, Genova, Italy), following manufacturer instructions [33]. This kit allows the amplification of the V3, V4 and V6 hypervariable regions of the bacterial 16S rDNA gene. The first step provides the amplification of the target regions. Once amplicon quality has been assessed on a 2% agarose gel, the PCR products are purified using the AMPure beads (Beckman Coulter, Brea, CA, USA) and used as template for a second step PCR required to add a specific index/sample. Indeed, the index is a short sequence of nucleotides used as a unique barcode specifically tagging each sample. At the end of the index PCR, the amplicons are assessed for quality (Tape Station, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA), and beads purified (AMPure beads). The obtained libraries were quantified with the Qubit fluorometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and diluted to a final concentration of 10 nM. Next, 3 μL of different libraries can be pooled before sequencing. The sequencing reactions were carried out on the MiSeq instrument using a V2 Nano PE 250 × 2 flowcell (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) and loading the libraries pool to a final concentration of 6 pM with a 10% of PhiX.

The FASTQ files produced at the end of sequencing have been analyzed using the Microbat system software (SmartSeq, Novara, Italy). This tool, specifically conceived for microbiome sequences analysis, allows a quality assessment of the reads and the taxonomic assignment within each sample. Moreover, it allows to associate several samples into a group and to export the OTU table and the taxonomy table for further analyses. Indeed, these files were used to perform additional evaluations using the web-based tool Microbiome Analyst [34,35]. The latter allows to carry out diversity analysis, composition and comparative analyses, and to predict metabolic potentials. OTU annotation was performed using QIIME [36]. Data filtering was done to remove low quality or low abundance reads, setting a prevalence filter of 20%. Several tests were used to evaluate samples richness and/or evenness and the ANOVA test was done to highlight significant differences. Bray–Curtis dissimilarity index was used to evaluate beta diversity coupled with PERMANOVA test to assess the significance of samples grouping. Differential abundance analysis was performed using univariate statistical comparisons based on parametric test (t-test/ANOVA); p-values were adjusted using FDR method.

Numeric data are presented as means ± SD (standard deviation). Statistical analysis has been performed, as appropriate, by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Tukey’s test correction for multiple comparisons between groups, using GraphPad Prism 7.00 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA). Correlation analysis was calculated using Pearson’s correlation coefficient.

All the C57BL/6J mice included in the study showed similar body weight at baseline (Figure 1a). During the diet protocol, HFD mice started to gain higher weight than SD mice already at the 4th week. HFD+E mice showed no significant difference in body weight compared to SD mice until the 21st week of diet, while maintained a lower body weight than HFD mice for the entire duration of diet protocol (Figure 1a). There were no differences in food intake between HFD and HFD+E mice until the 20th week of diet (Figure 1b). As expected, caloric intake was higher in both mice groups receiving HFD and HFD+E compared to SD mice (not shown).

Data are presented as mean ± SD. Statistical significance was evaluated using one-way ANOVA.

Following the insulin tolerance test (Figure 2a), glucose levels remained higher in HFD mice compared to SD mice during the entire length of the test. At variance, insulin sensitivity was improved in HFD+E group, as shown by a significant decrease of their blood glucose levels (Figure 2a). The iAUC indicates that HFD mice developed insulin resistance (7529 ± 1469 mg/dL) compared to SD mice (13,804 ± 1816 mg/dL) and, interestingly, HFD+E administration was able to induce a partial rescue of insulin sensitivity in mice (10,138 ± 1620 mg/dL) (Figure 2b).

Hematoxylin and eosin staining of liver sections showed severe (>66%) mixed micro-macrovescicular steatosis in all mice on HFD. In seven out of eight animals, steatosis involved more than 80% of hepatocytes, only sparing a rim of peri-portal cells. Steatosis was absent or minimal (<5%) in five out of eight mice receiving the plant extracts. SD mice showed normal liver tissue (Figure 3). Moreover, liver damage was reflected by the 2.8-fold increase of ALT levels in HFD-fed mice. Any significant increase in ALT levels was not revealed in HFD+E-fed mice (Table 1).

In the present study, in comparison to SD, HFD induces a 50% decrease of miR-122 levels, which were completely rescued by the plant extracts co-administration (Figure 4a). Conversely, a four-fold increase of miR-34a was induced by HFD and its expression is reduced to levels similar to SD mice in mice fed with HFD+E diet (Figure 4b).

A correlation analysis was performed between the expression levels of miR-122 and miR-34a in the livers of the three groups of mice and serum metabolic parameters. A significant negative correlation with total cholesterol and LDL-cholesterol was observed for miR-122 (r = 0.605, p = 0.02; r = 0.68, p = 0.007 respectively) (Figure 5a,b) Conversely, a significant positive correlation with total cholesterol and LDL-cholesterol was observed for miR-34a (r = 0.499, p = 0.0005; r = 0.573, p = 0.01 respectively) (Figure 5c,d).

The bacterial gut microbiome composition was evaluated in the three differentially fed mice-groups as described under Methods. Two sequencing runs were totally performed by analyzing 12 samples/run and obtaining an average of 40,324 reads/sample. Alpha diversity analysis was carried out to assess the within-group diversity using different metrics. Chao1 index and observed species number did not highlight any significant difference between the three groups. Moreover, richness of the gut microbiota was similar between SD and HFD groups. Thus, it is suggested that the HFD diet did not affect the bacterial richness. A not significant richness reduction was present in the HFD+E mice. Although no significant richness was observed by Chao1 and observed species indices, higher bacterial richness and evenness in the HFD+E mice compared to the other two groups was reported using the Shannon metric (p = 0.003) (Figure 6A).

At genus level, we found 54 differentially expressed taxa (Supplementary Table S2), the most significantly different being the Bacteroides genus that appear more abundant in the HFD+E mice than in the other two groups (Figure 9A).

NAFLD is the most common cause of liver disease and, in association with metabolic comorbidities, it represents a worldwide health problem [37]. Currently, there are no licensed drugs approved for the treatment of hepatic steatosis and, therefore, lifestyle modification is the standard therapeutic approach recommended [5].

Conversely, the strength of our study is the use of the combination of three plant extracts, never previously evaluated, as novel therapeutic strategy for hepatic steatosis. Although it is not possible to discriminate which component of the extract mixture has led to the improvement of the metabolic profile, it is possible to hypothesize a synergistic action of the three plant components.

In conclusion, our study shows, for the first time, that this combination of plant extracts has a protective effect on obesity, hepatic steatosis, insulin resistance and dyslipidemia. The metabolic outcomes are associated with the expression of miR-122 and miR-34a in the liver. Although the role of miR-122 and miR-34a on the lipid metabolism and NAFLD has previously been highlighted, further studies will be useful to demonstrate how these miRNAs are modulated by these plant extracts in combination. The positive effect on the gut microbiota demonstrated here using the extract combination may be directly responsible for the miRNA expression in the liver, as previously published. However, we cannot exclude that the extract effects on miRNA hepatic levels and metabolism may be also indirectly dependent on gut microbiota, in light of the absence of weight gain. However, either way, the outcome of this work suggests the use of the combination of Berberis Aristata, Elaeis Guineensis and Coffea Canephora as an adjuvant therapy for the prevention of obesity-induced NAFLD, supporting the gut microbiota-miRNA pathway as a reasonable target for the therapy of NAFLD.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

