Parvimonas micra, Peptostreptococcus stomatis, Fusobacterium nucleatum and Akkermansia muciniphila as a four-bacteria biomarker panel of colorectal cancer

Dysbiosis of the gut microbiome has been associated with the pathogenesis of colorectal cancer (CRC). We profiled the microbiome of gut mucosal tissues from 18 CRC patients and 18 non-CRC controls of the UKM Medical Centre (UKMMC), Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. The results were then validated using a species-specific quantitative PCR in 40 CRC and 20 non-CRC tissues samples from the UMBI-UKMMC Biobank. Parvimonas micra, Fusobacterium nucleatum, Peptostreptococcus stomatis and Akkermansia muciniphila were found to be over-represented in our CRC patients compared to non-CRC controls. These four bacteria markers distinguished CRC from controls (AUROC = 0.925) in our validation cohort. We identified bacteria species significantly associated (cut-off value of > 5 fold abundance) with various CRC demographics such as ethnicity, gender and CRC staging; however, due to small sample size of the discovery cohort, these results could not be further verified in our validation cohort. In summary, Parvimonas micra, Fusobacterium nucleatum, Peptostreptococcus stomatis and Akkermansia muciniphila were enriched in our local CRC patients. Nevertheless, the roles of these bacteria in CRC initiation and progression remains to be investigated.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third leading cause of cancer-related deaths1,2. Emerging evidence indicates that dysbiosis of the gut microbiome is associated with the pathogenesis of CRC. Several studies have suggested the involvement of bacteria genera such as Fusobacterium, Bacteroides, Parvimonas, Peptostreptococcus and Streptococcus in colorectal carcinogenesis3. Interestingly, there also appears to be a geographical link in terms of the dominant species of the gut microbiome in CRC patients. While Fusobacterium nucleatum features as the common pathogen reported in many CRC studies around the world4–7, species such as Peptostreptococcus assaccharolytica (Canada and USA), Granulicatella sp. (Guangzhou, Hongkong and China) and Collinsella sp. (Netherlands) appear to be region-specific7–9. In Malaysia, a country situated in Southeast Asia, CRC is currently the second most common cancer in both men and women10. Malaysia is a developing nation with 3 major ethnic groups namely, Malay, Chinese and Indian. Chinese Malaysians has the highest incidence of CRC, nevertheless, the cause of it is still unknown10,11. Even though gut microbiome profiling studies have been performed in many countries, data from the South-East Asian region are still lacking. In this study’s discovery phase, we performed 16S rRNA gene sequencing to profile the mucosa-associated gut microbiome of Malaysian CRC patients. We then validated five microbial candidates found to be over-represented in CRC patients in the discovery cohort, using a qPCR assay. We also evaluated the sensitivity and specificity of the proposed CRC-associated gut microbiome panel to determine microbial signatures that are potentially specific for Malaysian CRC patients.

A total of 36 subjects (newly diagnosed CRC patients, n = 18; healthy controls, n = 18) were enrolled for the discovery phase of the study. Demographic distribution between the subjects for both CRC and control groups were similar in terms of age, sex and ethnicity. For CRC patients, majority of the tumours were located at the left-sided colon (83.3%) and of Dukes’ B stage (61.1%). Non-CRC subjects were observed to be patients who attended the clinic for exploratory colonoscopy screening due to symptoms such as abdominal pain, altered bowel habit or family history of CRC. The demographic characteristics of the discovery cohort is shown in Table
1.

For the validation cohort, 40 CRC tissue samples and 20 control samples (18 from discovery cohort, two from UMBI-UKMMC Biobank) were included into the study. Tissues for all CRC stages were available for this part of the study, and the majority were of the Dukes’ C stage (57.5%). Similar to the discovery phase, most tumours were located at the left-sided colon (90.0%). The demographic characteristics of the validation cohort is shown in Table
2.

16S rRNA gene sequencing generated a total of 7,940,453 high quality reads (mean ± SD ~ 220,568 ± 144,691) for all samples of the discovery cohort. Paired-end reads were clustered into Operational Taxonomic Units (OTU) at 97% similarity and taxonomic classifications were assigned to bacterial genera. From our core diversity analysis, we identified a total of 21 bacterial phyla and 358 genera for all included samples. Comparison of alpha diversity abundance revealed significant difference between the mucosal microbiome architecture of CRC patients compared to controls. Principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) plot of unweighted UniFrac analysis highlighted distinct β-diversity microbiome clusters (Fig. 1). Overall, mucosal microbiome composition differed significantly between CRC and non-CRC control subjects according to unweighted UniFrac distance.

At the phylum level, patients with CRC were found to harbour increased abundance of Fusobacteria, Verrucomicrobia and Synergitetes; while nine genera found to be significantly enriched in CRC were Filifactor, Prevotella, Peptostreptococcus, Akkermansia, Parvimonas, Lachnobacterium, Bulleidia, Dialister and Fusobacterium. Interestingly, Faecalibacterium, Dorea, Sutterella, Propionibacterium, Neisseria and Anaerofuctis were significantly depleted in CRC patients (p < 0.05). Over-representation of Fusobacterium nucleatum, Intestinimonas butyriciproducens, Peptostreptococcus stomatis, Eubacterium coprostanoligenes, Ruminococcus bromii, Bacteroides fragilis, Akkermansia muciniphila, Ruminococcus callidus, Parvimonas micra, and Gemella morbillorum was found in more than 66% of CRC patients. In contrast, Haemophilus parainfluenzae, Atopobium parvulum and Clostridium oroticum were significantly depleted in CRC patients. On the other hand, we also found several novel CRC-related bacteria species such as Intestinimonas butyriproducens, Eubacterium coprostanoligenes and Ruminococcus bromii which have yet to be associated with CRC. Table
3 shows top 12 bacterial species over-represented in CRC (> 1.5-fold, occurrence in > 66% CRC samples) patients compared to controls. Figure 2 shows LEfSe analysis of bacterial taxa in CRC and non-CRC control subjects. Fusobacterium, Peptostreptococcus, Parvimonas and Akkermansia were amongst bacteria genera enriched in CRC patients, indicating a state of dysbiosis of the mucosal microbiome architecture in CRC.

From our list of 12 most over-represented bacterial species in CRC, whole genome sequences of Gemella morbillorum, Ruminococcus callidus, Eubacterium coprostanoligenes, Solobacterium moorei and Intestinimonas butyriciproducens are available; however, we encountered difficulty in primer design for these bacteria to validate their abundance via qPCR. This was mostly due to high similarity in regions suitable for primer design among different species of the same bacterial genus. Amplification of larger regions can differentiate these bacteria; however, qPCR products should be < 500 bp in size. In addition, at the time of this analysis, the whole genome sequences of Christensenella timonensis and Ruminococcus bromii are still not available. Therefore, validation of bacteria abundance was only carried out in five bacteria, namely, Fusobacterium nucleatum (Fn), Akkermansia muciniphila (Am), Parvimonas micra (Pm), Peptostreptococcus stomatis (Ps) and Bacteroides fragilis (Bf) (Fig. 3). Interestingly, bivariate correlation analysis demonstrated strong positive correlation (Spearman’s r = 0.85–0.918, p < 0.001) between 16S rRNA gene sequencing (discovery phase) and qPCR (validation phase) abundance for Fn, Am, Pm and Ps (Table
4). On the other hand, Bf qPCR abundance was found to be poorly correlated to 16S rRNA gene sequencing abundance.

Accordingly, the abundance of Bf was not found to be significantly different between CRC patients and controls (Table
5). Receiver Operating Curve (ROC) analysis (Fig. 3) showed that Pm had the best area under receiver operating curve (AUROC) of 0.908 (sensitivity, Sn = 85.0%, specificity, Sp = 90.0%; positive predictive value, PPV = 94.4%, negative predictive value, NPV = 75.0%) (Table
5). Combining these four bacteria as a CRC biomarker panel improved the indicative performance of these gut microbiota towards the occurrence of CRC, with an AUROC (ROC Test) of 0.927 (Sn = 95.0%, Sp = 90.0%, PPV = 95.0%, NPV = 90.0%) (Table
6). The predictive performance of this panel was further confirmed in LogisticR analysis (AUROC = 0.925) (Table
7 and Fig. 4).

Thirty-nine significant metagenome functions (KEGG Level 3) of both CRC and non-CRC control subjects’ gut microbiome were identified. Enriched metabolic functions of CRC gut microbiome were predicted to have roles in ribosome, DNA repair and recombination proteins, aminoacyl-tRNA biosynthesis and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon degradation. On the other hand, non-CRC gut microbiome metabolic functions involved pathways such as transcription factors, pentose and glucuronate interconversions, lysine biosynthesis and glyoxylate and dicarboxylate metabolism (Fig. 5).

At a cut-off value of > 5 fold abundance, Sporobacter termitidis, Ruthenibacterium lactatiformans and Akkermansia muciniphila were found to be enriched in our Malay CRC patients, compared to Harryflintia acetispora, Gemella morbillorum and Ruminococcus albus in Chinese-Malaysian CRC patients. On the other hand, Gemella morbillorum, Desulfovibrio desulfuricans and Eubacterium siraeumwere were overrepresented in male CRC patients, compared to Megasphaera elsdenii in the females. Eikenella corrodens and Eubacterium ventriosum were found to be abundant in early-stage CRC patients, compared to Prevotella intermedia, Harryflintia acetispora and Dialister pneumosintes in advanced CRC patients. Over-abundant microbiome species according to various patient demographics is presented in Supplementary Dataset 2.

Gut microbiome dysbiosis is a hallmark of CRC. In our study, we profiled the gut microbiome of our study subjects, and observed respective clustering of CRC and non-CRC groups via unweighted UniFrac analysis. Interestingly, Pm, Ps, Fn and Am were further identified as the predominant bacteria associated with CRC locally. Bacteria found over-represented in our CRC patients were also reported in other geographical areas of the world7,8,12. Interestingly, our results are largely in concordance with a recently published report on a separate set of CRC patients recruited in another Malaysian hospital13, with the exception that Bf was not found to be consistently over-represented in our CRC patients. Bf, designated as the “driver” bacteria of CRC tumorigenesis via production of genotoxic molecules, are hypothesized to be one of the earliest colonizers on the colon mucosa of CRC patients14. These bacteria will be outcompeted by tumour-foraging opportunistic “passenger” bacteria such as Fn in subsequent stages of CRC. Incidentally, we had a lower number of early-stage CRC patients (Dukes’ A, n = 2, 3.4%, only in validation cohort) compared to that of the other Malaysian study (stage I, n = 5, 11.4%). Indeed, we did not manage to enrol any Dukes’ A patient in our discovery cohort; this might have also caused the poor correlation between sequencing (discovery) and qPCR (validation) results for Bf.

Furthermore, while usage of mucosal tissues in 16S rRNA gene sequencing enabled us to identify the gut microbiome present on tumours and deduce their roles in tumorigenesis, results from mucosal tissue sequencing might be discrepant from those found in stool samples of CRC patients. Therefore, the four-bacteria panel identified to be over-represented in tissues of our CRC patients could not be used for population screening of the disease. The currently available immunochemical fecal occult blood test (iFOBT) will be a more suitable method for this purpose. Nevertheless, iFOBT only has a 40% sensitivity to detect patients with advanced adenomas47. To this end, identification of over-abundant gut bacteria found in stool samples of advanced adenoma and early-stage CRC patients, and utilization of these bacteria as screening markers for early detection of CRC could be further explored.

In summary, we identified Pm, Ps, Fn and Am as bacteria significantly abundant in our cohort of Malaysian CRC patients. The exact role of these bacteria in CRC initiation and progression remains to be investigated in further studies.

This study was approved by the Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia Research Ethics Committee (UKMREC) according to the declaration of the International Conference of Harmonization Good Clinical Practice Guideline (Ethics approval code: UKM 1.5.3.5/244/UMBI-2015-005). The study was carried out in two phases: discovery (gut microbiome profiling via 16S rRNA gene sequencing) and validation (qPCR amplification of 5 significant CRC-associated bacterial markers found in the discovery phase). Patients and controls for the discovery phase were recruited from those undergoing colonoscopy and tumour removal surgery at the Hospital Canselor Tuanku Muhriz, UKM Medical Centre (UKMMC), Kuala Lumpur, from 2015 to 2017. Written informed consent was obtained from each patient and control prior to colonoscopy. Subjects in this phase included individuals presenting with digestive symptoms and asymptomatic individuals undergoing colon screening. Exclusion criteria included history of any cancer or colon resection, subjects with gut diseases such as inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and polyps, consumption of antibiotics for the past 3 months and unsuccessful colonoscopy procedure. Endoscopic pinch biopsies were performed from tumour sites, immediately flash frozen in liquid nitrogen after collection and stored at − 80˚C until further analysis. After colonoscopy results were obtained, subjects with confirmed CRC were grouped as “patients”, while subjects whose tissues contained no evidence of active gut pathology were grouped as “non-CRC”. For the validation phase, matched tissue samples were selected from the UMBI-UKMMC Biobank. Patients with recurrent CRC, history of other cancers, inflammatory bowel disease, and those who had either radiotherapy or chemotherapy prior surgery were excluded from this phase of the study. For controls, the corresponding samples from the discovery phase, together with archived control tissues from the UMBI-UKMMC Biobank were used.

Genomic DNA from flash frozen tissue samples was extracted using the QIAGEN DNA Micro Kit (discovery phase) and the Machery-Nagel NucleoSpin Tissue Kit (validation phase) as per manufacturers’ protocols. The quality of the extracted DNA was determined by gel electrophoresis and the Nanodrop 2000c. Amplicon libraries for the discovery phase were prepared according to Illumina’s 16S Metagenomic Sequencing Library Preparation protocol with some slight modifications. Briefly, amplicons were generated using primers targeting the V3/V4 region of 16S rRNA gene. PCR products were purified using E-Gel EX SizeSelect 2% agarose and subsequently attached with Nextera XT forward and reverse indices for barcoding. The amplicons were then purified using AMPure XP beads and quality-checked using the Agilent Bioanalyzer High Sensitivity DNA kit to determine library size. Libraries were quantified using Illumina Library Quantification kit (KAPA Biosystems) and normalized to 2 nM prior sequencing using a 2 × 250 bp MiSeq Reagent kit v2 on an Illumina MiSeq sequencer.

Sample de-multiplexing was performed using Illumina’s BCL2FASTQ algorithm by MiSeq Software Reporter. Raw FASTQ files were exported and processed by Trimmomatic v0.3448 for adapter trimming and quality filtering. Forward and reverse sequences of each sample were assembled using SeqPrep (https://github.com/jstjohn/SeqPrep) and converted to FASTA via FASTX-Toolkit (http://hannonlab.cshl.edu/fastx_toolkit/) prior to analysis using the QIIME v1.9.149,50 and One Codex software51. In the QIIME analysis, assembled reads were clustered into Operational Taxonomic Units (OTUs) using UCLUST52 and aligned against the GreenGenes 16S rRNA gene database version 2013.05 (http://greengenes.lbl.gov) at 97% similarity threshold. Core diversity analyses were performed to determine alpha and beta-diversity of the samples. For species-level analysis, assembled FASTA files were uploaded to One Codex platform (https://www.onecodex.com/platform/) and aligned against the Targeted Loci database for species-level taxonomic classification.

LEfSe (Linear discriminant analysis effect size) was used to compare the relative abundance of different taxa between groups, where a p-value of less than 0.05 for the Kruskal–Wallis rank-sum test and a size-effect threshold of 2.0 on the logarithmic LDA score were applied for discriminative microbial biomarkers53. The gene functions of mucosal-associated microbiome for each group were predicted using Phylogenetic Investigation of the Communities by Reconstruction of Unobserved States (PICRUSt v1.1.3)54. After normalisation for 16S rRNA copy numbers, metagenomes were predicted based on KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) pathway database55 and summarised using KEGG from level 1, 2 and 3 metabolic functions. Differences in predicted metabolic function abundance between groups were identified using Statistical Analysis for Metagenomic Profile (STAMP)56. The STAMP software was used to assess significant statistical differences between the predicted metabolic function profiles using Welch’s t-test corrected for multiple-testing by Benjamini–Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR). Corrected p-values below 0.05 were considered significant.

qPCR was used to determine the relative abundance of candidate bacterial markers. Only bacterial species with available genome sequences for primer design were tested for relative abundance. Table
8 shows primers sequence of candidate markers designed using AlleleID v7.84 (PREMIER Biosoft, USA).

All reactions were performed on a CFX96 Touch Real-time PCR Detection system in a 10µL reaction volume using SsoAdvanced Universal SYBR Green Super mix (Bio-Rad, USA). Each sample was assayed for 40 cycles in a triplicate reaction and relative abundance of each marker was calculated in reference to total bacteria DNA. Primers for total bacteria were adapted from a previous study57. Abundance of the tested bacterial markers was calculated as a relative unit normalised to the total bacteria of that sample, using the 2−ΔΔCt method (where ΔΔCt = the average ΔCt value of each target—the average ΔCt value of total bacteria).

Taxonomic differences of gut microbiome composition between CRC and control was analysed using the Mann–Whitney test, where a minimum fold change of > 1.5 in bacteria abundance and > 66% occurrence in CRC was considered as significantly enriched. To determine gut microbiome differences between different demographics, the Mann–Whitney test was also used, with a cut-off value of > 5 fold abundance. For CRC staging, Dukes’ B was classified as early CRC, while Dukes’ C and D were classified as advanced CRC. Spearman correlation coefficient analysis was used to investigate the correlation between bacterial candidate marker abundance detected from sequencing and qPCR techniques. Diagnostic value for the bacterial markers in identifying CRC patients were evaluated by calculating the area under the receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) curve. The best cut-off values were determined by ROC analyses from maximized Youden index and smallest distance value. Sensitivity and specificity values were compared to find the best panel combination that gives high positive predictive value (PPV) and negative predictive value (NPV). Logistic regression model was applied to obtain probability plot values for estimating the CRC incidence among all subjects. ROC curves were constructed from the logistic regression for four-bacteria panel data. All tests were performed by GraphPad Prism 7.0 or SPSS software v22.0. A nominal value of p < 0.05 was determined as statistical significance.

This study was approved by the National University of Malaysia Research Ethics Committee (UKMREC) according to the declaration of the International Conference of Harmonization Good Clinical Practice Guideline (Ethics approval code: UKM 1.5.3.5/244/UMBI-2015–005).



Publisher's note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41598-021-82465-0.

