Emerging Evidence on the Effects of Dietary Factors on the Gut Microbiome in Colorectal Cancer

Dietary factors have important role in modulating the gut microbiome, which in-turn regulates the molecular events in colonic mucosa. The composition and resulting metabolism of the gut microbiome are decisive factors in colorectal cancer (CRC) tumorigenesis. Altered gut microbiome is associated with impaired immune response, and the release of carcinogenic or genotoxic substances which are the major microbiome-induced mechanisms implicated in CRC pathogenesis. Diets low in dietary fibers and phytomolecules as well as high in red meat are important dietary changes which predispose to CRC. Dietary fibers which reach the colon in an undigested form are further metabolized by the gut microbiome into enterocyte friendly metabolites such as short chain fatty acid (SCFA) which provide anti-inflammatory and anti-proliferative effects. Healthy microbiome supported by dietary fibers and phytomolecules could decrease cell proliferation by regulating the epigenetic events which activate proto-oncogenes and oncogenic pathways. Emerging evidence show that predominance of microbes such as Fusobacterium nucleatum can predispose the colonic mucosa to malignant transformation. Dietary and lifestyle modifications have been demonstrated to restrict the growth of potentially harmful opportunistic organisms. Synbiotics can protect the intestinal mucosa by improving immune response and decreasing the production of toxic metabolites, oxidative stress and cell proliferation. In this narrative review, we aim to update the emerging evidence on how diet could modulate the gut microbial composition and revive colonic epithelium. This review highlights the importance of healthy plant-based diet and related supplements in CRC prevention by improving the gut microbiome.

The gut microbiome includes the collective genes and genome of all microorganisms residing in the gastrointestinal tract (GIT) (1). There are over 100 trillion microbes residing in the human GIT, and majority of them are located in the colon (2). Metagenomic studies demonstrate that there are ~1,952 uncultured bacterial species in the human gut, and many remain unclassified to date. This contributes to substantial diversity within the microbial ecosystem (3). The host-microbe relationship can be symbiotic or pathogenic. Several external factors, such as diet, medication, and lifestyle heavily influence the microbial ecosystem (4). Symbiotic relationships between host and microbes have a plethora of effects on physiological functions and overall health. The beneficial commensals have several functions such as providing essential micronutrients, regulating the immune response, modulating enterocyte function, influencing metabolism, and preventing colonization by pathogenic microorganisms (5). The gut ecosystem is highly dependent on the human diet, as well as its composition, as the microbes metabolize and thrive on the consumed foods. Dietary fibers, microbiota accessible carbohydrates (MAC), and certain plant-based proteins are metabolized to short chain fatty acids (SCFAs). SCFAs exhibit anti-inflammatory properties, maintain mucosal integrity, and retain microbial diversity (6, 7). Imbalances in ratios of vital nutrients to dangerous toxins are implicated for several diseases, including cancer. Altered microbial diversity, impaired immune response, and release of carcinogenic or genotoxic substances are the major microbiome-induced mechanisms implicated for cancer pathogenesis (8). In this study, we aim to present emerging evidence on the dietary factors associated with the development of colorectal cancer (CRC). In addition, we also explored how healthy dietary modifications can restore functional colonic epithelium and prevent CRC.

The gut microbiome can influence the development of CRC in several ways. Perturbations in the gut microbiota expose the GIT to inflammatory and genotoxic metabolites such as secondary bile salts, trimethylamine-N-oxide (TMAO), hydrogen sulfide (from sulfur containing amino acids), heme, nitrosamines, heterocyclic amines, and polyaromatic hydrocarbons, often resulting from consumption of red or processed meat and diet poor in fibers (9, 10). These dietary factors along with lifestyle factors such as smoking, alcohol and obesity increase the risk of oncogenic transformations in the colonic epithelial cells (1). Figure 1 shows a diet-outcome model that incorporates the host-microbe relationship and factors influencing their harmony. In the human body, most of the bacteria reside in the colon and an estimated 3.8 × 1013 bacteria could be found in a 70 kg “reference man” (11). In addition to natural gut defenses, human symbiotic microorganisms have additional roles in fighting pathogenic strains by stimulating the immune system. In turn, the immune system responds by producing a myriad of inflammatory mediators, chiefly consisting of anti-microbial peptides, inflammasomes, and cytokines [e.g., interleukin (IL)-22, IL-17, and IL-10] (12). Importantly, persistent activation of the immune system has its own adverse effects. Chronic inflammation can induce oxidative stress by producing reactive oxygen species (ROS), which have both cytotoxic and genotoxic effects, resulting in detrimental effects on intestinal mucosal cells (13). Inflammasomes produced by the innate immune system secondary to inflammation can lead to colitis and increase the risk for CRC (14). Moreover, inflammation-mediated persistent release of growth factors, suppression of apoptosis, and increased angiogenesis are additional factors which promote tumorigenesis (15). Carcinogenic metabolites or oncotoxins are produced due to alterations in microbial metabolism resulting from alerted dietary patterns such as consumption of processed and refined foods. These oncotoxins are implicated for promoting CRC (1). Yang et al. performed integrated metagenomic and metabolomic analysis and found that lower microbial diversity and increased production of cytotoxic polyamines such as cadaverine and putrescine are associated with increased risk for CRC (16). Diets higher in red and processed meats and lower in dietary fibers increases the predisposing factors for CRC (17). Indigestible dietary fibers reaching the lower GIT are metabolized by the gut microbiome into SCFAs such as acetate, propionate and butyrate, which has anti-inflammatory effect on the colonic mucosa (18). The mechanisms by which dysbiotic microbiome mediates CRC include increased microbial adherence to colon cells, downregulation of tumor suppressor genes, activation of oncogenes, induction of genotoxic effects on colonic enterocyte, and activation of angiogenesis (19). Thus, external factors can modulate the gut microbiome, resulting in either stimulatory or regulatory roles in priming the intestinal microenvironment toward or against tumorigenesis.

Certain pathogenic microbes residing in the proximal colon of CRC patients produces biofilm, which has pro-malignant potential (34). In familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), which is a precursor lesion to CRC, colonization and invasion of the intestinal mucosa by carcinogenic toxin producing Escherichia coli and Bacteroides fragilis led to the formation of biofilms, which was associated with increase in the genes for bacterial toxins such as colibactin and enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis (ETBF) toxin (46). Co-colonization of toxigenic Escherichia coli and Bacteroides fragilis into FAP model mice showed increased production of ETBF induced pro-inflammatory IL-17 and colibactin mediated DNA damage, which collectively accelerated the development of CRC (46). This shows that toxigenic bacterial species can enhance the risk of malignant transformation in benign colonic polyps. Therefore, evolving evidence show that altered gut microbiome could alter gut microbial crosstalk with the colonic mucosa and potentially enhanced the risk for CRC (Table 1).

Dietary ingredients such as fibers, fat, and proteins fuel bacterial metabolisms which not only aid in the digestive process but also synthesize byproducts that have immense functional significance to the host. However, when this balance is impaired, toxic metabolites are generated by the gut microbes resulting in cytotoxic and genotoxic effects (Table 1). Moreover, diets rich in prebiotics and probiotics can increase the richness of microbiome by enhancing microbial diversity and nurturing the existing microbiota (65). Thus, the quality of diet delivered to the gut microbiota may be crucial for optimum health benefits. In the current era of processed food consumption, the gut biodiversity and chemical composition are profoundly affected, leading to chronic colonic inflammation, which increases the risk for CRC (9, 10, 66, 67). Processed meat consumption is associated with the risk of developing colorectal malignancies. Chemicals used for processing red meat react to form N-nitoso compounds (NOC), which are carcinogenic. This along with unhealthy dietary habits, obesity, heme iron, and associated alterations in gut microbiota enhance oncogenic changes in colonic mucosa (68). Viennois et al. reported that consumption of dietary emulsifiers such as carboxymethylcellulose (CMC) and polysorbate 80 (P80) alter the composition of the gut microbiome and increase the risk for intestinal inflammation and adenoma formation in Apcmin mice (69). Emulsifier consumption lowered the abundance of Clostridia (in both male and female mice) and increased the abundance of Proteobacteria (in male mice). Proteobacteria has been putatively linked to altered gut microbiome and risk for cancer (69, 70). In another study, Viennois et al. reported that CMC and polysorbate 80 induce low grade inflammation and alteration in the gut microbiota such as increase in Bacteroidales and decrease in Clostridiales (53). Long term consumption of emulsifiers increased fecal levels of bioactive products such as pro-inflammatory lipopolysaccharide and motility inducing flagellin. Consumption of food emulsifiers also increase the risk for developing metabolic syndrome and obesity, which are independent risk factors for CRC (71). This suggest that avoiding consumption of processed food could prevent colonization by harmful microorganisms, help in maintaining a healthy colonic mucosa, and decrease the risk for oncogenic changes.

Alcohol consumption is associated with alteration in gut microbiota that potentially accelerates CRC carcinogenesis. Alcohol is metabolized by the gut microbiota into toxic intermediates leading to colonic carcinogenesis via DNA-adducts, oxidative stress, epimutations, loss of epithelial barrier functions, and immunomodulations (95). These effects can be potentiated and aggravated by poor nutrition and chronic smoking status; covariates commonly associated with alcohol consumption. The microbiota in alcoholics have decreased levels of beneficial organisms such as Bacteroides and Ruminococcus and increased levels of harmful organisms such as Streptococcus (96). Integrated analysis using 16S rRNA (ribosomal RNA) gene analysis data and epidemiological characteristics by Kim et al. showed that alcohol consumption increased abundance of F. nucleatum in the gut which is associated with increased risk for CRC (97). Among alcoholics, deficiency of beneficial obligate anaerobe OTUs was demonstrated through decreased production of acetaldehyde in stool samples that were treated with specific quantities of ethanol under experimental conditions. This implies that restriction of alcohol consumption could potentially prevent genotoxic insults on colonic mucosa.

Dietary fibers provided by plant-based diets are not digested by the human intestinal enzymes and reach the colon unchanged. Colonic bacteria express enzymes that metabolize and ferment soluble dietary fibers into useful metabolites such as SCFAs which play a major role in decreasing colonic mucosal inflammation and lowering the risk for CRC (98, 99). Butyrate has an inhibitory effect over the histone deacetylases (HDAC) enzymes, resulting in enhanced expression of genes which arrest the cell cycle (100). Butyrate also serves as an energy source for normal enterocytes; however, rapidly dividing CRC cells are dependent on glycolysis rather than butyrate utilization for energy needs (101). Co-culturing certain bacterial strains in animal models enhanced production of butyrate and improved the SCFA-mediated protection against CRC. Faecalibacterium prausnitzii ATCC 27768 strain co-cultured with Bifidobacterium catenulatum KCTC 3221 and supplemented with fructooligosaccharides in anaerobic conditions significantly enhanced butyrate production (60). Exposing the co-culture supernatant to HT29 colon cancer cells and RAW 264.7 macrophages decreased the release of pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-8 in vitro (60). The supernatant from the co-cultured bacteria also enhanced acetate, propionate, and butyrate levels in the caecum of the DSS-induced colitis in mice model as well as decreased gene expression of IL-8, suggesting the anti-inflammatory effect of these bacterial species in vivo (60). Butyrate was also shown to increase the extracellular tight junction protein complexes in an Apcmin/+ mice model (102). This highlights the potential role of butyrate in decreasing the risk for CRC. Figure 2 illustrates the effects of dietary factors on the gut microbiome and their impact on CRC development.

The combination of prebiotics and probiotics is known as synbiotics. Consumption of synbiotics is considered an active intervention to improve the quality of gut microbiome for preventing CRC. Synbiotics work by enriching the gut microbiome and the microbial strains which impart protective mucosal functions such as decreasing inflammation, preventing uncontrolled proliferation, preventing altered immune responses, lowering production of toxic metabolites, and lowering oxidative stress (118). In an experimental in vitro chip-based model (HuMiX gut-on-a-chip), synbiotics downregulated oncogenic signaling pathways (in Caco-2 cells). The synbiotics consists of probiotic Lactobacillus rhamnosus Gorbach-Goldin strain and a complex prebiotic formula simulating high fiber diet which was prepared from non-digestible carbohydrates and other prebiotics such as arabinogalactan, xylan and soy (119). Synbiotic administration not only decreased the production of oncometabolite lactate and suppressed drug resistance genes in colon cancer-derived cells, but also increased SCFAs such as acetate and formate (119). A new synbiotic combination of Lactobacillus gasseri 505 and Cudrania tricuspidata leaf extract in fermented milk decreased Staphylococcus and increased Lactobacillus, Bifidobacterium, and Akkermansia, thus increasing protective effects in DSS/azoxymethane (AOM) induced colitis-CRC model mice. This in vivo intervention decreased tumor proliferation and inflammation (marked by decreased levels of TNF-α, interferon (IFN)-γ, IL-1β, IL-6, inducible nitric oxide synthase, and cyclooxygenase-2) and led to upregulation of anti-inflammatory cytokines IL-4 and IL-10 (120). Praveen et al. developed raindrop candy consisting of polysaccharides extracted from Indian seaweed (S. wightii, E. compressa, and A. spicifera) and probiotic species L. plantarum NCIM 2083. These seaweed polysaccharides demonstrated anti-cancer effects on RAW 264.7 macrophage and HT-29 human colon cancer cell line in vitro (121). Thus, synbiotics could be novel therapeutic approaches to strengthen the gut microbiome for protective effects against CRC through alleviating inflammation and preventing tumorigenesis. However, due to the concerns of consuming live microbial species and uncertainties about the net effects of its colonization in the gut, postbiotics are gaining increasing attention as a paradigm shift (122, 123). Postbiotics are composed of inactivated microbial cells or their components with or without microbial metabolites, which shows beneficial effects on human health (124). Lactic acid bacteria (LAB) which are found in fermented foods are an essential source of postbiotic metabolites (PM) with physiological effects and health benefits including opposing effects on tumorigenesis (125). The cancer opposing effects of postbiotics are achieved through improving the gut microbiota, reprogramming the immune function, enhancing response to CRC treatment, and increasing antioxidant, anti-proliferative, and anti-inflammatory actions (126). Postbiotic metabolites (PMs) produced from Lactobacillus plantarum isolated from Malaysian fermented food, Tapai Ubihas, has remarkable anti-cancer effects such as enhanced cytotoxicity and anti-proliferative action (127, 128). PMs from six different strains of L. plantarum were evaluated for their anti-cancer effect on cells lines of five different cancers, which included breast, colorectal, cervical, liver, and leukemia. PMs obtained from two strains RG14 and I-UL4 effectively inhibited proliferation of HT29 colon cancer cells. Some PMs show anti-proliferative effects when added in specific microenvironments. For example, PM from the cell free supernatant of Streptococcus salivarius M18 cultured on prebiotic inulin displayed potent inhibitory effect on colon cancer cell proliferation through increasing extracellular acidity within the tumor (129). Postbiotics like SCFA and tryptophan have shown to downregulate both the adaptive and humoral immunity in inflammatory conditions such as inflammatory bowel diseases (130). This shows that postbiotics can not only prevent cancer proliferation, but also ameliorate mucosal inflammation. Thus, consumption of dietary fibers and diet-derived factors such as phytochemicals and essential fatty acids, as well as prebiotics, probiotics, and postbiotics could be considered a multifactorial protective approach against CRC. Table 2 presents the studies on dietary factors influencing the gut microbiome and its effect on the colonic mucosa and CRC progression.

Cancer is triggered by a multitude of factors that destabilize the genetic regulatory mechanisms controlling the cell proliferation events. Apart from mutations occurring in the tumor suppressor genes, or protooncogenes leading to either loss or gain of resulting protein function, epigenetic changes also transform the transcriptomic profile and the genomic landscape resulting in oncogenic CRC traits (Figure 3). Epigenetic dysregulation, otherwise known as epimutations, commonly occur by promoter methylation/demethylation of CpG islands, histone acetylation/deacetylation, or by non-coding RNA such as miRNA which alter the expression of genes involved in cellular growth, differentiation, and metabolism (133). The gut microbiome is unique in the sense that it carries millions of genes which execute functions exotic to the human genome and their metabolic activities depend on the substrate presented to them by the host diet, thus establishing a symbiotic relationship. However, this symbiosis comes at a cost, as impaired nutrition can result in the synthesis of harmful metabolites which potentiates the susceptibility of the host genomic architecture to genotoxicity (133).

Overall, it appears that dietary patterns or habits regulating the gut microbiota heavily influences the epigenetic mechanism associated with the pathogenesis of CRC. Further clinical exploration on understanding the outcome of dietary intervention and its modulation of the gut microbiome and the host genome is warranted to validate the therapeutic potential of differential diet-based regimes in management of CRC.

Methodologically analyzing the gut microbiome and their metabolome is a very complex process and demands the use of advanced techniques to delineate the intricacy related to its composition and function. Culture based methods are the earliest measures to identify the bacterial species based on morphological and biochemical characteristics (167). But culturing underestimates the abundance and diversity of the microbial species in the gut and hence its utility is limited in microbiome research. The smaller 16S ribosome of bacteria contains the ribosomal RNA (rRNA) which is a phylogenetic marker representing the evolutionary divergence of bacteria and consist of several conserved constant regions and species-specific hypervariable regions (V1–V9) (167, 168). Molecular exploration of the hypervariable region is commonly employed to study the complex composition and diversity of the gut microbiome with relative accuracy (167, 168). Its variability at different taxonomic levels can be analyzed to estimate the bacterial genome and its relative abundances (169). These hypervariable regions are distributed between several highly conserved constant regions and variations in the nucleotide sequences within these hypervariable regions reflect evolutionary divergences of bacteria (167). Sequencing these hypervariable regions within the 16S rRNA gene is an essential technique for identification and classification of the bacteria with relative quantification of their abundance. Next generation sequencing is a powerful technique for efficient and cost-effective analysis of the 16S rRNA gene hypervariable regions which could not be effectively mapped using older methods (170). The sequenced data often contain poor quality reads which have to be removed using quality control filters and subsequently based on sequence similarities are clustered into operational taxonomic units or OTU. OTU represents the set of closely matched nucleotide sequences (>97% sequence similarity) which represent either a single or a group of bacterial species (88). The representative sequences from the OTU are mapped in a 16S rRNA gene sequence database for taxonomical classification and determination of diversity, relative abundance as well as annotation related to functional pathways (167). Even though 16S rRNA gene sequencing is a powerful technique in identifying the abundance of different bacterial taxa, it often has certain limitations. 16S rRNA gene sequencing is based on the assumption that >95% similarity is taxonomically associated with genus identification, while >98.7% sequence similarity is useful for distinguishing species (171, 172). But conventionally, the resolution is not enough for intraspecies strain identification, which are characterized by subtle changes in single nucleotide in the gene amplicon. Johnson et al. reported that sequencing the long reads or full-length amplicon of 16S rRNA gene can resolve minor nucleotide changes associated with intraspecies strain identification (173). Moreover, bacterial taxa analyzed by 16S rRNA gene sequencing is based on relative abundance than absolute count of the organism (174). Also, the 16S rRNA reference database is incomplete and does not cover all the reference sequences pertaining to specific microbial species from the diverse gut microbiota (167, 174). Amplification of erroneous sequences termed as chimera, which consist of a single amplicon originating from two different sources during the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) cycles could lead to wrong species identification and annotations (174). These drawbacks associated with inaccurate identification of bacterial species, incomplete 16S rRNA gene reference database and sequencing errors are major pitfalls associated with 16S rRNA gene sequencing and demand newer techniques to overcome these inadequacies and improve the resolution in identifying bacterial taxa to subspecies or strain levels. Shotgun metagenomic analysis using high throughput sequencing is another powerful technique, which collectively analyzes all the genes and genomes of the microbiota in the given specimen and is the next step for discretizing higher level of bacterial taxonomical characterization to achieve higher degree of sequence similarity and subspecies identification (167). This method circumvents the traditional 16S rRNA gene sequencing as well as provides better information on the functional capabilities of the microbiome (167). In this method the complete metagenome (cumulative genome of bacteria and host) obtained from the sample is fragmented into short segments and further sequenced using high throughput sequencing. Adequate filters are required for rarefaction of bacterial genomic component and remove the contaminants from host genome. The genome data is further analyzed using bioinformatic pipelines to delineate bacterial taxa. Compared to 16S rRNA gene sequencing, metagenomics reveals more information on low abundance genera and is more useful in determining microbial diversity when sufficient reads are available (175). Nanopore sequencing, using workflow, called Lathe (tool for generating bacterial genome from metagenomic data based on nanopore long read sequencing) could be used to assemble closed circular genome by incorporating long read assembly, short read error correction, and genome circularization (176, 177). It enhances binning assembly from assembled contigs as contiguity from short reads is often contaminated by repeat elements. This determines high-quality contiguous and circular bacterial genomes from diverse human gut microbiome. However, sequencing the closed circular genome from long reads requires extraction of high molecular weight DNA extraction which is technically challenging due to its low yield.

A solitary metagenomics analysis may be inadequate to establish association between the host, gut microbiome, and metabolite axis. Meta-analysis of metagenomics data is a powerful method for summarizing the impact of gut microbiota and its metabolites in CRC across different studies. Wirbel et al. in a meta-analysis based on eight fecal shotgun metagenomics studies (total 768 fecal metagenomes) identified potential microbial markers and altered metabolites associated with CRC (188). The analysis of diverse CRC metagenomes revealed a key set of 29 microbial markers, which were significantly associated with CRC. These also included genera such as Fusobacterium, Porphyromonas, Parvimonas, Peptostreptococcus, Gemella, Prevotella, and Solobacterium, which were previously associated with CRC (188). Functional analysis of the CRC metagenomes showed an upregulation of pathways related to protein, glycoprotein, and organic acid metabolism, while carbohydrate metabolizing genes were depleted (188). This suggested that the healthy gut microbiome which preferentially metabolized carbohydrate shifted toward an amino acid utilizing pattern in CRC. Interestingly, Thomas et al. in another meta-analysis involving large-scale CRC metagenomic datasets observed greater microbial richness in the gut microbiome of CRC subjects when compared to controls (189). This pattern was contributed by the overabundance of microbial species from the oral cavity in the gut microbiome of CRC subjects. CRC biomarker species such as F. nucleatum, Solobacterium moorei, Porphyromonas asaccharolytica, Parvimonas micra, Peptostreptococcus stomatis, and Parvimonas spp. were commonly observed in most of the individual studies. Analysis of the fecal metabolic profiles from the datasets show an abundance of the gene choline trimethylamine-lyase, which is required for the bacterial synthesis of trimethylamine, a potent carcinogen associated with CRC (189, 190). Thomas et al. also reported that predicting CRC based on an independent metagenomic dataset would incur errors and therefore performed alternative analysis based on leave one dataset out (LODO) predictive model which can be potentially useful in clinical scenario (189). Thus, meta-analysis-based approaches for comparing different metagenomic studies could be an effective method for identifying novel CRC associated microbial biomarker species and metabolites from large scale datasets.

Emerging evidence suggests a significant association between the gut microbiome and colorectal cancer. As a result, dietary constituents such as dietary fibers, phytomolecules, n-3 PUFAs, prebiotics, probiotics, and postbiotics may offer benefits in the prevention of CRC through favorable alterations in the gut microbiome. More specifically, dietary and lifestyle factors may enrich the growth of healthy microbes and suppress the non-beneficial strains. Beneficial strains of gut microbiome produce enterocyte-friendly metabolites, such as SCFAs, and may protect the mucosa against inflammation and induction of oncogenic pathways. At this time, prospective data examining this anti-cancer approach is lacking. Future studies should examine the microbiome impact of dietary risk factor modification in patients at high-risk for CRC.

RK and SA: conceptualization. MR: methodology. VR, PM, and RT: literature search. SA: writing—original draft preparation. MR, VR, AS, RT, PM, and AK: writing—review and editing. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

