The Effects of Nutrition on the Gastrointestinal Microbiome of Cats and Dogs: Impact on Health and Disease

The gastrointestinal (GI) microbiome of cats and dogs is increasingly recognized as a metabolically active organ inextricably linked to pet health. Food serves as a substrate for the GI microbiome of cats and dogs and plays a significant role in defining the composition and metabolism of the GI microbiome. The microbiome, in turn, facilitates the host’s nutrient digestion and the production of postbiotics, which are bacterially derived compounds that can influence pet health. Consequently, pet owners have a role in shaping the microbiome of cats and dogs through the food they choose to provide. Yet, a clear understanding of the impact these food choices have on the microbiome, and thus on the overall health of the pet, is lacking. Pet foods are formulated to contain the typical nutritional building blocks of carbohydrates, proteins, and fats, but increasingly include microbiome-targeted ingredients, such as prebiotics and probiotics. Each of these categories, as well as their relative proportions in food, can affect the composition and/or function of the microbiome. Accumulating evidence suggests that dietary components may impact not only GI disease, but also allergies, oral health, weight management, diabetes, and kidney disease through changes in the GI microbiome. Until recently, the focus of microbiome research was to characterize alterations in microbiome composition in disease states, while less research effort has been devoted to understanding how changes in nutrition can influence pet health by modifying the microbiome function. This review summarizes the impact of pet food nutritional components on the composition and function of the microbiome and examines evidence for the role of nutrition in impacting host health through the microbiome in a variety of disease states. Understanding how nutrition can modulate GI microbiome composition and function may reveal new avenues for enhancing the health and resilience of cats and dogs.

The word “microbiome” has been traditionally defined as “the aggregate genetic material of all microorganisms living in, or on, a defined habitat” (Lederberg and McCray, 2001; The NIH HMP Working Group, 2009). More generally, the term “microbiome” now refers to both the bacterial cells themselves and their genetic material. Given the wide ranging and often profound effects of the microbiome on the health of both humans and pets, the gastrointestinal (GI) microbiome is now recognized as an organ (Possemiers et al., 2011) with unique metabolic capabilities. The GI microbiome is comprised of trillions of cells residing in the digestive tract, which begins in the oral cavity and continues to the rectum (Gibson and Roberfroid, 1995). While the bacterial component of the microbiome has been the target of much research and represents the focus of this review, the microbiome also consists of fungi, archaea, viruses, and protozoa.

Given the potential impact of the GI microbiome on pet health, both directly and through its impact on the response to nutrition (Suez and Elinav, 2017), as well as an increasing awareness of the diagnostic and therapeutic potential of interventions targeting the GI microbiome, the objectives of this review are to: (1) discuss metrics used to evaluate the microbiomes of cats and dogs; (2) describe the impact of nutritional interventions on the microbiome of cats and dogs; (3) consider current evidence for the role of nutrition in influencing cat and dog health through changes to the GI microbiome; and (4) explore emerging evidence for the role of microbiome function and postbiotic effects on cat and dog health.

To evaluate research on the microbiome, it is important to first consider how microbiome status is assessed. A variety of metrics have been used in the literature to characterize microbiome status, including measurements representing both compositional and functional characteristics of the microbiome (Backhed et al., 2012). Most published microbiome studies involving cats and dogs use measurements of microbial composition rather than function when describing the microbiome or assessing the relationship between the microbiome and host health. Such metrics of microbiome composition may include relative abundance of various microbial taxa, as well as assessments of dysbiosis, which has been proposed to describe “an altered composition of the commensal microbiota that is detrimental to the host” (Staley et al., 2018). In addition, measurements of alpha or beta diversity, which reflect the richness and/or evenness of the distribution of bacterial groups within and between bacterial communities, respectively, have also been used (Staley et al., 2018). While common, measurements of microbial composition have limitations, including a higher degree of variation between individuals than over time within an individual (Schloissnig et al., 2013; Franzosa et al., 2015; Lloyd-Price et al., 2017); this high degree of interindividual variation complicates the identification of microbiome compositions that can reliably characterize health or disease and contributes to limited reproducibility across populations (Schloss, 2018). Indeed, factors that vary among (and within) individuals such as diet, environment, medication use, developmental stage, genetics, and health status have been shown to influence microbiome composition to some degree (Goodrich et al., 2016; Doestzada et al., 2018; Makki et al., 2018; Yadav et al., 2018), and even within healthy individuals, microbiome compositions have been shown to vary widely and continuously over time (Knights et al., 2014).

The health of the microbiome may be more meaningfully defined by how it functions, rather than its taxonomic or compositional makeup. Functional redundancy has been identified in multiple taxa from site-specific bacterial communities in humans, suggesting conservation of functional capability is of greater importance than community composition (Lloyd-Price et al., 2017). While measurements of microbial function are not without limitations, such as higher cost and more complex analysis, use of these metrics to characterize the microbiome are increasing. One such example is predicted metabolic capacity, which utilizes the imputed gene makeup of the bacteria in the sample or metabolite profiles (Langille et al., 2013). In addition, a functioning microbiome produces bacterial metabolites termed “postbiotics” that may directly affect host function (Tsilingiri et al., 2012; Ojeda et al., 2016). Postbiotics are metabolic products of bacteria; in a nutritional context, postbiotics are generated when food that is undigested by the pet is bypassed to the colon to become available to the microbiome. Postbiotics include not only metabolites from bypass carbohydrates, fat and protein, but also microbial derivatives of other compounds, such as secondary plant compounds; these metabolites can have a beneficial or detrimental effect on the host, depending upon the nature of the compound (Table 1). While the gut microbiome clearly has the potential to influence host health, evidence that links specific changes in microbiome structure with changes in host function is still needed (McBurney et al., 2019). Further, validated biomarkers or other surrogate indicators of host function and pathogenic processes based on the microbiome are also needed (McBurney et al., 2019).

As noted earlier, the compostion of the gut microbiome is generally similar between cats and dogs, with some differences noted. There is a complex relationship between the gut microbiome and the host, which is certainly influenced by the unique anatomy and physiology of cats versus dogs. However, evidence on how the digestive and physiological differences between cats and dogs might affect the microbiome is limited. Nevertheless, intriguing opportunities to study how food influences the health of each species through the production of microbial postbiotics have emerged. For example, when provided with a variety of foods of similar palatability, but different macronutrient content, and allowed to self-select macronutrient intake through free-choice feeding among the foods, the microbial postbiotics generated by cats at their chosen protein level were different from the microbial postbiotics generated by dogs at their chosen protein level (Hall et al., 2018). This resulted in significantly different postbiotics observed between the species; for example, none of the circulating plasma microbial metabolites changed in dogs after the 28-day free-choice feeding period, whereas 16 of 38 metabolite concentrations changed in cats (Hall et al., 2018). These differences between cats and dogs, both in preferred macronutrient intake and in the metabolic response of the microbiome to the selected macronutrient intakes, present unique challenges and benefits for optimizing nutrition intakes for cats and dogs.

One example of the links between the microbiome, nutrition, and digestive physiology is the production of equol, an isoflavone-derived metabolite produced through the microbial metabolism of daidzein. Equol production is known to be enhanced by a high carbohydrate diet (Vázquez et al., 2020). In the free-choice feeding article described previously, circulating daidzein sulfate levels were elevated in cats while equol sulfate levels were not different between cats and dogs (Hall et al., 2018). The authors postulate that the mixed diet chosen by cats (with macronutrient ratios higher in both protein and carbohydrate than those chosen by dogs) would likely have resulted in increased daidzein intakes and an expectation for increased equol production by the cat microbiome. Yet, circulating equol levels were similar in cats and dogs, a finding the authors interpreted as evidence that the microbiomes of cats do not have a similar capacity for equol production as those of dogs (Hall et al., 2018). The links between the microbiome, nutrition, and digestive physiology were seen in this study not only for anti-inflammatory postbiotics such as equol, but pro-inflammatory compounds such as 4-ethylphenyl sulfate, which was higher in dogs compared to cats at baseline, and p-cresol sulfate, which was higher in cats compared to dogs at baseline (Hall et al., 2018).

The degree of digestibility of a food determines the extent to which different nutrients are digested and absorbed by the host. Those nutrients that escape digestion and absorption by the host arrive to the colon and are thus available for microbial metabolism. High digestibility of protein and fat is important when provisioning food for cats and dogs, ensuring that the pet is appropriately nourished. In contrast, the “bypass” food components that are incompletely digested in the upper GI tract serve as nutrient sources for the GI microbiome, playing a significant role in defining its composition and functions. Together, the host and resident GI microbes harbor complementary digestive enzymes by which ingested food is broken down through saccharolysis, proteolysis and lipolysis, nourishing not only the pet but also the microbiome (Figure 1). Changes to the microbiome have been shown to occur quickly in response to dietary interventions (David et al., 2014; Mori et al., 2019). For example, variations in the amount of carbohydrate, protein, and fat that are fed to cats and dogs can have a significant impact on their intestinal microbiota (Mori et al., 2019). This was demonstrated in a recent study evaluating the effect of four commercially available prescription diet regimens on the fecal microbiome in six healthy dogs (Mori et al., 2019). Each dog was fed one of the following four diets for 21 days each: (1) weight-loss diet (high protein, low fat, low carbohydrate, high fiber); (2) low-fat diet (low fat, medium protein, high carbohydrate, low fiber); (3) renal diet (low protein, high fat, high carbohydrate, low fiber); and (4) an allergenic diet (hydrolyzed medium protein, high fat, medium carbohydrate, low fiber). This study revealed several significant differences in the microbiome of dogs fed the weight loss diet versus those fed the allergeneic diet, including significantly decreased proportions of Actinobacteria and Firmicutes and significantly increased proportions of Fusobacteria (Mori et al., 2019). Nevertheless, not every nutritional intervention results in a change to the microbiome composition (Bresciani et al., 2018; Pilla et al., 2019). The following sections summarize evidence for common nutritional interventions with the potential to impact the microbiome of cats and dogs, including probiotics, prebiotics, simple and complex carbohydrates, proteins, and fats.

One commonly used approach to improve the gut microbiome, and thus the health of the host, is the use of probiotics. Probiotics have been defined as live microorganisms, which when consumed in adequate amounts as part of a food, may confer a health benefit on the host (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations/World Health Organization, 2002). Many of the probiotics studied in pet health belong to the genera of Lactobacillus, Bifidobacterium and Enterococcus (Weese and Martin, 2011; Schmitz and Suchodolski, 2016; Jugan et al., 2017; Sanders et al., 2019). Probiotics can alter the resident microbiome through several mechanisms, including stimulation of the growth of resident bacteria through metabolic interactions, altering the abundance of pathogenic bacteria, or indirectly through interactions with the host epithelium and epithelial immune system (Derrien and van Hylckama Vlieg, 2015), but successful colonization of the resident microbiome by the probiotic is not universal and depends on characteristics of both the resident microbiome and the host (Derrien and van Hylckama Vlieg, 2015; Zmora et al., 2018) including the host’s dietary regimen (Derrien and van Hylckama Vlieg, 2015). Some have suggested that the bacterial species being utilized in a probiotic should ideally originate from the gut of the host species (Grzeskowiak et al., 2015; Suez and Elinav, 2017); however, this is not true for most probiotics currently marketed for cats and dogs (Grzeskowiak et al., 2015), and no studies comparing the efficacy of dog- or cat-derived probiotics to commercially available strains derived from other species exist. A review of commercially available veterinary probiotics revealed quality issues including inaccurate labels and poor viability (Weese and Martin, 2011); others have raised concerns about safety, though additional research is needed to understand the frequency and severity of adverse outcomes attributed to probiotic use in cats and dogs (Doron and Snydman, 2015).

Historically, the term prebiotic has been defined as “a non-digestible food ingredient that beneficially alters the host by selectively stimulating the growth and/or activity of one or a limited number of bacteria in the colon, and thus improves host health” (Gibson and Roberfroid, 1995). However, it is now understood that any substance that is available to the gut microbiome for fermentation, including bypass nutrients that reach the microbiome such as carbohydrate, protein, amino acids, fat and polpyphenols, can serve as a prebiotic (Gibson et al., 2010). Therefore, prebiotics are now defined as “selectively fermented ingredients that allow specific changes, both in the composition and/or activity in the GI microflora that confer benefits upon host well-being and health” (Gibson et al., 2004, 2010).

Complex carbohydrates are those that include three or more sugars (i.e., oligosaccharides and polysaccharides). While not all complex carbohydrates provide fiber, those commonly used in the pet food industry include traditional sources of fiber for cats and dogs, such as beet pulp, which contains a mix of insoluble and soluble fiber and cellulose, which is a non-fermentable, insoluble, non-viscous fiber (De Godoy et al., 2013). Other sources of fiber either being utilized or evaluated in pet foods include corn, fruit, rice, oat, and barley fiber; these fibers are sources of resistant starches and soluble fibers that can serve as substrates for the GI microbiome (De Godoy et al., 2013).

Subsequent sections in this article will review the impact of a variety of nutrition interventions, including fiber, probiotics, and synbiotics, in various disease states of cats and dogs.

Although the effects of complex carbohydrates on the microbiome have been well-studied, simple carbohydrates such as monosaccharides and disaccharides can also change the composition of the microbiome. Simple carbohydrates can be found in the diet or generated as the product of polysaccharide digestion in the upper small intestine. In rats, early life exposure to sugar (varying ratios of glucose and fructose) reduced Prevotella and Lachnospiraceae incertae sedis but increased Bacteroides, Alistipes, Lactobacillus, Clostridium sensu stricto, Bifidobacteriaceae, and Parasutterella (Noble et al., 2017). Some of these increases, which were independent of monosaccharide ratio, caloric intake, body weight, or adiposity index, have been previously associated with health and/or disease processes, such as metabolic and cognitive disorders. However, the implications of these changes on disorders associated with high sugar consumption require further study in cats and dogs.

Traditionally, protein quality has been defined by the amino acid composition of the protein, as well as digestibility and bioavailability of the protein source. Most pet foods use animal protein sources since they typically contain a more complete complement of amino acids, though plant protein sources are also used. Regardless of the source, dietary protein must undergo proteolysis, or the hydrolysis of intact proteins into individual amino acids, to be absorbed by the animal. In many cases, protein hydrolysis occurs as part of host digestion, though some specialized foods use hydrolyzed protein ingredients to reduce the potential for allergic response and ease digestion. Different protein sources vary not only in their amino acid composition, but also in their micro- and macronutrients, all of which affect the GI microbiome (Madsen et al., 2017). The concepts of protein quality (completeness of the amino acid profile and digestibility), quantity (amount of protein per serving) and quotient (ratio of protein to other energy-containing nutrients such as carbohydrate) are important factors in both host and microbial metabolism, since nutrients not digested and absorbed by the host become available for metabolism by the microbiome in the lower GI tract.

Ingestion of moderate quantities of highly digestible protein balances the concepts of quantity, quality, and quotient, optimizing protein utilization by the pet, while ingestion of large amounts of poorly digestible protein increases presentation of dietary protein to bacterial populations in the colon, where it undergoes putrefaction. Putrefaction is the process of microbial decomposition of amino acids into postbiotic products, some of which have been implicated in the initiation and progression of certain inflammatory diseases, such as atopy (Nylund et al., 2015), chronic renal failure (Niwa et al., 1997), and chronic enteritis (Nikolaus et al., 2017; Table 1). In short, it is both the total amount of protein ingested (quantity), ratio of protein to other energy-containing ingredients such as carbohydrates (quotient), and the digestibility and amino acid composition of protein (quality) in the diet that determine the amount and amino acid composition of the bypass digesta, and the subsequent availability of nitrogenous waste (e.g., ammonia and urea) presented for microbial metabolism.

Much less is known regarding the role that fat quantity plays in influencing the microbiome than protein and carbohydrate. Most of the information available describes the impact of high dietary fat on the microbiota of either humans or mice (Shen et al., 2014; Martinez et al., 2017). These reports show a clear link between high-fat diets (45−60% of daily caloric intake) and a rapid and dramatic shift in the microbiota within 2−3 days of starting consumption of the high-fat diet. Furthermore, decreases in beneficial postbiotic SCFAs and increases in detrimental hydrogen sulfide (H2S) are found in obese individuals (Martinez et al., 2017), though in the context of metabolic syndrome, it is difficult to isolate the specific effect of fat intake. Thus, the pro-inflammatory nature of dietary fat may influence microbiome composition, perhaps through host-microbiome immune-mediated homeostasis. Substantial additional research is needed to better understand the mechanisms underlying these effects.

Fatty acids are underappreciated prebiotics that have the potential to influence health and physiology through their effects on the GI microbiome. Emerging research has indicated a role for gut microbial metabolism of linoleic acid to produce postbiotic metabolites with health-promoting effects. For example, a bacterial metabolite of linoleic acid has been shown to prevent the impairment of the epithelial barrier that is caused by periodontopathic bacteria (Yamada et al., 2018). Future research on the targeted delivery of lipids to the colon will determine if this is a successful strategy to influence the production of fatty acid postbiotics with the potential to improve animal health.

The GI microbiome influences an array of physiological and immunological functions either directly or indirectly, including energy homeostasis and metabolism, endocrine signaling, inhibition of enteropathogenic colonization, and immune function regulation (Nicholson et al., 2012; Wilson and Nicholson, 2015). Consequently, disruptions to the composition of the GI microbiome can lead to detrimental health consequences, including inflammatory enteropathies (e.g., inflammatory bowel disease), allergy, constipation, oral disease (i.e., periodontal disease), obesity, diabetes, and kidney disease (Nicholson et al., 2012). Nutrition has the potential to both affect the disease condition directly through provision of substances like macro- and micronutrients, as well as indirectly by changing the microbiome, while the microbiome in turn influences the response to nutrition (Suez and Elinav, 2017). Here, we consider current evidence for the role of nutrition in influencing cat and dog health through changes to the GI microbiome.

Because the GI microbiome influences the environmental habitat of the GI tract and vice versa, the incidence and progression of microbiome-associated chronic GI enteropathies, particularly inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), has been the subject of considerable research. Most research reported to date involving the microbiome in cats and dogs with GI enteropathies involves dogs, with relatively fewer studies in cats. Dogs with chronic enteropathy (CE) have been shown to have lower concentrations and altered patterns of SCFAs, as well as changes in the fecal microbiota compared to healthy dogs (Minamoto et al., 2019). With respect to cats, it has been shown that the GI microbiota in those with IBD is altered compared to healthy cats (Garraway et al., 2018). One study also found that Fusobacterium spp. are elevated in the ileum and colon of biopsies from cats with small cell GI lymphoma compared to those with IBD; however, it’s not yet clear whether this change plays any role in the development of GI lymphoma (Garraway et al., 2018). While a number of previous reviews have discussed this topic at length (Heilmann and Allenspach, 2017; Redfern et al., 2017; Roth-Walter et al., 2017; Yogeshpriya et al., 2017; Barko et al., 2018), few authors have explicitly evaluated the impact of macronutrient nutrition (nutrition supplied by carbohydrates, protein, and fat), digestion, and food processing on the pet microbiome and its subsequent effect on health outcomes in IBD. Dysbiosis, which is more common in animals with IBD, compared to those without the disease, is characterized by decreased microbiome diversity in general, and a reduction in species that produce SCFAs in particular. One study examined ileal and colonic mucosal microbiota samples from dogs with IBD and found that they manifested increased Enterobacteriaceae and E. coli bacteria attached to epithelia or invading the intestinal mucosa at these sampling sites (Cassmann et al., 2016). These findings are consistent with that of another recent study which also found increased E. coli in the colonic mucosa of dogs with CE, as well as decreased Helicobacter spp. and Akkermansia spp. (Giaretta et al., 2020). Interestingly, a recent review of the literature noted that compared to humans, Akkermansia spp. are not abundant in the GI tracts of cats and dogs, suggesting that these bacteria do not have a significant role in the microbial degradation of mucus in these animals (Garcia-Mazcorro et al., 2020).

Additional well-designed and controlled trials are needed to assess the interrelationships among nutrition and the microbiome in the management of IBD in cats and dogs.

Food allergies manifesting with GI symptoms in animals are often mistaken for IBD and vice-versa due to the overlap of symptoms, most noticeably diarrhea. Although few studies have been conducted in pets and humans, it has been found that in adult humans, peanut and tree nut allergies are associated with higher Bacteroides and reduced Clostridiales, Prevotella, and Ruminococcaceae (Hua et al., 2016). While nut allergies may be less relevant for cats and dogs, this report suggests that microbiome alterations may be associated with allergic diseases.

A validated model of canine atopic dermatitis found that early exposure to probiotics (Lactobacillus rhamnosus) significantly decreased allergen-specific IgE and partially prevented atopic dermatitis in the first 6 months of life (Marsella, 2009). A follow-up of this study showed that these effects persisted for 3 years after discontinuation of the probiotic (Marsella et al., 2012). A randomized control trial of dogs with confirmed atopic dermatitis reported that probiotic (Lactobacillus sakei) administration for 2 months significantly reduced atopic disease severity in all dogs who received it (Kim et al., 2015a). It should be noted that the vast majority of research evaluating the use of probiotics in treating systemic allergies has been conducted in humans (Osborn and Sinn, 2007a, b; Bresciani et al., 2018; Pilla et al., 2019).

The prevalence of constipation among cats and dogs is not well-described, and defecation frequency is difficult for pet owners to quantitate (Davenport et al., 2010). Nevertheless, constipation may be a relatively common clinical problem in pets, particularly in cats (Chandler, 2013).

Although there are limited data in cats and dogs, several reviews have summarized studies on the beneficial impact of probiotics on constipation in humans (Chmielewska and Szajewska, 2010; Miller and Ouwehand, 2013; Dimidi et al., 2014; Ford et al., 2014; Korterink et al., 2014). In addition, a more recent study has evaluated the mechanism of action for probiotics on gut motility (Dimidi et al., 2017); a second study evaluated the effect of probiotics on spontaneous bowel movements in constipated patients (Kim et al., 2015b). Overall, these studies support the use of probiotics for constipation, reducing GI transit time, increasing stool frequency, improving stool consistency, and ameliorating GI symptoms (Miller and Ouwehand, 2013; Dimidi et al., 2014; Ford et al., 2014; Kim et al., 2015b). However, not all studies demonstrated probiotics to be effective in the treatment of constipation (Chmielewska and Szajewska, 2010; Korterink et al., 2014). A systematic review concluded that there was insufficient evidence supporting the use of probiotics in functional constipation (also known as chronic idiopathic constipation) (Chmielewska and Szajewska, 2010) and a meta-analysis found that while probiotics may improve abdominal pain in children with functional GI disorders, they have not been proven effective in childhood constipation (Korterink et al., 2014). Potential mechanisms for these effects center on the interactions between the gut luminal environment, immune system, enteric nervous system, and central nervous system, all of which are highly interrelated and influence gut motility (Dimidi et al., 2017). Additional research evaluating the impact of nutrition inteventions on the microbiome in cats and dogs with constipation is warranted.

Reported to affect 76% of dogs and 68% of cats, dental disease is the most common disease in pets (Banfield Animal Hospital, 2016). Research indicates 6 bacterial phyla consistently dominate the oral microbiome of clinically healthy dogs and cats: Actinobacteria, Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes, Fusobacteria, Proteobacteria, and Spirochetes (Davis, 2016). The oral microbiome in cats and dogs with and without documented periodontal disease has been evaluated (Isaiah et al., 2017; Whyte et al., 2017). Overall, these studies suggest that dental disease is associated with a replacement of health-associated taxa with more pathogenic strains.

A primary distinction among commercial diets of cats and dogs is whether the food is dry or wet. Dry diets are often fed to promote oral health because of the abrasive nature of the dried kibble. Although such foods have been shown to reduce plaque and gingivitis, their impact on the microbiome was not evaluated (Logan et al., 2002). A study of community cats fed exclusively a diet of dry (highly refined, cereal-based dehydrated rations) or wet (canned, sachet, and/or fresh meat combinations) food demonstrated differences in the oral microbiome over time, but could not determine if these differences affected the risk of periodontal disease because the study was not powered to evaluate this endpoint (Adler et al., 2016). However, cats fed the dry diet had a more diverse oral microbiome, with enrichment of bacteria associated with both oral health and periodontal disease (higher abundances of Porphyromonas spp. and Treponema spp.).

Obesity in pets is a significant problem. According to a recent report by the Association for Pet Obesity Prevention, 60% of cats and 56% of dogs in the United States are classified as overweight or obese (Association for Pet Obesity Prevention, 2019). Obesity is also associated with a variety of other conditions, such as diabetes mellitus (DM), osteoarthritis, cardiovascular disease, skin disorders, and decreased lifespan (German, 2006; Tarkosova et al., 2016; Phillips et al., 2017). Several factors can predispose an animal to obesity, including the GI microbiome, genetics, neutering, decreased activity levels, and high fat and high energy diets (Zeng et al., 2014; Hamper et al., 2016; Davison et al., 2017).

Prebiotics have also been shown to be a potential dietary intervention for promoting health in overweight or obese cats and dogs (Alexander et al., 2018). Although many studies have evaluated fiber intake in relation to weight loss, only a subset included evaluations of the microbiome. One recent study examined the effects of the prebiotic inulin-type fructans on fecal microbiota, metabolites, and bile acids in overweight dogs (Alexander et al., 2018). In this study, nine overweight beagles were fed the same diet twice daily and received treatment over three 14-day periods, separated by a 14-day washout, with one of the following: (1) non-prebiotic control (cellulose); (2) low-dose prebiotic (0.5% of diet); (3) high-dose prebiotic (1% of diet). Each dog received all three treatments over the course of the study. Incremental area under the curve (IAUC) for glucose and insulin was numerically lower in dogs fed the high-dose prebiotic, suggesting a beneficial effect. However, IAUC for glucose, insulin, and GLP-1 was not statistically different among the 3 treatments. Although prebiotic treatment had minimal impact on fecal microbiota and metabolites, some beneficial shifts occurred, including greater concentrations of fecal SCFAs. In addition, prebiotic treatment with inulin resulted in an increase in relative abundance of some members of the phylum Firmicutes and a decrease in the relative abundance of some Proteobacteria (Alexander et al., 2018). Additional studies in cats and dogs are needed to determine the mechanisms for the shifts in the GI microbiome and bile acid (BA) pool observed with prebiotics.

Diabetes mellitus (DM) is increasing in prevalence in cats and dogs (Banfield Animal Hospital, 2016). Between 2006 and 2015, the prevalence of DM increased by 79.7% in dogs (from 13.1 to 23.6 per 10,000) and by 18.1% in cats (from 57.2 to 67.6 per 10,000) (Banfield Animal Hospital, 2016). While dogs almost exclusively have type 1 DM, cats are more likely to have type 2 DM. Advances in microbiome research in various model systems indicate that the GI microbiome plays a role in extra-intestinal diseases such as diabetes and obesity (Blake and Suchodolski, 2016). Altered gut microbiota composition has been associated with the development of type 2 DM in cats and dogs (Jergens et al., 2019; Kieler et al., 2019). For example, one recent study showed that dogs with naturally occurring type 1 DM have intestinal dysbiosis and altered concentrations of fecal unconjugated BAs, exhibiting similar patterns to that in humans with type 2 DM (Jergens et al., 2019). In addition, cats with DM have also been shown to have a significant decrease in gut microbial diversity and a loss of butyrate-producing bacteria, compared with healthy cats of the same age (Kieler et al., 2019).

Because macronutrient profile affects the composition of the GI microbiome, and the associated functional products of the microbiome impact host health, it is logical to approach the management of DM in cats and dogs through nutrition. Although data are currently limited, several studies are underway to further investigate the effects of prebiotics on metabolic diseases. Taken together, there is a clear need to better understand how different nutrition interventions can impact GI microbiome composition and function in DM, which will inform the development of more effective nutritional interventions for DM.

Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is one of the most common diseases in cats and dogs (Polzin, 2007), yet little research has been published to date on the GI microbiome and kidney disease in these species. However, one recent study showed that cats with CKD had decreased richness and diversity of the fecal microbiome compared with healthy cats (Summers et al., 2019), which is consistent with prior studies of the intestinal microbiome in humans with CKD (Hida et al., 1996; Vaziri et al., 2013).

Nephrolithiasis, or kidney stones, is a condition common in cats and dogs that shortens the lifespan of cats by about 3 years on average (Hall et al., 2017). The majority of kidney and bladder stones in animals are composed of calcium oxalate or magnesium ammonium phosphate (struvite), and development of stones is a complex process, involving genetic and environmental factors (Mehta et al., 2016). Results of studies in animals and humans evaluating the use of probiotics for reducing kidney stones have been mixed (Mehta et al., 2016; Lieske, 2017; Sadaf et al., 2017). Studies in both humans and animals have shown that Oxalobacter and Lactobacillus spp. prevent stone formation through the degradation of oxalate salts (Sadaf et al., 2017). More research on the impact of the GI microbiome on kidney function and kidney disease in cats and dogs and the impact of nutrition on these effects is needed.

The majority of the pre-existing literature described earlier in this article has focused on associations between compositional changes in the GI microbiome and adverse health effects, including the presence of disease. However, accumulating research suggests that future nutrition interventions that produce changes in microbiome function, which is evident from postbiotic metabolites, may provide significant beneficial impacts on health. Function-based approaches lay the foundation for microbiome-based therapeutics (Suez and Elinav, 2017), a concept based on the fact that many interactions between the host and microbiome are mediated by a wide variety of metabolites secreted, degraded or modified by the microbiome, including fatty acids, amino acids, bile acids, vitamins and polysaccharides (Suez and Elinav, 2017). These metabolites create a signaling network that impacts the host, the microbiome and their inter-dependent functions; therapies based on these metabolites offer the advantage that they target a point downstream of the microorganisms which circumvents inherent compositional differences, as well as the challenges of interventions aimed at creating compositional changes, such as colonization resistance to probiotics (Suez and Elinav, 2017). Nutrition interventions involving microbiome-based metabolites may benefit the host by restoring host metabolic or signaling pathways that have been altered in diseases linked to the microbiome, or they may support a shift in the microbiome composition in a way that reduces the likelihood of disease development (Suez and Elinav, 2017). The subsequent paragraphs provide an overview of emerging evidence for the role of nutrition to influence the health of cats and dogs through changes to microbiome function and postbiotics (see Table 1).

Although substantial evidence indicates that reducing excessive putrefaction of bypass protein may provide benefit, there appears to be a role for some putrefactive metabolites to contribute to improved host physiological function. Intriguingly, some putrefactive products may provide health benefits (Table 1). For example, indole, a degradation product of the amino acid tryptophan, has been shown to improve host-microbiome immune homeostasis (Alexeev et al., 2018), decrease markers of inflammation, and increase epithelial-cell tight-junction resistance (Bansal et al., 2010), while the related metabolite indole-3-propionate improves gut barrier integrity (Venkatesh et al., 2014). Conversely, indole has been shown to be a potent co-carcinogen in rats (Dunning and Curtis, 1958; Sims and Renwick, 1983) and hamsters (Oyasu et al., 1972) and is metabolized to 3-indoxyl sulfate, 5-hydroxyindole sulfate and 7-hydroxyindole sulfate, which stimulate the progression of glomerular necrosis and renal failure in uremic patients (Niwa et al., 1997; Barreto et al., 2009; Lisowska-Myjak, 2014). As in humans, indoxyl sulfate is an important uremic toxin in cats and dogs that increases with the severity of renal disease (Wong et al., 2014; Barrios et al., 2015; Cheng et al., 2015). Enhancement of polyamine production has been proposed to abrogate the detrimental impact of aging on intestinal epithelia (Kibe et al., 2014). Finally, bSCFAs derived from putrefaction of branched chain amino acids can refeed starved colonocytes with an efficiency not observed with straight SCFAs (Jaskiewicz et al., 1996). Therefore, bypass protein influences the balance of saccharolytic fermentation versus putrefaction in the gut microbiome, and this balance may help to determine how the microbiome affects a pet’s health (Holmes et al., 2017).

Future research will determine the appropriate balance of saccharolysis and putrefaction to optimize health. A working hypothesis holds that delivery of tryptophan, branched chain amino acids, and adequate saccharolytic substrates into a gut microbiome with the appropriate genetic capacity for transforming these substrates into indole-3-propionate, isobutyrate, and straight SCFAs, will promote optimal health. Examples of the effects of postbiotics on the GI microbiome in several disease states are reviewed below.

The postbiotic metabolite, H2S, which is derived from sulfur-containing amino acids, is a Janus-faced molecule that is associated with both toxic functions and potential health benefits (Zhang et al., 2013). For example, endogenous production of H2S by the host generates an endothelium-derived hyperpolarizing effect to promote vasorelaxation and promotes anti-inflammatory effects (Linden et al., 2008; Martin et al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2013). In contrast, H2S generation in the colon by gut microbiota inhibits utilization of the SCFA butyrate by colonocytes through inhibition of mitochondrial metalloproteins and is associated with ulcerative colitis (Roediger et al., 1997). This appears to be an example of dose and site of action determining the outcome of H2S generation, such that limiting delivery of sulfur-containing amino acids to the colon by increasing digestibility and reducing dietary levels may provide a benefit to the GI tract.

Certain GI bacteria produce precursors of uremic toxins through fermentation of protein and amino acids. Indoxyl sulfate, p-cresol sulfate, and phenylacetylglutamine have been shown to negatively correlate with kidney function in observational studies (Lin et al., 2011; Barrios et al., 2015; see Table 1). In addition, p-cresyl, its parent compound p-cresol, and indoxyl-sulfate are known to contribute to endothelial damage and oxidative stress (Dou et al., 2004; Lin et al., 2011; Gryp et al., 2017). These toxins are important contributors to the development of kidney disease in cats and dogs (Chen et al., 2018; Summers et al., 2019) but data on the relevance of the effects of specific bacteria on levels of uremic toxins are inconsistent. While many animal studies have shown the benefit of removing indoxyl sulfate by AST-120 (an oral carbonaceous adsorbent used in patients with CKD), no consistent benefit on renal endpoints has been demonstrated in clinical studies with humans (Yamaguchi et al., 2017).

Diets specifically formulated for cats and dogs with kidney disease have been shown to increase the lifespan of pets by controlling signs of uremia (Cline, 2016). The use of ingredients such as fish oil, antioxidants, L-carnitine, and botanicals has resulted in significant improvements in markers of renal health and have also been shown to exhibit beneficial effects on the microbiome (Yu et al., 2014; Fukami et al., 2015; Hall et al., 2016a, b). Although a definitive link between diet, microbiome function, and kidney disease has not been established in cats and dogs, one group reported reductions in several uremic toxins associated with indoles in cats with renal insufficiency after feeding a diet containing a specific combination of a simple fermentable fiber and a complex polysaccharide (Ephraim-Gebreselassie et al., 2018). Findings such as these suggest that further study on the role of nutrition in shaping microbiome function to influence renal health in cats and dogs is needed.

Emerging postbiotics, such as 10-hydroxy-cis-12-octadecenoic acid, have generated interest due to their anti-allergic effects and anti-inflammatory activity in the intestine (Miyamoto et al., 2015; Kaikiri et al., 2017; Ikeguchi et al., 2018). A study in mice demonstrated that consumption of 10-hydroxy-cis-12-octadecenoic acid reduced clinical symptoms of allergic disease, including scratching behavior, hemorrhage, edema, and dryness (Kaikiri et al., 2017), suggesting it could have similar effects in cats and dogs. This nutritional component, which is found in food-derived polyunsaturated fats, may also be beneficial for other mucosal pathologies, such as oral diseases that stem from decreased epithelial barrier integrity (Yamada et al., 2018). While speculative, emerging postbiotics such as this warrant further research to determine if they can be modulated through nutrition in a way that impacts cat and dog health in a beneficial manner.

The role of the GI microbiome in both health and disease is an increasingly important field of study for researchers and area of clinical interest for veterinarians. The GI microbiome is now recognized as a metabolic organ that plays a critical role in numerous processes essential to the health and fitness of the host. Consequently, disturbances in the microbiome may contribute to or exacerbate illness, while the introduction of nutritional interventions that optimize the composition and function of the microbiome may improve the health of cats and dogs.

Variations in the GI microbiome that have been observed among healthy pets and those with various diseases such as IBD, allergy, oral disease, overweight, diabetes, and kidney disease, suggests that nutritional components that effectively target the microbiome may require tailoring to the unique features of a given health condition. While foods can be formulated with ingredients generally recognized to protect against microbiome disturbances, additional study is needed to demonstrate the impact of such changes on disease in individual cats and dogs. Although use of microbiome-based health screening (Staley et al., 2018) and microbiome diagnostics are not yet widespread, future use of microbial-derived biomarkers for specific diseases may enhance the efficacy and efficiency of diagnosis, assessment of progression, and prognosis (Bäckhed et al., 2005; Davies, 2018), as well as decisions related to the choice of nutrition therapy. Mounting evidence suggests that nutrition influences GI microbiome composition and function, impacts extra-GI organs directly or indirectly, and has reshaped the field of microbiome research in the context of personalized nutrition. Further research is needed to develop consensus around quantifiable measures for characterizing the microbiome in both wellness and disease, evaluating the impact of nutrition interventions and ultimately guiding the development of appropriate nutritional recommendations for microbiome health in cats and dogs.

SW, JR, MJ, EE, DB, JM, and DJ wrote the manuscript. SW, JR, MJ, and JS edited and revised the manuscript.

SW, JR, MJ, EE, DB, and JM were current employees and DJ was a former employee of the Hill’s Pet Nutrition, Inc., Topeka, KS, United States. The remaining author declares that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

Funding. This work has been funded by the Hill’s Pet Nutrition, Inc. The funder was not involved in the study design, collection, analysis, and interpretation of the data, the writing of this article or the decision to submit it for publication.

