Gut microbiome signatures distinguish type 2 diabetes mellitus from non-alcoholic fatty liver disease



Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is closely associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D), and these two metabolic diseases demonstrate bidirectional influences. The identification of microbiome profiles that are specific to liver injury or impaired glucose metabolism may assist understanding of the role of the gut microbiota in the relationship between NAFLD and T2D. Here, we studied a biopsy-proven Asian NAFLD cohort (n = 329; 187 participants with NAFLD, 101 with NAFLD and T2D, and 41 with neither) and identified Enterobacter, Romboutsia, and Clostridium sensu stricto as the principal taxa associated with the severity of NAFLD and T2D, whereas Ruminococcus and Megamonas were specific to NAFLD. In particular, the taxa that were associated with both severe liver pathology and T2D were also significantly associated with markers of diabetes, such as fasting blood glucose and Hb1Ac. Enterotype analysis demonstrated that participants with NAFLD had a significantly higher proportion of Bacteroides and a lower proportion of Ruminococcus than a Korean healthy twin cohort (n = 756). However, T2D could not be clearly distinguished from NAFLD. Analysis of an independent T2D cohort (n = 185) permitted us to validate the T2D-specific bacterial signature identified in the NAFLD cohort. Functional inference analysis revealed that endotoxin biosynthesis pathways were significantly enriched in participants with NAFLD and T2D, compared with those with NAFLD alone. These findings may assist with the development of effective therapeutic approaches for metabolic diseases that are associated with specific bacterial signatures.

Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) has a broad spectrum of hepatic manifestations, ranging from non-alcoholic fatty liver to more serious conditions, including non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), advanced fibrosis, and cirrhosis. Owing to this wide spectrum of disease, lack of specific pharmacotherapy, and requirement for histological examination to make a definitive diagnosis, efforts to identify tangible targets for the treatment of NAFLD have been attempted using genetic, imaging, serological, and Omics approaches [1]. However, it is necessary to further evaluate the potential non-invasive biomarkers identified in this way. In addition, the existence of comorbidities further complicates the characterization of the disease. For example, NAFLD is closely associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D): patients with T2D have a high prevalence of NAFLD (55%), and NAFLD is also a risk factor for T2D [2], [3], [4]. Furthermore, the presence of this comorbidity is often associated with a poorer prognosis and a higher incidence of mortality [5]. Emerging evidence indicates that these two metabolic diseases are characterized by alterations to the gut microbiome [6], [7], [8]. Previous research regarding these conditions and their associations with the gut microbiome has mostly focused on the identification of non-invasive microbial biomarkers of NAFLD and attempts to identify the roles of gut microbes in the pathophysiology of NAFLD. However, the additional effect of T2D on the gut microbiome that characterizes NAFLD has not been fully investigated.

In the present study, we aimed to identify disease-specific microbial signatures and the additional effect of T2D on the gut microbiome of patients with NAFLD. To this end, we categorized the participants in a biopsy-proven Asian NAFLD cohort on the basis of the presence of NAFLD ± T2D. 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing analysis demonstrated that the gut microbiome includes taxa that 1) change in abundance with the progression of NAFLD alongside T2D, 2) are characteristic of the presence of T2D only, and 3) change with the progression of NAFLD but are not affected by T2D. These findings were validated using an independent T2D cohort. The study of these two independent cohorts has identified specific associations between metabolic diseases and gut bacteria, which suggest unique biomarkers for each condition.

We analyzed three independent Korean cohorts, with the aim of distinguishing the gut microbiomes of NAFLD and T2D. First, the ‘Boramae NAFLD cohort’ was recruited by the Seoul Metropolitan Government Seoul National University Boramae Medical Center in South Korea (NCT02206841) [9], [10]. Fecal samples collected from 288 participants with biopsy-proven NAFLD and 41 without NAFLD were studied. The clinical and biochemical characteristics of the participants are listed in Table 1, Table 2. This study was performed in accordance with the ethical guidelines of the 1975 Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Seoul National University Boramae Medical Center (IRB No. 26–2017-48). Written informed consent was obtained from all of the study participants. Second, a validation T2D cohort was recruited from Chungnam National University Hospital (CNUH; n = 185; 36 with T2D and 149 controls). The demographics of this cohort are presented in Table 3. This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of CNUH (IRB No. 2015–09-942–006). All the participants provided their written informed consent, and all the procedures were performed in accordance with relevant guidelines and regulations. Finally, data from the healthy Korean twin cohort (n = 752) were obtained from the European Nucleotide Archive under study accession number: ERP010289 and used for enterotyping.

FDRa: no NAFLD vs. NASH or NAFL. FDRb: no NAFLD vs. NASH + T2D or NAFL + T2D. *, Wilcoxon rank sum test (FDR < 0.1).

BMI: body mass index, AST: aspartate aminotransferase, ALT: alanine aminotransferase, GGT: gamma-glutamyl transferase, HDL: high-density lipoprotein, LDL: low-density lipoprotein, HA: hyaluronic acid, HbA1c: hemoglobin A1c (glycated haemoglobin), HOMA-IR: Homeostatic Model Assessment of Insulin Resistance, Adipo-IR: Adipose tissue Insulin Resistance index, FFA: free fatty acid, hsCRP: high-sensitivity C-reactive protein, TG: triglyceride, FBS: fasting blood sugar, HTN: hypertension.

*, Wilcoxon rank sum test (FDR < 0.1).

BMI: body mass index, AST: aspartate aminotransferase, ALT: alanine aminotransferase, GGT: gamma-glutamyl transferase, HDL: high-density lipoprotein, LDL: low-density lipoprotein, HA: hyaluronic acid, HbA1c: hemoglobin A1c (glycated haemoglobin), HOMA-IR: Homeostatic Model Assessment of Insulin Resistance, Adipo-IR: Adipose tissue Insulin Resistance index, FFA: free fatty acid, hsCRP: high-sensitivity C-reactive protein, TG: triglyceride, FBS: fasting blood sugar, HTN: hypertension.

*, Wilcoxon rank sum test (FDR < 0.1).

BMI: body mass index, AST: aspartate aminotransferase, ALT: alanine aminotransferase, GGT: gamma-glutamyl transferase, HDL: high-density lipoprotein, LDL: low-density lipoprotein, TG: triglyceride, FBS: fasting blood sugar.

Participants with radiologic evidence of hepatic steatosis were eligible for inclusion in the study. The subsequent inclusion/exclusion criteria were as follows.

Participants without NAFLD also underwent liver biopsy because they were either potential liver donors or required investigation for a liver mass. Of the 41 control participants who did not have NAFLD, 40 were liver donors for transplantation and one required a biopsy because of suspicion of a liver mass. This participant was diagnosed as having focal nodular hyperplasia (FNH) on the basis of histological examination. Participants who had been administered antibiotics within the preceding month were also excluded from the downstream analysis.

Inclusion criteria: adult (≤18 years old) and a diagnosis of T2D made according to the American Diabetes Association criteria [11].

As a result, data from 31 participants who had high FLIs (≥60) [13] were excluded from the analysis. Samples from participants who did not have T2D were collected in collaboration with the CNUH health screening center. Written informed consent was obtained from all the participants.

Liver histology was analyzed by a single pathologist, according to the NASH Clinical Research Network scoring system. NAFLD was diagnosed in the presence of ≥ 5% macrovesicular steatosis, and NASH was diagnosed according to the criteria of Brunt et al. [14], [15] on the basis of the overall pattern of histological hepatic injury, involving consideration of the extents of steatosis, lobular inflammation, and ballooning [16]. The severity of fibrosis was determined according to the method of Kleiner et al. [16]. Significant fibrosis was defined as a score of ≥F2.

For the NAFLD and validation T2D cohorts, fecal DNA extraction and microbial profiling were performed as described previously [8]. Briefly, DNA was extracted from 200 mg aliquots of fecal samples using the QIAamp DNA Stool Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). Amplicons targeting the V4 region of 16S rRNA were sequenced using the MiSeq platform (2 × 300 reads; Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) and processed using the DADA2 pipeline (v.1.16.0) [17]. The filtering and trimming parameters were as follows: truncQ = 2, trimLeft = c(10,10), and trunclen = c(230,140). Filtered reads were denoised, merged, and further processed to remove chimeras. Taxonomic classification of the amplicon sequence variants (ASVs) was performed using the Ribosomal Database Project (RDP) classifier (RDP trainset 16/release 11.5). For the Korean twin cohort [18], single-ended fastq sequences were processed using the same DADA2 pipeline, except that the following filtering and trimming parameters were used: truncQ = 11, trimLeft = c(20), and truncLen = c(2 0 0). Data from four participants were excluded because of low sequencing depth (<10,000 reads). Prior to the downstream analysis (excluding multivariate taxonomic association analysis), bacterial abundances were transformed using the centered log-ratio (CLR) transformation of Aitchison to control the composition of the sequencing data (CoDaSeq R package function codaSeq.clr [19]). Zero counts in the AVS table were replaced by a Geometric Bayesian multiplicative approach using the zCompositions package function cmultRepl [20].

The metabolic pathways that were overrepresented in the microbial community in the NAFLD cohort were identified using Phylogenetic Investigation of Communities by Reconstruction of Unobserved States 2 (PICRUSt2, v.2.3.0_b) and the default parameters [21]. Up- and downregulated metabolic genes and pathways were identified by referring to the MetaCyc database (https://metacyc.org/). Associations of NAFLD progression with T2D were analyzed using the Multivariate Association with the Linear Models 2 (MaAsLin2) package in R (v.1.2.0), after adjustment for age and sex [22]. Regression coefficients were used for heatmap analysis.

The effect sizes of cohort covariates on variation in the microbial community were evaluated as described previously [23]. Briefly, distance-based RDA (db-RDA) was performed at the ASV and genus levels using Euclidean distance, as implemented in vegan [24]. Covariates (false discovery rate [FDR] < 0.1) identified during this step were entered into forward stepwise model selection to measure their cumulative effect sizes. Prior to this analysis, the collinearity of the variables was checked using phiK and Spearman’s rank correlation.

Statistical analysis of the microbiome was performed in R (v.4.0.5) [25]using the vegan [24], phyloseq [26], pairwiseAdonis [27], [28], CoDaSeq, DirichletMultinomial [29], fifer [30], MaAsLin2 [22], and ppcor [31] packages. Enterotyping (or community typing) was performed using the Dirichlet Multinomial Mixtures (DMM) approach and a genus-abundance RMP matrix in R, as described by Holmes et al. [32]. The diversity and composition of the bacterial communities were evaluated using α- (Observed richness, Shannon, and Pielou’s indices) and β- (principal components analysis (PCA), based on Euclidean distance) diversity at the ASV and genus levels and vegan [24]. The composition of the bacterial communities were compared between the groups using permutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) pairwise comparisons (pairwise Adonis test) [27]. Multivariate analysis of the associations between metabolic diseases and the abundances of bacterial taxa was performed using the MaAsLin2 package in R [22]. Comparisons between two groups were made using Wilcoxon’s rank sum test, and the Kruskal–Wallis test, followed by a post-hoc Dunn’s test, was used for analysis of more than two groups. Categorical data were analyzed using the chi-square test. Associations of taxa with host parameters were identified by a partial correlation, to adjust for confounders, using the R package ppcor [31]. Statistical testing of more than two features included correction for multiple testing using the Benjamini–Hochberg method, and the results are reported with FDRs. All the statistical tests used were two-sided. The results were visualized using R or GraphPad Prism 9 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA).

We used a biopsy-proven NAFLD cohort (n = 329) to distinguish the microbial signature of T2D from that of the progression of NAFLD. The participants were categorized into subgroups using their histological characteristics (the NASH-CRN histological scoring system), the severity of fibrosis, and the presence or absence of T2D. First, we compared the anthropometric and biochemical characteristics of control participants (no NAFLD or no fibrosis), those with liver disease alone (NAFL, NASH, or fibrosis), and those with liver disease and T2D (Table 1, Table 2). The participants with both liver disease and T2D had significantly higher serum hyaluronic acid (HA) concentration, HbA1c, free fatty acid (FFA) concentrations, fasting blood sugar (FBS), and blood pressure than the liver disease only group (Wilcoxon rank sum test, FDR < 0.1). By contrast, the participants with liver disease and T2D had significantly lower ALT activity, low-density lipoprotein (LDL)-cholesterol concentration, and total cholesterol concentration than those with NAFLD only (Wilcoxon rank sum test, FDR < 0.1).

In the NAFLD cohort, the variation in the gut microbial community could mostly be explained by age at both the genus and ASV levels (db-RDA, adjusted R2 [0.51:0.8%], FDR < 0.1; Fig. 1A and Table S1). T2D in combination with fibrosis and NAFLD (NAFL or NASH) was associated with the second highest explanatory power for this community variation (db-RDA, adjusted R2 [0.35:0.56%], FDR < 0.1). Other significant covariates included circulating parameters that are linked to the liver conditions and T2D; for example, C-peptide, platelet count, FFA, and triiodothyronine (db-RDA, adjusted R2 [0.14:0.26%], FDR < 0.1). PCA based on the Aitchison transformation confirmed that the variations were related to the metabolic diseases; however, although T2D could be distinguished from NAFLD, it could not be distinguished from fibrosis in this way (pairwise Adonis test, FDR < 0.1; Fig. 1B and C, Fig. S1B, and Table S2). For example, a PERMANOVA test did not differentiate fibrosis from fibrosis combined with T2D (Table S2A). Biodiversity analysis of the NAFLD cohort using NASH-CRN category and the severity of fibrosis demonstrated a significant decrease in the richness of the community with an increase in the severity of NAFLD in the presence of T2D at the ASV level (Fig. S2A). The same analysis conducted at the genus level also revealed reductions in bacterial diversity and evenness (Fig. S2B). Together, these results suggest an independent effect of T2D on the gut microbiome signature for NAFLD.

Multivariate taxonomic association analysis for NAFLD and T2D status identified three distinct bacterial signatures after adjustment for age (FDR < 0.1; Fig. 2 and Tables S3–4): 1) a signature characteristic of T2D during the progression of NAFLD or fibrosis (Fig. 2A and B), 2) a signature characteristic of the presence of T2D in patients with fibrosis (Fig. 2C), and 3) a signature for NAFLD alone (Fig. 2D). The relative abundances of Enterobacter, Romboutsia, and Clostridium sensu stricto were significantly associated with the progression of NAFLD (NASH and fibrosis) in combination with T2D (pattern 1; Fig. 2A and B). Further investigation of the associations of the gut microbial composition with T2D showed that the abundances of Enterobacter, Clostridium sensu stricto, and Lachnospiraceae were significantly affected only by T2D in combination with liver disease (pattern 2; Fig. 2C). Following pattern 3, Megamonas and Ruminococcus were associated with NAFLD alone, with no T2D. These results imply that different gut microbes are independently associated with NAFLD and T2D.

Next, we investigated how the characteristics of the host interact with the abundances of the bacterial taxa that were significantly associated with metabolic disease (Fig. 3). Analysis of the host–microbe interactions identified specific associations of parameters relating to diabetes, such as FBS and HbA1c, with the abundances of Romboutsia, Clostridium sensu stricto, and Escherichia/Shigella (Spearman’s correlation, adjusted for age, FDR < 0.1). In addition, we found a strong positive association between serum LDL-cholesterol concentration and Faecalibacterium. This suggests that the differences in the abundances of these bacterial taxa are more closely related to T2D than NAFLD.

To better understand the links between metabolic diseases and microbial function, we characterized the microbial metabolic pathways that were associated with each disease using PICRUSt2 (Fig. 4). Of the 394 metabolic pathways inferred, 36 were significantly upregulated in the NASH or significant fibrosis (≥F2) group (multivariate regression analysis, FDR < 0.2). Of these, the largest number of significant pathways (6 out of 31 for participants with NAFLD and 11 out of 25 for participants with fibrosis) are involved in the degradation of aromatic compounds, which implies that they increase nutrient or energy supply for the growth of specific bacteria with increasing disease severity (Fig. 4A–B) [33]. Moreover, participants with both NAFLD and T2D demonstrated the upregulation of pathways involved in cofactor, carrier, and vitamin biosynthesis (10 out of 31 pathways), which implies greater biosynthesis of small molecules that are involved in enzymatic reactions. We found that ECASYN-PWY (the enterobacterial common antigen biosynthesis pathway) and KDO-NAGLIPASYN-PWY (the superpathway for (Kdo)2-lipid A biosynthesis) were positively associated with the severity of NAFLD and T2D, after adjustment for age (Fig. 4C–D). These results suggest that individuals with both NAFLD and T2D may have greater flux through deleterious microbial metabolic pathways than those with NAFLD alone.

Given that antidiabetic medications may affect the relationship between T2D and the gut microbiome [34], we next assessed the effect of taking antidiabetic medications on host health status (Table S5). Participants who had been treated with antidiabetic medications had significantly lower LDL-cholesterol, ferritin, and cholesterol concentrations, but a higher FBS concentration than those who had not (Tables S6–7). However, a taxonomic association analysis of participants that were taking antidiabetic medications generated the same associations of bacterial taxa with T2D, which implies that such medications did not have effects on the gut microbiome in the present study (Fig. S3, Tables S8–9).

To determine whether an enterotype was present in the selected Korean cohort and whether a specific enterotype is linked to the metabolic disorder, we used Dirichlet Multinomial Mixtures (DMM)-modeling based clustering, which was previously used to identify an inflammatory enterotype in Western population cohorts [35], [36], [37]. The DMM community typing of a combination of the NAFLD cohort (n = 335) and the healthy Korean twin cohort (n = 751) identified three optimum clusters on the basis of the minimum Bayesian information criterion (Fig. 5A, S4A). The three community types were labeled on the basis of their bacterial composition, community richness, and host BMI (Fig. S4B–D). In the merged cohort dataset, the Bacteroides (B) and Ruminococcus (R) enterotypes included Bacteroides at similar abundances, but the B enterotype featured a greater abundance of Escherichia/Shigella, lower richness, and higher BMI than the R enterotype (Kruskal–Wallis test, FDR < 0.1). Comparison of the enterotypes between the healthy Korean twin and NAFLD cohorts showed that the latter cohort had a significantly higher proportion of the B enterotype and a lower proportion of the R enterotype (chi-square test, FDR < 0.1; Fig. 5A). The greater proportion of the B enterotype was associated with the presence of NAFLD, but there was no significant contribution of T2D (Fig. 5B–C). Furthermore, there was a trend for the B enterotype to become more abundant with an increase in the severity of fibrosis (chi-square test, p = 0.065; Fig. S4E), but T2D was not significantly associated with the B enterotype (chi-square test, p = 0.24).

To validate our findings regarding the bacterial signature of T2D, we analyzed a separate cohort of patients with T2D that were recruited at CNUH (n = 185). Because T2D is frequently accompanied by NAFLD, we excluded patients with a high FLI (≥60) from the present analysis because such individuals are likely to have NAFLD (NAFL or NASH) [38]. We confirmed that there were no significant differences in the serum ALT, aspartate aminotransferase, or γ-glutamyl transferase activities between participants who did or did not have T2D (Table 3). The variations in the gut microbial communities of this validation cohort could be explained by height, the presence of T2D, alcohol consumption, and age (db-RDA, adjusted R2 0.6 [0.71%], FDR < 0.1; Fig. 6A and Table S10). The fact that variation could be explained by height implied a sex effect in the cohort; therefore, we included this as a potential confounder in the downstream analysis. The composition of the microbial community significantly differed between the controls and participants with T2D (Adonis R2 = 0.01, p = 0.01; Fig. 6B); however, the biodiversity of the microbiota did not significantly differentiate the groups (Fig. S5A). Enterotype analysis confirmed the absence of an association between a specific enterotype and T2D (Fig. S5B). After adjustment for age, sex, and FLI, we found that Escherichia/Shigella (+) and Clostridium sensu stricto (−) were significantly associated with T2D (multivariate regression analysis, FDR < 0.1; Fig. 6C and Table S11). By means of inferred functional analysis, we found that two pathways related to LPS biosynthesis were also more abundant in the participants with T2D (Fig. 6D and 6E), as shown in the NAFLD cohort in the present study.

NAFLD is a well-established risk factor for T2D, and vice versa [3], [4]. We recently identified gut microbiome signatures and metabolites that are associated with the histological severity of NAFLD, but some of these microbial signatures were lost after adjustment for T2D [8]. Therefore, we hypothesized that the two metabolic disorders may be independently linked with the gut microbiome. Indeed, multivariate taxonomic association analysis identified several taxa that followed the distinct patterns linked with 1) disease progression (Enterobacter, Romboutsia, and Clostridium sensu stricto), 2) the presence/absence of T2D alongside NAFLD (Enterobacter, Clostridium sensu stricto, and Lachnospiraceae), and 3) NAFLD only (Megamonas and Ruminococcus). Enterobacter, which belongs to the Enterobacteriaceae family, has previously been reported to be linked to NAFLD [8], [39], [40], [41]. However, we previously showed that this association disappears when the data are adjusted for the presence of T2D [8]. Using the present, larger NAFLD cohort, and the categorization of the participants according to the presence or absence of T2D, we have confirmed the association of particular bacterial taxa with T2D, rather than NAFLD. In a previous study, Romboutsia was found to be overrepresented in lean NAFLD patients and to be closely associated with hepatic triglyceride levels [42]. Clostridium was previously shown to be less abundant in individuals with either NAFLD [43] or T2D [44]; however, we found significantly fewer Clostridium in patients with fibrosis and T2D, but not if T2D was absent. The link between NAFLD and T2D and the abundance of Lachnospiraceae has been previously studied, but inconsistent results have been obtained. Significant associations of this taxon with these diseases have been identified, but both greater and lesser abundance have been reported [43], [45], [46], [47]. Megamonas and Ruminococcus have been previously shown to be associated with severe NAFLD (NASH or significant fibrosis) [7], [8], [48], [49], and we found that it was only significantly less abundant in patients with fibrosis but no T2D.

Some limitations of the present study include 1) the study design: this cross-sectional study only captures a snapshot of the microbial relationships with the host. 2) The differing definitions of NAFLD that were used for the NAFLD (i.e., biopsy) and T2D (i.e., FLI) cohorts. In a previous study of a large Finnish cohort (n = 6,269), a NAFLD-specific microbial signature was successfully identified by categorizing the participants using this FLI cut-off value [13]. However, the use of this index to define NAFLD may not be as accurate as a diagnosis made using a biopsy. 3) The absence of patients with only a single disease in the NAFLD cohort. Given that T2D always accompanied NAFLD in the present cohort, we were unable to analyze the independent effect of each disease. Despite these limitations, we were able to distinguish the microbial signature of T2D from that of the progression of NAFLD using an additional validation cohort. Further studies with longitudinal cohorts with shotgun metagenomic analysis are warranted to confirm the functional perspective of the gut microbiome with the disease.

In conclusion, we have been able to distinguish T2D-specific and NAFLD-specific bacterial signatures. Recent studies of NAFLD have shown that there are distinct alterations to the gut microbiota of individuals with NAFLD, but most of these studies did not consider the presence of T2D as a confounding factor. In the present study, we have identified bacterial taxa that more strongly associated with T2D than NAFLD in a NAFLD-T2D cohort by 1) categorizing the cohort, 2) showing correlations with host parameters that are specific for diabetes and liver disease, and 3) validating the results in an independent T2D cohort. These results should help facilitate further research aimed at improving the diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of these metabolic diseases. In the future, longitudinal studies should be performed to evaluate whether the presence or exacerbation of these bacterial signatures may predict the development or progression of these metabolic diseases.

Jiyeon Si: Formal analysis, Writing – original draft, Funding acquisition. Giljae Lee: Formal analysis, Writing – original draft. Hyun Ju You: Funding acquisition, Writing – review & editing. Sae Kyung Joo: Data curation, Project administration. Dong Hyeon Lee: Data curation, Project administration. Bon Jeong Ku: Resources, Funding acquisition. Seoyeon Park: Formal analysis. Won Kim: Conceptualization, Resources, Writing – review & editing, Funding acquisition. GwangPyo Ko: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Supervision.

GK is a founder of KoBioLabs, Inc., a company that aims to characterize the role of host–microbiome interactions in chronic diseases. The other authors declare no competing interests.

We thank Bioedit (https://www.bioedit.com) for editing drafts of this manuscript. The graphical abstract was created using BioRender.com.

GL, JS, WK, GBJ, HJY, and GK conceived and designed the study. WK, GBJ, JSK, and DHL coordinated patient recruitment and sample collection. GL and JS conducted bioinformatic analysis. GL, JS, and SP conducted 16S rRNA gene sequencing. The draft manuscript was prepared by GL, JS, and WK.

This work was supported by a Multidisciplinary Research Grant-in-aid from the Korea Health Technology R&D Project through the Korea Health Industry Development Institute (KHIDI), funded by the Ministry of Health & Welfare, Republic of Korea (grant number: HI21C0538) and the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) (grant numbers: 2021R1C1C2004318, 2015M3C9A4053391, and 2019M3C9A6089879).

Sequences obtained from the NAFLD cohort have been deposited in the European Nucleotide Archive databases with the accession code PRJEB27662, and sequences from the T2D cohort have been deposited with accession code PRJEB45895. The metadata relating to the participants are available from the corresponding author upon request.

The following are the Supplementary data to this article:

