A Microbiome-Driven Approach to Combating Depression During the COVID-19 Pandemic



The significant stressors brought about and exacerbated by COVID-19 are associated with startling surges in mental health illnesses, specifically those related to depressive disorders. Given the huge impact of depression on society, and an incomplete understanding of impactful therapeutics, we have examined the current literature surrounding the microbiome and gut-brain axis to advance a potential complementary approach to address depression and depressive disorders that have increased during the COVID-19 pandemic. While we understand that the impact of the human gut microbiome on emotional health is a newly emerging field and more research needs to be conducted, the current evidence is extremely promising and suggests at least part of the answer to understanding depression in more depth may lie within the microbiome. As a result of these findings, we propose that a microbiome-based holistic approach, which involves carefully annotating the microbiome and potential modification through diet, probiotics, and lifestyle changes, may address depression. This paper's primary purpose is to shed light on the link between the gut microbiome and depression, including the gut-brain axis and propose a holistic approach to microbiome modification, with the ultimate goal of assisting individuals to manage their battle with depression through diet, probiotics, and lifestyle changes, in addition to offering a semblance of hope during these challenging times.

Within a 1-month period at the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, there was a reported 34.1% increase in prescriptions for anti-anxiety medications, an 18.6% increase in antidepressant prescriptions, and a 14.8% increase in common anti-insomnia drugs including prescribed anti-insomnia medications including eszopiclone, zolpidem and zaleplonin the United States (1). During such a short period of time, this steep rise hints at the magnitude of COVID-19's immediate and widespread effect on mental health. In a recent Single Care survey taken from 1,000 U.S. respondents, 59% reported that their mental health had been affected by COVID-19 (2). Additionally, a spokesperson for the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA)-Disaster Distress Helpline reported a 338% increase in the call volume for individuals experiencing emotional distress from February 2020 to March 2020, an 891% increase compared to the call volume from March of 2019 (3). This alarming rate of mental health crises is an extreme concern for countries worldwide. Experts from the United Nations World Health Organization (WHO) have urged governments to put tribulations regarding the upsurge and severity of mental health illnesses at the “front and center” of their COVID-19 response (4). The suggestion by the United Nations is not trivial, as it is based on the startling statistics that show the devastating toll the pandemic is having on individuals all around the world.

Here, we propose a potential approach to address depression, which involves analysis of the microbiome and potential modification through diet, probiotics, and lifestyle changes. This article discusses gut and brain communication and the potential connection to stress and depression, the potential association between COVID-19 and the microbiome, the reported association between the microbiome and depression, and how the microbiome and depression may relate to diet, probiotics, and lifestyle habits. Lastly, we conclude by offering a potential approach to addressing depression through lifestyle modification including diet, exercise and potential microbiome modification. The overall goal is to examine evidence suggesting a connection of the microbiome to the brain, which implicates potential effects on depression and depressive disorders, in order to address how individuals may contain and end their battle with depression and navigate these difficult times.

Since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic extensive efforts have been made to combat this new virus. One of the main steps in studying any infectious agent is to know how it can infect human cells and consequently cause symptoms. In this regard, studies have found that COVID-19 targets exclusively the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor as an entry receptor into ACE2-expressing cells (35) which have been identified as the surface receptor for the spike proteins of acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) (36), a first and essential step of viral infections of host cells (37). Moreover, the virus also uses serine protease TMPRSS2 for S protein priming that facilitates viral spread and pathogenesis (38, 39). Thus, in addition to the mode of transmission playing a major role (40), the expression of ACE2 on respiratory epithelia cells make it more plausible (39, 41).

Another clinical reported manifestation is COVID-19 induced neurological symptoms (51, 69, 70) including non-specific cognitive complaints, headache, numbness/tingling, dysgeusia, and anosmia (loss of smell) (71–74). These observations were thought to be due to ACE2 expression on neurons and glial cells of the brain (41) allowing the virus to directly reach the brain via the olfactory bulb following inhalation without the use of ACE2, however, this was strongly refuted by growing evidence that support these neurological findings are mainly attributed to the effects of hypoxia, coagulopathy, and multi-organ damage in severe infection, accompanied by virus-mediated inflammatory processes (74).

In the past, scientists believed that the brain was the central control for all processes. However, recent findings suggest otherwise. Numerous studies have shown that the microbiota, or the communities of bacteria and fungi that live in our gut, impact our brain and emotions. The communication between the gut microbiome and the brain is bidirectional and occurs through neural, inflammatory, and hormonal signaling pathways. To further expand upon this relationship, murine studies have shown that the gut microbiome is actively involved in processes linked to brain development, physiology, psychology, and behavior (75, 76). Specifically, murine models have demonstrated that the gut microbiome plays a critical role in the regulation of mood, anxiety, and pain (77, 78). In addition, the brain-gut axis has been shown to modulate the following: stress responsiveness (79, 80), prefrontal myelination (81), brain biochemistry (78), immune function, neurotransmission, and neurogenesis (80) using murine models and germ free animal studies.

On the other hand, an imbalance in the gut's microbes, as reviewed by Petersen and Round (87), is an example of how the gut can send messages that impact the brain. Microbial shifts in abundance and diversity (either increased or decreased) are often termed “dysbiosis” (87–90). In the present article, our reference to dysbiosis is to indicate a change from “baseline” microbiota for any given individual, not necessarily to indicate a pathological outcome. However, in general, decreased levels of diversity have been associated with pathological outcomes often identified as dysbiosis. When dysbiosis is observed, numerous targets are affected, such as the levels of dopamine and serotonin in the brain, both of which directly influence mood using germ free murine models (91–95). It is worth mentioning that dysbiosis is not the only factor that affects the level of these transmitters, however, this observation strongly suggests that microbiota may have a role in regulating these neurotransmitters. Such changes are associated with increased depression and anxiety and altered eating habits (96, 97). In summation, the bidirectional interaction between the gut microbiome and the brain highlights the relationship that exists between the two.

Given the reported increase in stress, anxiety and depression with the COVID19 pandemic, examining potential factors influencing depression is in order. One such factor is the microbiome connection to these disorders. The connection between the gut microbiome and depression is demonstrated by the subsequent factors that affect, and are affected by, the gut microbiome's composition and the onset/development of depression. The interaction between the gut microbiome and the brain lays the foundation for the specific link between the gut microbiome and depression. Changes to the gut microbiota in major depressive disorder adversely affect many dimensions of the gut-brain axis, including the following: hyperactivation of the Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Adrenal (HPA) axis, disruption of neural circuits and neurotransmitter levels, excess production of proinflammatory cytokines in the immune system, and disruption of the intestinal barrier, as reviewed by Bastiaanssen et al. (98).

The plethora of evidence supporting the gut-brain axis and the established relationship between depression and the gut microbiome is indicative of potential new and more effective depression management. Based on the findings above, it is clear that the gut microbiome's makeup in individuals with depressive disorders are disrupted and lack the appropriate levels of beneficial microorganisms. Thus, we believe that encouraging the growth of such beneficial microorganisms and rebalancing the gut microbiome in individuals with MDD may be a promising step toward assisting individuals ease their depression via the gut-brain axis. Therefore, we propose a multifaceted approach to manage depression that involves rebalancing and maintaining the gut microbiome through diet, probiotics, and specific lifestyle changes.

While acknowledging the complex and multidirectional nature of the relationship between diet and mental health, we propose that diet is an essential part of a balanced approach to combating depression. A large number of promising studies have examined the relationship between diet and depression. In particular, one study examined 16 eligible randomized controlled trials with outcome data for more than 45,000 participants. The findings from this study indicate that dietary intervention significantly reduced depressive symptoms in high-quality trials (g = 0.321, 95% CI = 0.12–0.53, p = 0.002) (122). Other meta analyses and clinical studies have revealed an association between diet quality and the probability of and risk for depression (123, 124). Additionally, pro-inflammatory dietary patterns have specifically been linked to a greater likelihood of developing depression and depressive symptoms in clinical studies (125–127).

Although the exact underlying mechanisms through which diet impacts mental health have yet to be defined, there are several pathways by which diet can play a role. These pathways are related to oxidative stress, inflammation, and mitochondrial dysfunction, which tend to be disrupted in people with mental health disorders (142). A healthy diet typically includes various bioactive compounds that beneficially engage these pathways. For example, fruits and vegetables contain fiber, vitamins, minerals, and are packed with a large number of polyphenols. These nutritional factors appear to be associated with decreased depression rates, possibly due to their anti-inflammatory, neuroprotective, and prebiotic properties (143, 144). On the other hand, unhealthy diets are rich in nutritional factors that may negatively engage these pathways. Specifically, elements commonly found in processed foods like artificial sweeteners, emulsifiers, and saturated fatty acids may change the gut microbiome's composition and activate inflammatory pathways (136).

In addition to diet, we propose that probiotics are an essential part of an encompassing approach to treating depression. We assert that probiotics will help to serve the critical function of rebalancing the microbiome. While we recognize that the study of probiotics in humans is a newly emerging field that has recently gained an immense amount of attention, published evidence suggests that probiotics will play a promising role in combating depression (145). Numerous studies conducted on both humans and animals have indicated that probiotics are associated with a reduction in anxiety and depression (78, 80, 146–149). Other clinical studies have shown that probiotics have also effectively mitigated anxiety and depressive symptoms in a manner that is comparable to that of conventional prescription medications (150–152). Additionally, related studies have indicated that probiotic use reduced depressive symptoms and improved the functionality of both the HPA axis and was equivalent to treatment with the antidepressant Citalopram in murine studies (106, 146, 152). However, as with any emerging therapeutic option, some failed to achieve the desired effect, a result that has been reported in a number of studies (153–155).

The underlying mechanism/s for the contribution of probiotics to rebalance the microbiome, normalize neuroendocrine system, and reduce depression may be mediated by: (1) immunomodulatory effects of the probiotics, (2) ability to decrease intestinal translocation of microbial constituents across the gut intestinal barrier, and (3) inhibition of digestive biofilms. However, the studies that suggest these potential influences are mainly associative, with little mechanistic considerations. The potential involvement of immunomodulatory effects of probiotics (e.g., B. pseudocatenulatum) is indicated by a pronounced decrease of stress-induced interleukin (IL)-18 levels in the serum as well as decrease of basal and stress-induced interferon gamma (IFNγ) levels in the small intestine of probiotic-treated animals. Additionally, probiotic incorporation led to a reduction of corticosterone in stool and catecholamines in the hypothalamus, as well as anxiety-like behavior (161). Such findings indicate that probiotic therapies may produce certain benefits over current therapeutic drugs or play an adjunctive role. As a result of this, we propose that probiotics may play an important part of a comprehensive approach to rebalancing the microbiome and treating depression.

The last element proposed for combating depression focuses on 3 specific lifestyle habits; exercise, sleep, and stress management. The gut microbiota is an extremely dynamic system that constantly changes over time due to a combination of various factors and lifestyle habits. Since the beginning of COVID-19 pandemic, the fear of being infected, loss of loved ones, lockdown, and social isolation all together caused marked changes in individuals' behaviors in an attempt to combat the stress caused by these factors. This in turn caused a huge impact on daily activities in multiple aspects including physical activity (162), eating habits (128), and sleeping (163). We propose that these three lifestyle habits are critical as a result of the existing evidence that demonstrates their unique benefits in improving gut health and decreasing depression.

The first lifestyle habit addressed is exercise. Studies showed that COVID-19 negatively affected daily physical activity, thereby shifting individuals to more sedentary lifestyle (164). Zheng et al., investigated the impact of the pandemic on physical activity in a sample of 631 young adults. In total, 70% of the participants reported decreased physical activity levels since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic with a significant increase in sleep duration and sedentary behavior (e.g., computer/video games, sitting talking on telephone, doing computer/paper work), consistent with data reported by Moore et al., demonstrating significant decline in all types of physical activity among children and adolescents in Canada since the beginning of the pandemic (164). A recent review has shown that regular exercise plays an important role in increasing the diversity of the gut microbiota and maintaining the balance between beneficial and pathogenic bacterial communities (165). Consequently, this major decline in physical activity eventually causes significant disruption to the gut microbiota (i.e., dysbiosis) which in turn plays a role in multiple neuropsychiatric disorders (e.g., depression), as reviewed by Belizario and Faintuch (166).

While the exact reasons are unknown, the evidence is abundantly clear that exercise helps to decrease depression and depressive symptoms. As a result of these findings, we propose that exercise is a critical lifestyle element to consider when dealing with depression. Specifically, performing a minimum of 150 min of moderate exercise every week, consistent with the U.S. government's Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans (180) and the American Heart Association's recommendations, may improve depressive symptoms (181).

In addition to exercise, sleep is another essential lifestyle element to consider, as it is also associated with the microbiome and depression. When it comes to sleep and the microbiome, sleep has been shown to have a direct impact on the microbiome in many ways. For example, murine studies have demonstrated the link between sleep deprivation or disruption and microbial dysbiosis (182, 183).

Interestingly, Li et al. (198) suggested that a bidirectional connection between the gut microbiome, sleep and depression exists with inflammation and endocrine hormones contributing to this process. In this regard, sleep loss, prolonged disturbances of circadian rhythms, and depression affects the metabolism of commensal gut bacteria and leads to alterations in microbiome structure including a reduction in members of the Lactobacillaceae family and an increase in Enterococci, Bacteroides multiforme, Lachnospiraceae, and Ruminococcaceae. These changes lead to microbiome dysbiosis (201–203). Damage to the gut epithelial barrier, as happens in leaky gut, will allow bacterial cells and their harmful metabolites to stimulate inflammatory immune responses thereby exciting the vagus and spinal afferent nerves (204). It has been postulated that the underlying mechanism for this process may be that the inflammatory response brought about by gut microbiome dysbiosis exacerbates insomnia and depression (112, 205–208).

The last major lifestyle habit that comprises a complete approach to combating depression is effective stress management. We propose that stress management is an important lifestyle habit mainly because stress heavily impacts the microbiome and is related to depression. As a result of the gut-brain axis, there is always a link to the gut when a stress response occurs (97). For this reason, stress has been shown to have a significantly negative impact on the microbiome as it affects intestinal barrier function (209) and host-microbe interactions (210). Studies have demonstrated that various types of stressors, including the burden of COVID-19 pandemic (211–213), heat, social rejection, and separation, are responsible for compositional alterations to the gut microbiome (207, 214–218). In this regard, a murine study by Galley et al., showed that colonic lumen tissues were differentially affected by exposure to the psychological stressor imposition of restraint. Specifically, restraint stress significantly reduced the alpha diversity in the microbiome of stressed mice compared to controls. Moreover, a significant reduction in the relative abundance of the genera Lactobacillus and Adlercreutzia was observed (219).

While we understand that various lifestyle habits can positively impact depression, treatment should also include psychological, neuropsychiatric and pharmacological approaches. We propose that exercise, sleep, and stress management are among the most accessible methods to individuals that can be relatively easily implemented. Given the various research studies that have linked the microbiome and depression with these three particular lifestyle habits, we propose that this approach may hold promise.

Having highlighted a relationship between depression and the microbiome, and the given association of COVID19 with stress and depression, we propose that one approach to combat depression should include potential diet modification, nutritional supplements and lifestyle changes. Specifically, increasing the abundance of beneficial organisms that exhibit a reduction in their levels during stress and depression (e.g., F. prausnitzii, Bifidobacterium, and Lactobacillus) and decrease the levels of pathogens such as Candida, Corynebacterium and Ruthenibacterium should provide an improved gut microbiome.

Healthy eating habits involving limiting consumption of sugar and refined carbohydrates and are associated with a decreased risk of depression. One such diet, the Total Gut Balance (TGB) (97) incorporates all aspects of the microbiome using foods and lifestyle practices to support a healthy gut and reduce overall inflammation with potent anti-inflammatory and antioxidant foods rich in targeted vitamins, minerals, and other beneficial constituents. This diet is nutritionally balanced, whole-food based, low- glycemic rich in fiber and resistant starches, low in sugar, full of mono- and polyunsaturated plant fats, low in saturated fat and animal fat, incorporating lean plant protein and animal protein primarily from seafood, with some poultry, as outlined in Table 1. As shown, this diet closely resembles the “Mediterranean” diet in the makeup of the constituents (227).

Studies have shown that bacteria inhabiting our gut have the ability to produce and/or consume a wide range of mammalian neurotransmitters, including dopamine, norepinephrine, serotonin, or gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) (91–95, 232). Since it is well-known that disturbance of these neurotransmitters is linked to a variety of mental disorders including depression (233–237), a target of many antidepressant pharmacological treatments, a possible approach to rebalance these neurotransmitters, although not completely discovered, is by modulating the abundance of these bacteria. However, some gut-derived neuro transmitters function differently from brain-derived neurotransmitters (238). It has been reported that Bifidobacterium improved the expression of Tph1 and secretion of 5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP) in RIN14B cells, significantly reduced depressive behaviors of mice, and increased the level of 5-hydroxytryptamine and brain-derived neurotrophic factor concentration in brain (239). Furthermore, in some studies, autistic patients were found to have increased level of Clostridia that were associated with production of toxic compounds, such as 3-hydroxypropionic acid (240) and p-cresol (241), found to inhibit the dopamine beta-hydroxylase that converts dopamine to norepinephrine in neurons in the brain and in the sympathetic nervous system (242). This increase in dopamine in neurons leads to production of oxidative species, depletion of glutathione and subsequently brain damage (240, 243, 244). Thus, increasing these beneficial organisms while decreasing pathogenic ones through diet may help in rebalancing neurotransmitter and reducing symptoms of some mental disorders including depression. However, investigations in this regard is still ongoing and thus can't be used as a solo treatment option.

Based on association between COVID-19 infection and gut microbiome disruption, a logical approach to help balance the gut microbiome is administration of probiotics. Probiotic, as defined by World Health Organization, is “live microorganisms which when administered in adequate amounts confer a health benefit on the host” (245, 246). Not only should probiotic consumption restore the gut balance, it may also decrease the likelihood of colonization of the gut by opportunistic pathogens (247), as reported in many studies that analyzed the gut microbiome in COVID-19 infected patients (57, 58). Published reports have shown that use of a probiotic helped in supporting the immune system (248), as well as leading to a marked reduction in the incidence of respiratory tract infection (249) Furthermore, studies have also shown that lactic acid bacteria probiotics possess antiviral properties (250) which has been used in many fields including agriculture (251), poultry (252), and medicine (253).

Eating to enhance the microbiome may help to achieve better health, but there is compelling research to show that other aspects of life, from the environment you live in, as well as sleep, stress, and exercise, that can significantly impact all gut microbes. While genetics is certainly part of this equation, and diet is another component, research continues to demonstrate that lifestyle factors play an important role in chronic diseases (254, 255). Because depression has been shown to be linked to dysbiosis in the microbiome, knowing what you can do to make your lifestyle habits work for you instead of against you is also important. To aid this approach, we propose a number of lifestyle recommendations that may enhance the microbiome balance which should result in reduced depression. A summation of the recommended lifestyle targets is listed in Table 2.

As a result of the toll COVID-19 has had on mental health, and society's imperfect understanding and inability to adequately treat depression, we propose it is important to examine more thoroughly new potential methods to prevent and treat depression. While this topic still needs further examination, research is extremely promising and should offer a glimpse of hope. The overall goal of the present manuscript is to offer suggestions that incorporate an encompassing approach to combat depression. As such, we want to emphasize the importance of rebalancing the gut through probiotics, diet, and lifestyle changes. However, we also propose that more can and should be done to achieve this goal and improve the lives of individuals who are struggling.

Since the start of time, humans have continued to evolve and adapt to whatever situations they are presented with. We propose that the COVID-19 pandemic is no different from these situations. Therefore, if you find yourself constantly worrying about the future, we hope this paper has eased your concerns and allowed you to adopt our optimistic view that we will get through this and be better because of it.

The raw data supporting the conclusions of this article will be made available by the authors, without undue reservation.

Ethical review and approval was not required for the study on human participants in accordance with the local legislation and institutional requirements. The patients/participants provided their written informed consent to participate in this study.

MG: conceptualization and funding acquisition. MF and MG: literature acquisition and writing—original draft. MG, TM, RB, and AG: writing—review and editing. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.

MF was an employee at BIOHM Health LLC. MG was the Co-founder of BIOHM Health LLC and author of the Total Gut Balance Book. The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

Funding. This work was supported in part by a National Institutes of Health Grant # R01AI145289- 01A1 to MG.

