Microbiome Research as an Effective Driver of Success Stories in Agrifood Systems – A Selection of Case Studies

Increasing knowledge of the microbiome has led to significant advancements in the agrifood system. Case studies based on microbiome applications have been reported worldwide and, in this review, we have selected 14 success stories that showcase the importance of microbiome research in advancing the agrifood system. The selected case studies describe products, methodologies, applications, tools, and processes that created an economic and societal impact. Additionally, they cover a broad range of fields within the agrifood chain: the management of diseases and putative pathogens; the use of microorganism as soil fertilizers and plant strengtheners; the investigation of the microbial dynamics occurring during food fermentation; the presence of microorganisms and/or genes associated with hazards for animal and human health (e.g., mycotoxins, spoilage agents, or pathogens) in feeds, foods, and their processing environments; applications to improve HACCP systems; and the identification of novel probiotics and prebiotics to improve the animal gut microbiome or to prevent chronic non-communicable diseases in humans (e.g., obesity complications). The microbiomes of soil, plants, and animals are pivotal for ensuring human and environmental health and this review highlights the impact that microbiome applications have with this regard.

Microbiome research has been intensifying in recent years in terms of the numbers of publications, research programs and complexity. A query performed using the PubMed repository (visited on 4 April 2022)1 revealed that in the last 10 years, the number of publications including the term “microbiome” in the title and/or the abstract was 40,565, where 24,261 of them (61%) were published just in the last 3 years. The term “microbiome” was first described by Whipps et al. (1988) and has been recently redefined by Berg et al. (2020) as microbial communities (including prokaryotes, fungi, protozoa, and other micro-eukaryotes) that occupy well-defined habitats and their “theatre of activity.” This “theatre of activity” includes microbial structures, metabolites/signal molecules, and mobile genetic elements, including transposons, phages, viruses, and relic DNA, embedded in the environmental conditions of the habitat (Berg et al., 2020). The enormous potential of advanced sequencing technologies have led to a rapid evolution in microbiome research in the last decades, which has become a topic of great interest in science, society, and industry. Innovation actions address significant challenges within microbiome applications for sustainable food systems, yielding outputs of commercial relevance across many product and process areas. The European-funded coordination and support action MicrobiomeSupport2 acts by setting a basis for a common R&D framework for food system microbiomes. To achieve this, MicrobiomeSupport conducted mapping exercises (Meisner et al., 2022), proposed common terminology and standards (Berg et al., 2020; Ryan et al., 2021) and is developing recommendations for a strategic research and innovation agenda. Microbiomes are an integral component of many scientific fields related to the agrifood system, such as medical, nutrition, feed and food, veterinary, and environmental sciences. The mapping exercise showed that most publications and research projects address human microbiomes and, more precisely, gut microbiomes. The second biggest thematic cluster comprises publications on soil and plant microorganisms, and research projects on environmental (mostly soil) and plant microbiomes and also projects on primary production systems (mostly agriculture). Within the research projects targeting microbiomes in food products and processing environments, microbiomes used as additives or health supplements and microbiomes of fermented foods (such as starters or ripening cultures) are the most investigated fields (Meisner et al., 2022).

In the last years, the application of high-throughput DNA sequencing (HTS) approaches has revolutionized the way microbes are investigated. Different sequencing platforms are available and their constant improvement allows the generation of billions of base pairs of data in a reasonable time and price (Quijada et al., 2020b). The success of the different HTS approaches relies on their capability to define, with a high level of depth and accuracy, the microbial communities occurring in a specific environment, as well as their potential activities and functions (Cocolin and Ercolini, 2015; Gerner-Smidt et al., 2019). These techniques have been successfully applied to several areas from “Farm-to-Fork,” such as the investigation of microbial dynamics along the food chain and during food fermentation, the screening of microorganisms and/or genes that are associated with hazards for animal and human health in feeds, foods, and processing environment, or the identification of novel potential probiotics or metabolites. To exploit the rapid growth of research and innovation in the field of agrifood microbiomes, it has to be ensured that this knowledge is integrated into industry and that legal and regulatory considerations are made. Many microbiome-based applications exist nowadays and the aim of this review is to expose selected cases where the increase in microbiome knowledge has led to advancement within the “Farm-to-Fork” context. In the following sections, we will elaborate on 14 selected microbiome success stories to demonstrate the crucial role of microbiome research associated with the agrifood system. Among the microbiome success stories available in the literature, we decided to focus on 14 examples taken from partners of the MicrobiomeSupport consortium that have demonstrated significant impacts on plant, animal, human, and environmental health. These case studies focus on the microbiome role and range from production of plant raw materials for food, feed supplement products, production and preservation of food, health benefiting effects from food.

In this collection of case studies, we provide an overview of agrifood success stories based on microbiome research that meet one or more of the following criteria: (i) Microbiome-based innovations in the agrifood chain context that led to commercialization, (ii) Microbiome-based mitigation strategies implemented by the industry to increase product yield and quality or decrease economic losses during production, (iii) Microbiome-based innovations in the agrifood sector that helped improve plant, animal, and human health, (iv) Microbiome-based knowledge that led to improved food safety management systems, or (v) Amendments of legal regulations based on microbiome research. For the purpose of this review, the MicrobiomeSupport consortium members have selected 14 example case studies matching at least one of the above-mentioned criteria from different sectors, including plant health, feed products and livestock health, food production and human health (Table 1).

One of the greatest challenges for agriculture in the upcoming decades is to meet the demand for food production caused by a growing human population, which is expected to reach 10 billion in 2050 (Tilman et al., 2011; Ray et al., 2013). Food production will need to increase by roughly 70% by 2050 and food producers will need to simultaneously limit their environmental impact (Crist et al., 2017). Therefore, the development of environmentally sustainable agriculture is necessary, where biofertilizers, biostimulants, and biopesticides will play a fundamental role. The studies performed on plant and soil microbiomes during the last decades have highlighted the dynamic and complex interactions that occur between microorganisms, plants and soil (Hartmann et al., 2009; Vorholt, 2012; Berg et al., 2014a, 2016; Hardoim et al., 2015; Hassani et al., 2018). Studies on topics such as plant tolerance and resistance to diseases, and/or abiotic stresses and nutritional, mineral and vitamin supplementation, have led to the implementation of microbial-based products, which are now successfully registered as plant growth-promoting (PGP) agents in several countries and available on the market (Calvo et al., 2014; Wallenstein, 2017; Woo and Pepe, 2018). In recent years, a growing number of studies have suggested that plant-microbe interactions promote plant health and development to a larger degree than previously acknowledged (Turner et al., 2013; Berg et al., 2014b). Complex communities of archaea, bacteria, and fungi can live as epiphytes or endophytes in different host tissues (Turner et al., 2013) and have been considered as an extension of the host’s functional repertoire by providing a second genome crucial for the plant health and growth (Berendsen et al., 2012; Lemanceau et al., 2017). In this context, soil plays a crucial role as a source of additional microorganisms and the transmission of plant associated microbiota from one plant generation to the next one (Sánchez-Cañizares et al., 2017).

Plant pathogens are causing substantial losses in the production of plant-based food products globally. Crop protection against pests and diseases has been mainly achieved by pesticides that are harmful to the environment and non-target organisms. However, an increased number of recent studies targeting the seed microbiome have demonstrated their ability to improve crop sustainability and production without the need of chemical substances (Berg and Raaijmakers, 2018). Different microbiome studies have indicated that up to 20,000 microbial species and up to 2 billion of bacterial cells can be present in one single seed (Adam et al., 2016; Johnston-Monje et al., 2016; Shade et al., 2017). The seed microbiota of plants not only includes bacteria, but also fungi as well as archaea (Wassermann et al., 2019; Taffner et al., 2020). Seed-derived bacteria were found to play a crucial role in the assembly of tissue-specific microbial communities in plant seedlings (Abdelfattah et al., 2021). When the establishment of seed endophytes was investigated, it was shown that endophytic communities can be shaped by targeted introduction of microbial inocula (Rezki et al., 2016). Mitter et al. (2017) showed for the first time that bacteria can be selectively introduced into maize seeds. Other studies provided evidence that plant breeding resulted in the divergence of the seed microbiome in various crop plant species (Adam et al., 2016; Abdullaeva et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020). In targeted approaches, where different generations of the same plant cultivar were compared in terms of their seed microbiome composition and structure, it was shown that bacterial endophytes can substantially differ between generations. The same studies also showed that while the seed microbiome is subjected to certain dynamics, it could still maintain beneficial bacteria (Bergna et al., 2018; Matsumoto et al., 2021).

In the first success story presented here (case study 1; Table 1), we highlight the discovery of the first seed-endophytic bacterium with holistically disease-preventing traits which was facilitated by integrative approaches that included not only conventional microbiome analyses, but also large-scale disease occurrence monitoring (Matsumoto et al., 2021). First assessments indicated that diverse members of the bacterial genus Sphingomonas were accumulated and transmitted across successive generations in disease-resistant rice seeds and conferred resistance to disease-susceptible phenotypes against the plant pathogen Burkholderia plantarii. Using culture-based approaches, Matsumoto et al. (2021) confirmed an endophytic Sphingomonas melonis strain (ZJ26) as the core constituent of the seed-endophytic bacterial community in disease-resistant phenotypes. More profoundly, S. melonis ZJ26 restored the phenotypic plasticity in disease-susceptible rice seeds upon exposure to B. plantarii. The identification of S. melonis ZJ26 as the resistance-conferring agent by the integration of HTS data, gene mutagenesis, and molecular interaction assays facilitated the discovery of its principal mode of action that underlies pathogen inhibition by S. melonis ZJ26 (Figure 1), which is based on the disruption of the pathogen’s virulence signaling cascade by anthranilic acid secretion from S. melonis ZJ26 (Matsumoto et al., 2021). The strategy employed here demonstrates that microbiome studies that integrate multiple approaches and data types can provide much more mechanistic insight than those that rely on HTS alone. Although this discovery is unique so far, one can assume that a similar approach will facilitate the discovery of microorganisms with analogous functions in other plant species and pave the way for the implementation of disease-preventing microorganisms in sustainable agriculture.

Crop production is often limited by the availability of essential macro- and micronutrients. Nitrogen (N) is one of the most limiting nutrients affecting crop yield, and thus applied in large quantities worldwide (Zhang X. et al., 2015). However, excessive application and continued dependence on N fertilizers raise the cost of crop production and increases environmental degradation. Urea, the most used N fertilizer, is manufactured by an energy-intensive process that requires fossil fuels and generates large amounts of greenhouse gases (GHG; Woods et al., 2010). Microbial inoculants composed of atmospheric nitrogen-(N2)-fixing bacteria (diazotrophs) have been effectively shown to partially or completely replace chemical N fertilizers in agricultural systems (Hungria et al., 2015; Santos et al., 2019, 2021; Rondina et al., 2020). Diazotrophic bacteria supply plants with N through biological nitrogen fixation (BNF), a process that involves the nitrogenase, an enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of atmospheric N2 into ammonia (NH3), which can be easily assimilated by plants (Kuypers et al., 2018). Diazotrophs include free-living soil bacteria (e.g., Azotobacter spp.), associative bacteria (e.g., Azospirillum spp.), and symbiotic bacteria (e.g., Bradyrhizobium spp.; Kaschuk and Hungria, 2017). In legumes, such as soybeans, symbiotic associations are established by the formation of root nodules, which are specialized root structures that harbor N2-fixing microbes. Within the nodules, plants provide carbon sources and other nutrients to the bacteria, while the bacteria deliver excess fixed N2 to the plant (Saha et al., 2017).

It is expected that the upcoming generation of PGP-based products will focus on (1) the optimization and development of methods for delivering microbes; (2) the use of co-adjuvants or other molecules that are synergistic with the effects of bacterial or fungal inoculation; and (3) the creation of products containing a consortia of microbes capable of delivering multiple beneficial traits to plants. It has been recently shown in several studies that an improved rhizosphere microbiome can provide disease suppression and strengthen plant growth; however, only a small fraction of the available knowledge has been translated into the field. Therefore, additional research into the dynamic interactions between crop plants, the rhizosphere microbiome, and the environment are necessary to better guide the harnessing of the microbiome to increase crop yield, quality, and sustainability.

Omics-based technological advances have also revolutionized our understanding of host-associated microbial communities in livestock health. Animal microbiome research often focuses on the microbial populations that inhabit the gastrointestinal tract (GIT) of animals, in order to determine their role in the animal’s growth, health and disease (Maynard et al., 2012; Van Borm et al., 2015; Bahrndorff et al., 2016; Celi et al., 2017; Peixoto et al., 2021). Functional insights into the animal’s GIT microbiome will lead to advances in animal disease prevention and nutrition through the targeted administration of probiotics, prebiotics, feed additives and customized diets (de Lange et al., 2010; Kiarie et al., 2013; Dawood et al., 2018; Quijada et al., 2020a). Effective functionality of the GIT and its health are important factors in determining animal performance (e.g., body weight gain and milk, meat, and egg production and quality; Celi et al., 2017). The nutritional quality of feed is a critical factor for animals as it has a significant impact on their health, productivity, protection against pathogens and toxins, and the regulation of their immune system (Chaucheyras-Durand and Durand, 2010). Manipulation of the microbiome also has a broad range of applications: from improving nutrition to the protection of the animals against pathogens and toxic compounds. Antimicrobials have been widely used in animals for preventing and treating GIT infections, with the inadvertent consequence of increasing the risk of spreading antimicrobial resistant mechanisms in bacteria (McEwen and Collignon, 2018). Therefore, in 2006, the use of antimicrobials in feeds was banned in the EU and several other countries (Directive 2003/1831/EC, 2003). Several alternatives such as probiotics, prebiotics, enzymes, and phytogenic compounds were utilized to prevent pathogenic bacterial growth and to promote the beneficial GIT microbiota toward improving the feed conversion ratio (Moretti et al., 2018). In principle, probiotics are an effective method to enhance the beneficial GIT microbiome by stabilizing epithelial barriers prone to foodborne pathogens (Deng et al., 2020). Within the last decade, many studies have provided evidence for specific and significant changes caused by microbiome-based feeding that leverages well-described types of feed additives (de Lange et al., 2010; Markowiak and Śliżewska, 2018).

Globally, feed production uses approximately 75% of all arable land. Further, responsible industrial animal production is struggling to solve issues regarding animal welfare, diseases and zoonosis, and find means to cut down the use of antimicrobials and reduce GHG emissions. Thus, it is essential to identify sustainably resourced feed materials (e.g., from food processing side-streams or marine biomass) and select feedstocks with high potential to provide the basis for stabilizing and sustaining a healthy GIT microbiome (Grela et al., 2019; Tomaszewska et al., 2019).

The fermentation process has been used to improve the nutritional quality and stability of various foods (Aktaş and Akın, 2020). Microbial fermentation can increase the digestibility of most proteins and convert indigestible sugars to lactic acid and prebiotic oligo-elements (Dotsenko et al., 2018). Fermentation of feed not only preserves high-quality feedstuffs for long-term use, but also degrades toxins and anti-nutritional factors and reduces harmful microorganisms in low-quality ingredients (Dai et al., 2020). The feed fermentation process has also been used in preparing livestock liquid diets (Canibe and Jensen, 2012; Missotten et al., 2015). In recent years, attention has been drawn to the use of fermented feedstuffs in dry feed (Navarro et al., 2017).

The weaning of piglets in modern pig production is generally done at an early age and is associated with stresses due to major changes in diet, environment, and social groups. Consequently, weaned piglets experience a reduced feed intake, intestinal and immune dysfunction, as well as increased risk of infection with enteric pathogens (Pluske et al., 1997; Lallès et al., 2004). Thus, the production efficiency of a swine facility is eventually reduced due to stunted growth, post-weaning diarrhoea, and increased mortality of the piglets (Campbell et al., 2013). There is an urgent need to find suitable strategies to enhance the performance and GIT health of weaned piglets, thus substituting the use of antibiotics or veterinary doses of zinc oxide (ZnO). Notably, high dose of ZnO in animal feed, added to prevent weaning-related loss in productivity, must be phased out by 2022 in the EU (European Medicines Agency, 2017). In case study 5 (Table 1), we present a newly developed dry feed additive based on co-fermented rapeseed meal and seaweed (from sustainably sourced feed materials) with lactic acid bacteria (LAB), which promote intestinal development and gut epithelial barrier functions in weaner piglets (Satessa et al., 2020a,b). Piglet performance, intestinal development, and other health indicators were sustained or numerically improved when in-feed ZnO was replaced by this new feed additive (EP100i, European Protein, Denmark). In two separate studies with newly weaned piglets, this dry feed additive enhanced small intestinal villi and colon mucosal development, brush border integrity and reduced signs of small and large intestinal inflammation, and the latter was also observed when the rapeseed meal had been co-fermented with the brown algae Ascophyllum nodossum (EP199, European Protein, Denmark; Figure 4). The morphological changes observed in the small intestine increased the absorptive capacity of the gut. This could explain, why performance was sustained or even improved in the piglets fed the pre-fermented rapeseed product in the two studies (Satessa et al., 2020a,b). The solid-state fermentation process, in which the commercial rapeseed product is produced, is a controlled, anaerobic process using cultures of three fermentative LAB (Satessa et al., 2020b). Hence, piglets were provided with not only probiotic bacteria added during the pre-fermentation process, but also with health-promoting bioactive metabolites generated during the pre-fermentation process (Shi et al., 2015; Pessione and Cirrincione, 2016; Drażbo et al., 2018). This increased the microbial biodiversity and robustness of the microbial community in the hindgut (Satessa et al., 2020a). It is furthermore likely that the microbial pre-fermentation process has improved the nutritional value of the rapeseed meal itself, since fermentation in other studies was shown to improve digestibility and neutralize anti-nutritional factors (e.g., tannins, glucosinolates, and phytic acid; Shi et al., 2015; Drażbo et al., 2018). The sustainable development of this product is not only based on the use of sustainably sourced feed material but also on using solid-state fermentation instead of liquid-fermentation, thereby lowering water consumption and energy. Such microbially enriched fermentatively processed feed products are already commercialized as pig-feed additives and contribute to enabling a more sustainable meat production. This microbiome-based feed product developed by the EU feed industry can hence decrease economic losses during production, even when the use of growth promoters are phased out. Indeed, the most important contribution is the reduction of the use of ZnO and antibiotics.

Applications of additives like prebiotics in both animal feed and human food have paved the way for development in the synthesis of oligosaccharide prebiotics (Dotsenko et al., 2018; Mano et al., 2018). Oligosaccharides derived from many natural polysaccharides have been shown to have prebiotic effects (e.g., fructooligosaccharides, galactooligosaccharides, maltooligosaccharides, and gentiooligosaccharides; Al-Sheraji et al., 2013). Xylooligosaccharides (XOS) have recently been suggested as a promising alternative to fructooligosaccharides prebiotics (Aachary and Prapulla, 2011). XOS are sugar oligomers composed of xylose units, which appear naturally in bamboo shoots, fruits, vegetables, milk and honey. Their production at an industrial scale is carried out from lignocellulosic materials (Vázquez et al., 2000). The production of XOS from agricultural residues means that the raw material is cheap and abundantly available. In case study 6 (Table 1) the XOS ability to modify pig gut microbiome was investigated (Dotsenko et al., 2018). XOS were obtained from monocotyledonous biomass, wheat straw, and ryegrass by treatment with different xylanases. The effect of dimers, trimers, tetramers, pentamers, etc. on the pig gut microbiota was evaluated using in vitro fermentation of pig fecal samples. The analysis was made from porcine gut samples, isolated from dissected, slaughtered animals. The shifts in the microbial communities were successfully measured by using culture-based methods. Significant differences in the prebiotic potential (suppression of the potential pathogen Clostridium perfringens and stimulation of beneficial LAB) were found between non-treated and XOS-treated samples. Differences were also found between the lengths of XOS. These results showed an improvement in porcine gut health after such prebiotic oligosaccharide treatments (Dotsenko et al., 2018). Furthermore, it is possible to produce such prebiotic feed additives affordably and at large scale as an integrated product from a Green Biorefinery that converts biomass to higher value products (Corona et al., 2018; Dotsenko et al., 2018; Parajuli et al., 2018).

Microbiome modulation in the GIT is an innovative and emerging approach to control farm animal disease and foodborne pathogens. A customized combination of microbial-based therapies could promote animal health and contribute to the practice of sustainable husbandry.

Microbiome-based innovations have the potential to improve food processing and human health. The microbiological analysis of foods continues to be heavily reliant on the use of classical culture-based approaches involving agar plates and incubators. While these have value, they are laborious, time-consuming and require the selection of specific growth media based on the microorganisms predicted to be present, or cause for concern, with respect to that specific food (Cocolin et al., 2013; Cocolin and Ercolini, 2015; De Filippis et al., 2018). This means that problems caused by microorganisms that are non-cultivable and/or not expected to be present in the food will be difficult to detect. Extending the knowledge of the cultivable and non-cultivable food microbiota is pivotal to unravel its potential role in the sustainability, safety, and quality of food production. In this regard, novel HTS approaches offer a wide range of exciting new possibilities for food research, as already discussed (Ercolini, 2013; Ferrocino and Cocolin, 2017; Walsh et al., 2017; De Filippis et al., 2018; Quijada et al., 2020b; Ferrocino et al., 2022). Bokulich and Mills (2013) described that the development of a microbial community within a food production environment is driven by community-wide adaptations in response to substrates or conditions within each environmental niche. The recent application of HTS techniques has expanded our knowledge of microbial communities in foods and their processing environment with an unprecedented level of detail (Doyle et al., 2017; McHugh et al., 2020; Cobo-Díaz et al., 2021).

The meat microbiome has an important role in the conversion of the components of meat into several metabolites, with a consequential major impact on physical and organoleptic properties, and the quality and safety of the final products (Cobo-Díaz et al., 2021; Franciosa et al., 2021). The initial microbiota is influenced by several factors such as the season, slaughter procedure, transport conditions, manufacturing equipment, factory environment and operators (Franciosa et al., 2021). Re-contamination is often a stochastic process throughout the slaughter line, which is complex to monitor (Mann et al., 2016). Multi-step monitoring is required to identify microbial shifts, obtain useful information on fermentation dynamics, and evaluate possible health risks (Mrkonjic Fuka et al., 2020).

It should also be noted that an in-depth study of the technological potential of the isolates should be performed, since strains belonging to the same species/genus can harbor a different genes and thus exert a different impact on the ecosystem. Additionally, a single strain is not able to confer specific characteristics to the product itself in most cases, but rather in combination with other strains with a cocktail of different genetic repertoires. Understanding these interactions is the new frontier of the food-omics approach. Moreover, the implementation of modeling based on meta-omics data can help prevent yield loss during food production and, at the same time, enable the prediction of product characteristics. This implementation requires the integration of data and bioinformatic tools into a predictive model based on the starting microbiome, and some limitations still need to be overcome, such as access to genomic and metabolomic databases specific for microbial groups, (e.g., LAB).

Current estimations of global food loss and waste lie at around 1.3 billion tons every year (Vilariño et al., 2017). This corresponds to approximately one-third of the food produced globally, resulting in an immense waste of resources, and contributes significantly to global GHG emissions. On average, about one-third of the global food loss and waste is attributed to the retail and consumer level, while 24%–30% is lost during production, 20% is lost post-harvest, and the rest is lost in the field prior to harvest (Kummu et al., 2012). While the main reason for food waste at the consumer level is over-shopping, the reasons for food loss can be diverse, including spoilage, defects, malfunction, or overproduction (Ishangulyyev et al., 2019).

These studies provide a nice example to show that HTS of food and food chain samples is not a purely academic exercise but rather can have a meaningful impact on industry. Simplifying and standardizing protocols, from sample collection to bioinformatic analysis, will eventually allow for the regular use of HTS in food production facilities and ultimately result in a better understanding of microbial contamination along the food supply chain.

The microbiome and its implications for human health have attracted significant interest in recent decades. Sequencing the human gut microbiome in health and disease states (Yatsunenko et al., 2012) promptly led to efforts to find out how such microbiomes could be stabilized, restored, or modified to favor holobiont symbiosis. Many gut microbial species and/or their produced metabolites have been shown to contribute to host immunity, nutrient processing, and energy harvesting and were further linked to the prevention or management of multiple diseases (Dahiya et al., 2017; Fung et al., 2017). A dysbiosis of our microbiome is often associated with disease. Driving factors for the structure and function of our microbiome are individual genetics, gender, age, and lifestyle factors. Diet is further considered a main factor (Singh et al., 2017). In contrast to Western diet, which is associated with a number of inflammatory, chronic and allergic gut diseases (Statovci et al., 2017; Zinöcker and Lindseth, 2018), other diets, e.g., the Mediterranean diet, which is rich in fiber, and traditional Asian diets, which include many fermented foods, are thought to support gut health (Şanlier et al., 2017; Tosti et al., 2018; respectively). Emerging evidence also indicates that the microbiome composition of individuals might help to predict the risk of developing chronic diseases (Rampelli et al., 2018) and responses to dietary interventions (Zeevi et al., 2015; Berry et al., 2020). However, understanding of the microbiome’s role in dietary-mediated health effects is still too limited to provide solid recommendations. Dietary guidelines by regulatory bodies scarcely address the role of the microbiome in human nutrition (Sanz et al., 2018). Continuing to generate evidence on the role played by specific gut microbes through interactions between diet and our health is essential to advance toward robust dietary recommendations. It is crucial to understand the key role of nutrition and the human microbiome in personalizing health and disease management as well as to align regulatory and policy actions that facilitate translation to society.

Fermented foods are defined as “foods made through desired microbial growth and enzymatic conversions of food components” (Marco et al., 2021) and have been part of our daily diet for more than 14,000 years. In the past, food fermentation was mainly introduced to avoid food spoilage. Much later, it was also recognized that fermented foods can have beneficial health effects. In the former section, we highlighted the pivotal role of the food microbiota in determining the quality of food products. Moreover, many bacteria and fungi have been isolated from fermented foods and considered as probiotics due to their beneficial properties for human health (Parvez et al., 2006; Marco et al., 2017, 2021). Nevertheless, how certain microorganisms drive food fermentation, are transferred across the food production chain, persist in the final product and, potentially, colonize the human gut is poorly understood. This is also true for various health promoting agents (living bacteria, enzymes, prebiotics, etc.). More work here would help us to (a) drive the process of food fermentation in a more targeted way and (b) use probiotics or their metabolites for new forms of therapy diseases based on gut dysbiosis, including both infectious and non-communicable diseases, such as bowel inflammatory disorders, cardiovascular disease, allergies, or cancer.

Bronchial asthma is one of the diseases that has become very important worldwide in recent years. In case study 12 (Table 1), we illustrate how a specific metabolite (D-tryptophan) obtained from food fermenting bacteria has immunomodulatory potential and can mitigate this disease. Toward doing so, Kepert et al. (2017) used a number of strains belonging to the genera Bifidobacterium, Lactobacillus, Lacticaseibacillus and Lactococcus, among others. These were obtained from fermented food and their immunomodulatory activity was evaluated. Cell-free supernatants derived from Lactococcus sp. strains were shown to decrease the secretion of CCL17 by a human Hodgkin lymphoma T-cell line (KM-H2) without affecting cell viability. L. casei W56 was then used for the enrichment and stepwise chemical characterization of candidate metabolites, revealing tryptophan as the responsible compound for the immunomodulatory effect. Enantiomeric separation of the purified subfraction confirmed the presence of D- and L-tryptophan, whereas the corresponding growth medium used as a control contained only L-tryptophan. Oral supplementation of D-tryptophan in mice with induced asthma (by Ovalbumin) increased D-tryptophan serum levels significantly, indicating enteric uptake and systemic distribution. Pretreatment of mice with D-tryptophan for 3 days and throughout experimental asthma induced significant shifts in the gut microbiome of the treated mice resulting in an increase of overall diversity. At the same time, supplementation improved airway hyperreactivity in response to methacholine. Allergic airway inflammation reduced gut microbial diversity, but when fed to mice, D-tryptophan increased gut microbial diversity and ameliorated the disease, demonstrating the importance of the gut-lung axis in health (Kepert et al., 2017). These findings support the concept that defined bacterial products can be exploited as novel preventative strategies for chronic immune diseases. D-tryptophan could be considered either a drug, which should be used to treat patients with asthma or a food additive, which could protect the gut microbiome from a dysbiosis despite a Western diet and other lifestyle factors which have negative impact on the gut microbiome. The next steps will strongly depend on the intended application, either as a drug or food additive, as regulatory authorities treat these very differently.

Obesity has reached epidemic proportions, which is mainly a consequence of unhealthy dietary habits that are based on foods rich in fats and simple sugars, in addition to a sedentary lifestyle. Obesity severely affects the health status of our society and leads to an increase in health expenditure. Indeed, the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) has estimated that the absence of effective preventive measures for obesity will severely increase the percentage of new cases of diabetes (60%), cardiovascular diseases (18%), dementia (11%), and cancers (8%) between 2020 and 2050, with the consequent increase of premature deaths and the reduction of life expectancy (OECD, 2019). The interactions of the gut microbiota with dietary compounds and the host seem to determine our vulnerability to obesity and its complications (Sonnenburg and Bäckhed, 2016). For example, excessive intake of high-fat foods and simple sugars induces immune dysregulation in the gut, partly triggered by diet-induced microbiota changes (Winer et al., 2016). Dietary fibers are recognized worldwide for their beneficial effects on host health and well-being (Makki et al., 2018). They include resistant starch and non-starch polysaccharides often found in vegetables including legumes, and cereals. Such polysaccharides are known to serve as substrates for the gut microbiota. Besides the well-known claim of improved digestive health, new evidence has emerged regarding the role of these polysaccharides and the microbiome in preventing metabolic disorders, increasing calcium absorption and bone health, boosting immunity and restoring eubiosis (Whisner et al., 2016; He et al., 2017; Beukema et al., 2020; Li et al., 2021; Song and Song, 2021). However, meeting the nutritional recommendations of 30 g/day seems challenging.

The generation of robust scientific evidence on the effects of specific intestinal microorganisms or products thereof on health-outcomes and their mode of action is needed to facilitate legal approval under different regulatory frameworks. For the approval of microorganisms as foods supplements bearing health claims, the scientific criteria applied by the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) during the evaluation process should be considered at the very beginning of the research program (publicly available EFSA Guidance documents on health claims published in the EFSA Journal). For approval of a microorganism to be used as a drug, the regulatory framework is not as well established, but both the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the European Directorate for the Quality of Medicines and Health Care (EDQM) codified these as live biotherapeutic products. The approval of these innovative products is promising but also constitute a challenge due to the limited experience of both applicants and regulators in defining quality and safety criteria and developing suitable study designs to demonstrate efficacy. Despite this, collaboration between the Pharmabiotic Research Institute (PRI) and industrial partners and scientists provides a roadmap (Paquet et al., 2021).

Agrifood companies recognize the potential in understanding the microbiome and translating this knowledge into products. Interested parties range from food ingredient producers, consumer goods companies and medical device companies to biotech firms and technology service providers. The food industry is further preparing to develop personalized diets and specific foods for particular target groups in order to prevent or treat certain chronic conditions. Meanwhile, industrial and academic partners are calling for public–private partnerships to stimulate the translation of scientific knowledge into new products and treatments.

To conclude, it is important to remark that the case studies presented here are a subset of examples of potential applications of microbiome-based research in the agrifood field selected within the MicrobiomeSupport consortium members and their partners. The microbiomes of soil, plants and animals are pivotal for ensuring human and environmental health. Research and innovation on microbiomes in the agrifood system are constantly advancing, and a better understanding of these microbiomes will be a key factor in producing highly nutritious, affordable, safe, and sustainable food.

RO, SUW, TK, AS, ES, and MW: conceptualization. All authors substantially contributed to collecting and writing the case studies. RO and SUW drafted the manuscript. RO edited and prepared the submitted version of the manuscript. All authors made a substantial, direct, and intellectual contribution to the work, and revised and approved the last version of the manuscript for its publication.

This work was supported by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 R&I programme under grant agreement No. 818116 (MicrobiomeSupport).

At the time of writing, SS was employed by Indigo Ag. RdS and JA was employed by Symbiomics Microbiome Solutions. YS had a patent on a Bifidobacterium strain for obesity licensed (WO2012/076739A1). AS and BM had a patent on the plant-endophyte combinations and uses therefor (US9364005B2).

The handling editor BM declared a shared affiliation with the authors MO, MR-P, and YS at the time of review.

All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

1 https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/

2 https://www.microbiomesupport.eu/

