A double-blind, 377-subject randomized study identifies Ruminococcus, Coprococcus, Christensenella, and Collinsella as long-term potential key players in the modulation of the gut microbiome of lactose intolerant individuals by galacto-oligosaccharides



Background. Our recent publication (Chey et al., Nutrients 2020) showed that a 30-day administration of pure galacto-oligosaccharides (GOS) significantly reduced symptoms and altered the fecal microbiome in patients with lactose intolerance (LI). Results. In this addendum, we performed an in-depth analysis of the fecal microbiome of the 377 LI patients randomized to one of two GOS doses (Low, 10–15 grams/day or High, 15–20 grams/day), or placebo in a multi-center, double-blinded, placebo-controlled trial. Sequencing of 16S rRNA amplicons was done on GOS or placebo groups at weeks zero (baseline), four (end of treatment), nine, 16 and 22. Taxa impacted by treatment and subsequent dairy consumption included lactose-fermenting species of Bifidobacterium, Lactobacillus, Lactococcus, and Streptococcus. Increased secondary fermentation microorganisms included Coprococcus and Ruminococcus species, Blautia producta, and Methanobrevibacterium. Finally, tertiary fermenters that use acetate to generate butyrate were also increased, including Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, Roseburia faecis, and C. eutactus. Conclusions. Results confirmed and expanded data on GOS microbiome modulation in LI individuals. Microbiome analysis at 16 and 22 weeks after treatment further suggested relatively long-term benefits when individuals continued consumption of dairy products.

Expression of the human intestinal lactase-phlorizin hydrolase (lactase) naturally declines as we age.1 Although most human individuals cannot digest lactose in high quantities, most can tolerate approximately one cup of milk a day, whereas individuals of Northern European descent can consume high amounts of lactose-containing foods over their lifetime with no adverse effects.2,3 Individuals that show specific symptoms (diarrhea, flatulence, bloating and others) upon consumption of low amounts of lactose are considered lactose intolerant.

The parent study to this addendum,12 a clinical data in a multi-center, double-blinded, placebo-controlled trial, showed that 40% of the individuals in the GOS groups had a ≥ 4-point reduction or no symptoms in the LI composite score compared to 26% with placebo (p = .043). Additionally, GOS treatment led to significantly higher levels of milk and dairy intake and significant improvements in global assessments compared to placebo. In this addendum, we present the analysis of the fecal microbiome of 377 patients with lactose intolerance (LI), randomized to one of two doses of GOS (GOS High or GOS Low doses), or placebo.

Our recently published study, of which this article is an addendum, included 15 investigative centers throughout the U.S. and 3 phases: a screening phase, a treatment phase and a post-treatment phase.12 There was a 7-day screening phase where patients were assessed for LI symptoms based on a hydrogen breath test and a blinded-lactose challenge. Stool samples were collected (baseline). Patients were then stratified into Placebo (powdered corn syrup), Low GOS (10–15 grams/day) and High GOS treatments (15–20 grams/day) and administered treatment for 30 days, during which patients did not consume lactose (week 4). Following treatment for 30 days, a stool sample was collected. Then, “real-world” dairy intake was encouraged without further treatment, LI symptoms were assessed, and stool samples were collected after a 30-day period (week 9). Finally, an extension study monitored a subset of subjects (n = 100) for approximately 6 months (week 16) and 12 months post-treatment (week 22).

Sequencing of 16S rRNA amplicons targeting the variable region 4 of the ribosomal gene was performed on samples corresponding to treatment groups: (1) Placebo, (2) GOS Low, (3) GOS High (N = 1,332). Amplicon sequencing yielded a total of 254,386,079 sequences (188,994 mean reads per sample). Overall, sequencing data assigned the majority of Operational Taxonomic Units (OTUs) to the phyla Firmicutes averaging 38.9 ± 22.4% per treatment group and time, Bacteroidetes (36.5 ± 18.2%), Proteobacteria (4.1 ± 1.3%), Verrucomicrobia (3.3% ± 2%), and Actinobacteria (2.3% ± 1.7%). The Archaea Euryarchaeota and the phylum Tenericutes were represented at 0.21 ± 0.24, and 0.13 ± 0.11, respectively. The phyla Cyanobacteria, Fusobacteria, OD1, Synergistetes, TM7, Lentisphaerae, Elusimicrobia, Spirochetes were identified in a range from 0.003% to 0.07%, and the phyla [Thermi], Chlorobi, Deferribacteres, Planctomycetes, Armatimonadetes, SR1, Crenarchaeota (Archaea), and Aquificae had the lowest representation (from 7.02 × 10−7 to 2.4 × 10−5%) (Figure 1a).

Permutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) using unweighted Unifrac distance matrices showed statistically significant correlations (Pseudo-F > 2, p = .05) between microbiome composition and treatment, as well as treatment over time (Figure 1c, d). Our analysis showed significant differences associated with treatment over time when we compared each time point with the same group at time zero weeks (p < .05, q < 0.05). Differences between treatments at week 4 were observed for Low GOS (p < .05). To confirm the observed differences, we determined how beta diversity changed across time within and between treatment groups using q2-longitudinal.13 We visualized individual trajectories in volatility plots using first distances. A linear mixed-effects (LME) test indicated a significant impact from visit number (P = .004) on baseline Jaccard distance (Figure S1).

OFrom a total of 605 species-level taxa identified by ANCOM analysis,14 61 were differentially represented in response to treatments by visit week (either at 4, 9, 16 or 22 weeks) after treatment (Figure 2a). The differentially represented groups were distributed among the phyla Firmicutes (48 species-level taxa), Actinobacteria (6), Proteobacteria (4), TM7 (1), Euryarchaeota (an Archaeae, 1), and one uncharacterized Bacteria. Of a total of 48 Firmicutes species impacted by treatments over time, 38 were of the order Clostridiales, four were of the order Erysipelotrichales, seven of the Lactobacillales, and one of the Turicibacterales. Within Clostridiales, two families (Lachnospiraceae and Ruminococcaceae) were the most affected by treatments and showed an increasing linear trend. Important butyrate-producers including Coprococcus catus, within the Lachnospiraceae,15 and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, within the Ruminococcaceae, showed an overall significantly increased abundance associated with both low and high GOS treatment groups (Figure 2b). Lactobacillus, Lactococcus, and Streptococcus species showed a marked increase in relative abundance in response to GOS. Finally, an uncharacterized species of the family Christensenellaceae had markedly higher relative abundance in response to GOS during the follow-up weeks, suggesting long-term effects of treatment.

Of the Actinobacteria, Bifidobacterium showed a specific abundance increase in response to the treatments (Figure 2b). Egerthella lenta and Collinsella aerofaciens showed long-term increasing trends, which could be related to increased dairy consumption. Likewise, Adlercreutzia, Actinomyces, and an uncharacterized group of the family Coriobacteriaceae showed specific increases in abundance associated with the GOS treatments at the follow-up visits (weeks 16 and 22) suggesting long-term effects of the prebiotic treatment in combination with increased consumption of dairy foods. This was also observed in the relative abundance over time of Methanobrevibacterium, a methane-producing, commensal Archaeae of the healthy microbiome (Figure 2b).

A total of 1050 samples corresponding to 345 subjects receiving either placebo or GOS treatments were analyzed by high-throughput qPCR16 using specific 16S rRNA gene, IS and GroEL probes to determine abundance of bifidobacteria and lactobacilli. Confirming our previous observations,11 the data showed significant increases in the relative abundance of the phylum Actinobacteria, the family Bifidobacteriaceae, and the genus Bifidobacterium in response to treatment in both GOS Low and GOS High groups, but not in the placebo group (Figure 3a). At week 9, the abundance of these taxa returned to baseline (week 0) levels. Nine relevant species of Bifidobacterium (B. longum, B. gallicum, B. dentium, B. catenulatum, B. breve, B. bifidum, B. animalis, B. angulatum and B. adolescentis) were also quantified (Figure 3b). Our data showed that overall, the most abundant Bifidobacterium species were B. bifidum and B. catenulatum, both of which were enriched by GOS treatments. B. angulatum, B. longum, and B. breve increased in the treatment groups at week 4, while B. animalis increased at week 9.

Taxonomic groups relevant to genus Lactobacillus were quantified, including Firmicutes, Lactobacillaceae, L. acidophilus, L. casei, L. crispatus, L. delbrueckii, L. gasseri, L. murinus, L. reuteri, and L. rhamnosus. Of the analyzed taxa, differences reached statistical significance for L. casei (Figure 3c).

Faith phylogenetic diversity (Faith PD) and Shannon diversity indices showed that age (Figure 4 and Supplementary material) significantly impacted baseline diversity of the cohort, increasing over time. Combined analysis of the population characteristic with treatment and with treatment by time showed that treatment had different effects depending on baseline diversity and specific category (Figure S2). Of the analyzed characteristics, age and BMI had the larger effect size (Figure 4d). PERMANOVA using unweighted and weighted Unifrac distance matrices showed statistically significant correlations (Pseudo-F > 1, p = .05) between microbiome composition and age, gender, BMI, race, ethnicity, alcohol consumption and smoking (Table S2). These categories were still significant after combining with treatment and treatment plus visit number.

Phylogenetic Investigation of Communities by Reconstruction of Unobserved States (PICRUSt) analysis was applied to 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing data to assess potential differences in microbial functional capabilities between groups. Group significance analysis on metagenome predictions identified 58 KEGG pathways differentially represented between placebo and GOS groups combined at 4 weeks. Of those, 34 pathways were significantly (Mann-Whitney test, FDR corrected p <.05) overrepresented in the GOS group, and 24 were overrepresented in the placebo group. Overall, the prebiotic group had increased representation of carbohydrate metabolism pathways (galactose, pentose and glucuronate interconversion, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis), lipid metabolism (fatty acid biosynthesis, butyrate), and amino acid metabolism (phenylalanine, tryptophan, cysteine and methionine). Relative abundance of six bacterial transport genes was increased in the GOS group. Abundance of the gene responsible for fermentation of the prebiotic (β-galactosidase, EC 3.2.1.23) was increased in the GOS groups. This enzyme is also represented in the pathway KO00511 (Other glycan degradation), in the N-glycan biosynthesis (Figure 5b).

Based on previous and new data from this study, we attempted to summarize how GOS are metabolized by the gut bacterial network. We included species that were differentially represented in the GOS treatment groups and classified them as first metabolizers or degraders (Bifidobacterium, Lactobacillus, Streptococcus, Ruminococcus bromii), secondary metabolizers, which use the intermediate metabolites (including lactate and succinate) for generation of SCFAs, hydrogen sulfide and methane, and tertiary metabolizers that use a SCFA (acetate) to generate another (butyrate).

Supervised learning was used in this study to build a descriptive model of the data to identify a highly predictive subset of taxa for further investigation. Significantly increased abundance of Bifidobacterium (Other), B. adolescentis and B. pseudolongum, and decreased abundance of the families Lachnospiraceae and Christensenellaceae, and the genera Roseburia, Ruminococcus, Coprobacillus, and Eubacterium dolichum characterized the GOS-treated groups (High and Low GOS combined). Data suggest that GOS primarily acts on lactose intolerant individuals by increasing the abundance of rapid lactose metabolizers (e.g. bifidobacteria). Bifidobacterium spp. generate lactate and acetate, which can then be used by other species to generate butyrate.

Galacto-oligosaccharides (GOS) are known to modulate the gut microbiome, increasing the abundance, and enhancing functionality of beneficial bacteria.11,22–24 An initial trial and subsequent microbiome analysis of lactose-intolerant individuals10,11 showed that patients receiving a high purity GOS preparation exhibited decreased symptoms. This decrease in symptoms was correlated with increases in bifidobacteria, lactobacilli and faecalibacteria. In this addendum to the second clinical study on lactose intolerant individuals12 and in accordance with our first microbiome report,11 most of the groups impacted by treatment or subsequent dairy consumption, in addition to bifidobacteria, were of the phylum Firmicutes. The genera Lactobacillus, Lactococcus, and Streptococcus, all lactate-producers, showed a specific response to GOS treatments at week 4. Our study added potential new players to the cross-feeding intestinal network. For example, R. bromii, over represented in the GOS groups, has been shown to be an essential species in the degradation of resistant starch in the human colon.17 A more recent in vitro study further established the ability of the species to metabolize resistant starch and confirmed the cross feeding between species where Ruminococcus gnavus, which prefers mucin to grow, can use the products of starch degradation generated by R. bromii.18 Although the study of Crost et al.18 did not specifically test GOS, it included glucose oligosaccharides, and led us to speculate that R. bromii could use GOS, thereby generating intermediate products that can result in the production of SCFAs. Additional work is needed to investigate this possibility.

Observations from this study are novel and add to the knowledge of how to approach treatment and ameliorate symptoms for lactose intolerance, while identifying new potential long-term key bacterial players and networks in the metabolism of prebiotics in the gastrointestinal tract.

Correcting imbalances in the gut microbial communities that can be correlated with disease is one of the main goals of microbiome research. This study confirms and expands on the modulation of beneficial and commensal bacteria by GOS in individuals clinically diagnosed as lactose intolerant, thus advancing the notion that gut microbial disproportions can be adjusted to improve quality of life. Beyond the traditional, potentially probiotic bacteria (Bifidobacterium, Lactobacillus, Faecalibacterium), we have identified new bacterial taxa (Ruminococcus, Coprococcus, Christensenella, Collinsella) that may be a part of the beneficial gut network enhanced by treatment, with the potential consequence of long term increased saccharolytic potential and, hence, the ability to consume dairy products. Further research is needed to predict treatment response and therefore advance personalized disease management.

The lower dose of GOS (RP-G28) was 5 grams twice daily on days 1–10 followed by 7.5 grams twice daily on days 11–30. The higher dose of GOS (RP-G28) was 7.5 g twice daily for days 1–10, followed by 10 g twice daily on days 11–30. The placebo group received a powdered corn syrup that matched the consistency, color, sweetness, and taste of the drug. This clinical trial can be found on the clinical trial registry website (www.clinicaltrials.gov), trial number NCT02673749.

Stool samples (200 mg) were transferred to sterile 2 ml tubes containing 200 mg of glass beads, ≤11 μm (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) and 1.4 ml of Qiagen ASL buffer (Valencia, CA). Bead-beating was then carried in a Qiagen TissueLyser II at 30 Hz. Subsequently, samples were incubated at 95ºC for 5 minutes and centrifuged at 21,000 × g for 3 minutes. To remove PCR inhibitors, supernatants were transferred to new 2 ml-tubes containing InhibiEx inhibitor adsorption tablets (Qiagen) and vortexed vigorously. After a brief centrifugation, supernatants were aspirated and transferred to a new tube with Qiagen AL buffer containing Proteinase K (600IU/μl). Samples were then incubated at 70◦C for 10 minutes. DNA was purified using a standard on-column purification method with Qiagen buffers AW1 and AW2 as washing agents and eluted in 10 mM Tris (pH 8.0).

12.5 ng of total DNA were amplified using universal primers 515 F-806 R targeting the V4 region of the bacterial 16S rRNA gene.45,46 Primer sequences contained overhang adapters appended to the 5ʹ end of each primer for compatibility with Illumina sequencing platform. Master mixes contained 12.5 ng of total DNA, 0.2 µM of each primer and 2x KAPA HiFi HotStart ReadyMix (KAPA Biosystems, Wilmington, MA). Each 16S amplicon was purified using the AMPure XP reagent (Beckman Coulter, Indianapolis, IN). In the next step each sample was amplified using a limited cycle PCR program, adding Illumina sequencing adapters and dual‐index barcodes (index 1(i7) and index 2(i5)) (Illumina, San Diego, CA) to the amplicon target. The final libraries were again purified using the AMPure XP reagent (Beckman Coulter), quantified and normalized prior to pooling. The DNA library pool was then denatured with NaOH, diluted with hybridization buffer and heat denatured before loading on the Illumina HiSeq 2500 instrument. Automated cluster generation and paired–end 2 × 250 bp sequencing with dual reads were performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

Multiplexed paired end fastq files were produced from the sequencing results of the Illumina HiSeq using the Illumina software configure BclToFastq. The paired-end fastq files were joined into a single multiplexed, single-end fastq using the software tool fastq-join. Demultiplexing and quality filtering were performed on the joined results. Quality analysis reports were produced using the FastQC software. Bioinformatics analysis of bacterial 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing data was conducted using the Quantitative Insights into Microbial Ecology (QIIME) software versions 1 and 247,48 at a 25,000 reads/sample depth. OTU picking was performed on the quality filtered results using pick_de_novo_otus.py in QIIME and using the DADA2 plugin in QIIME 2. Chimeric sequences were detected and removed using ChimeraSlayer. Alpha diversity and beta diversity analysis were performed on the data set using the QIIME routines: alpha_rarefaction.py and beta_diversity_through_plots.py,49,50 respectively. Summary reports of taxonomic assignment by sample and all categories were produced using QIIME summarize_taxa_through_plots.py and summarize_otu_by_cat.py. Longitudinal analysis of alpha and beta diversity was performed using the QIIME 2 longitudinal plugin.13

The access array AA 24.192 (Fluidigm Corporation, San Francisco, CA) validated in previous studies51–54 was used for quantification of the following taxonomic groups: domain Bacteria, phylum Actinobacteria, genus Bifidobacterium and Bifidobacterium species. The taxonomic groups targeted in the Lactobacillus array included: phylum Firmicutes, genus Lactobacillus, and species of the genus Lactobacillus. Pre-amplification (specific target amplification, STA) assays and microfluidic qPCR were performed on a BioMark HD reader as described.24 Raw data were normalized using the Livak method.55 Cq values for each sample were normalized against their respective Cq value obtained from Universal primers using the equation: Ratio (reference/target) = 2 – Ct (ref)-Ct (target). One-way ANOVA (ANalysis Of VAriance) with post-hoc Tukey tests were applied for comparing multiple treatments.

Analysis of 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing data was performed using the default settings of PICRUSt (version 0.9.1). The resulting metagenomic data were submitted to the HMP unified metabolic analysis network (HUMAnN2)56 pipeline to sort individual genes into Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways representing varying proportions of each imputed sample metagenome.

OTUs present in less than 10 samples were filtered out. The OTU table was normalized using DeSeq prior to applying supervised_learning.py in QIIME. We ran 10-fold cross validation on the normalized OTU table to obtain more robust estimates of the generalization error and feature importance (including standard deviations). We then produced a single results file containing the average estimated generalization error of the classified, and the pooled standard deviation. The baseline error for random guessing was 80%.

Chey, W.; Sandborn, W.; Ritter, A.J.; Foyt, H.; Azcarate-Peril, M.A.; Savaiano, D.A. Galacto-Oligosaccharide RP-G28 Improves Multiple Clinical Outcomes in Lactose-Intolerant Patients. Nutrients 2020, 12, 1058. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu12041058

IRB approval for protocol G28-003 was approved on 26 January 2016, with approval of Amendment #1 on 5 May 2016, and Amendment #2 on 17 June 2016. This clinical trial can be found on the clinical trial registry website (www.clinicaltrials.gov), trial number NCT02673749.

16S rRNA amplicon sequencing data has been submitted to the Sequence Read Archive (SRA) and is available under the BioProject accession number PRJNA727279.

AJR was the Co-Founder, President and Chief Executive Officer of Ritter Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (acquired by Qualigen Therapeutics) from 2007 to 2020.

Experimental design. MAA-P, AJR, WDC, WJS, DAS, TRK. Data acquisition. MAA-P, JR, AM. Data analysis. MAA-P, JR, AM. Data interpretation. MAA-P, AJR, DAS, TRK, AM. Manuscript writing and editing. MAA-P, JR, AM, AJR, WDC, WJS, DAS, TRK

Supplemental data for this article can be accessed on the publisher’s website.

