Factors shaping the abundance and diversity of the gut archaeome across the animal kingdom

Archaea are common constituents of the gut microbiome of humans, ruminants, and termites but little is known about their diversity and abundance in other animals. Here, we analyse sequencing and quantification data of archaeal and bacterial 16S rRNA genes from 250 species of animals covering a large taxonomic spectrum. We detect the presence of archaea in 175 animal species belonging to invertebrates, fish, amphibians, birds, reptiles and mammals. We identify five dominant gut lineages, corresponding to Methanobrevibacter, Methanosphaera, Methanocorpusculum, Methanimicrococcus and “Ca. Methanomethylophilaceae”. Some archaeal clades, notably within Methanobrevibacter, are associated to certain hosts, suggesting specific adaptations. The non-methanogenic lineage Nitrososphaeraceae (Thaumarchaeota) is frequently present in animal samples, although at low abundance, but may have also adapted to the gut environment. Host phylogeny, diet type, fibre content, and intestinal tract physiology are major drivers of the diversity and abundance of the archaeome in mammals. The overall abundance of archaea is more influenced by these factors than that of bacteria. Methanogens reducing methyl-compounds with H2 can represent an important fraction of the overall methanogens in many animals. Together with CO2-reducing methanogens, they are influenced by diet and composition of gut bacteria. Our results provide key elements toward our understanding of the ecology of archaea in the gut, an emerging and important field of investigation.

The intestinal microbiota plays key roles in host health1–8. It is composed of bacteria, archaea, microbial eukaryotes, and viruses/phages. Several studies have unveiled features that influence the overall structure of the intestinal microbiota such as diet or the ability to fly9–12. However, most of these studies have only targeted the bacterial intestinal community. Host-associated archaeal methanogens produce a significant amount of methane gas in ruminants, which makes them ecologically and environmentally important13, and in humans, archaea have been linked to various conditions of health and disease5.

In this work, we analyse gut samples collected from 250 species, covering a broad spectrum of animal diversity. Using both sequencing and quantitative approaches, we investigate host-associated archaea in eight animal classes and identify the major gut archaeal lineages, as well as the dominant methane metabolisms. Based on these data and a meta-analysis of the environmental distribution of all archaeal sequences in the Silva database we also predict several events of adaptation to the gut in the Archaea. Finally, by using a wide range of metadata from the literature, we investigate the factors influencing the composition, diversity and abundance of the gut archaeome across the animal kingdom.

We analysed samples from 250 species of animals (n = 341 samples) ranging from invertebrates to mammals – the majority of which, except for birds (Aves), fish (Actinopterygii) and gastropods, came from captive specimens (Supplementary Data 1). We used three approaches to characterize the archaeal community of these samples: i) quantitative PCR (qPCR) targeting total Archaea, total Bacteria, and five archaeal lineages known to be present in the animal intestine (Methanobacteriales, Methanomassiliicoccales, Methanomicrobiales, Methanimicrococcus and Thaumarchaeota), ii) 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing of the Archaea only and iii) of the entire microbial community. With Archaea-specific sequencing, we detected the presence of archaea in the gut microbiome of 175 species belonging to all eight animal classes investigated, including 14 orders of mammals (Fig. 1a; Supplementary Data 1).

Archaea were detected in a higher proportion of the species when using archaea-specific primers for qPCR (77%) or amplicon sequencing (70%) with respect to the prokaryotic universal primers for amplicon sequencing (46%) (Kruskal-Wallis chi-squared = 56.928, df = 2, p = 4.35e−13, n = 250). This difference was also observed in most animal classes (Fig. 1a). In addition, prokaryotic universal primers also captured a lower number of archaeal ASVs (1.9 ± 2.6 ASVs per sample; 140 in total) with respect to the archaea-specific primers (13.6 + 20.3 ASVs per sample; 1307 in total) (Kruskal-Wallis p = 1.65e−8 (Fig. 1b), n = 218). With ~10,000 prokaryotic reads (after rarefaction) per samples, which corresponds to a common number reads in recent studies relying on 16S rRNA gene sequencing9,33,34, the archaeal species/ASVs that represent less than 0.01% of the microbial community were likely missed. This may explain why prokaryotic universal primers, although having no mismatches with most archaeal sequences, identify a lower number of archaea-positive animals and a lower archaeal alpha diversity than archaea-specific primers. Finally, the composition of the archaeal community was largely similar across the three approaches, especially for samples with more than 107 archaeal 16S rRNA gene copies per gram of faeces (Supplementary Fig. 1).

The broad taxonomic coverage of the animal hosts and the use of archaea-specific primers allowed us to identify archaeal ASVs belonging to 19 described families, 10 orders, 6 classes, and 3 phyla. Despite this large diversity, the majority of the archaea present in the gut are closely related to cultured ones. Indeed, 84.9% of these ASVs (94.5% of the reads) share more than 95% identity with cultured species in the Living Tree Project (LTP, v138) database35 amended with characterized candidate species, and half of the reads share more than 99% identity with known species (Supplementary Table 1). Consistently, the vast majority (93.7%) of the reads are affiliated to only six genera or families (Fig. 2a): Methanobrevibacter, Methanosphaera (Methanobacteriales), Methanomethylophilaceae (Methanomassiliicoccales), Methanocorpusculum (Methanomicrobiales), Methanimicrococcus (Methanosarcinales), Nitrososphaeraceae (Nitrososphaerales/Thaumarchaeota group 1.1b). These lineages also constitute more than 50% of the gut archaeome in 92% of the sampled animals and can be qualified as “dominant gut archaea”. Among them, Methanobrevibacter, Methanosphaera and “Ca. Methanomethylophilaceae” had already been extensively reported in the gut microbiota of ruminants, humans and termites5,17,21. Methanobrevibacter members are by far the most dominant methanogens in our dataset – composing over a third of the total number of reads, followed by “Ca. Methanomethylophilaceae” members which accounted for 17.5% of the total reads (Fig. 2a). The other two most prevalent methanogen lineages, Methanocorpusculum and Methanimicrococcus, are reported less often in studies on the animal digestive tract17,36,37.

A few other methanogen lineages may have also developed specific adaptations to certain gut conditions or specific hosts. For example, “Ca. Methanomassiliicoccus intestinalis” was detected in high prevalence/absolute abundance in the gut of elderly people with a disturbed gut microbiota and living in long-term residential care20. Methanomicrobium mobile was not detected in our samples and is almost never detected in open environments, but it can represent a large proportion of archaea in the rumen (Fig. 2a)39, suggesting a high-level of specialization to this gut compartment.

The family Nitrososphaeraceae (Thaumarchaeota), which gathers 15% of the total reads in our study (Fig. 2a), has rarely been reported in previous gut microbiomes studies (great apes and humans) and only when archaeal specific primers coupled with high-throughput sequencing (or nested PCR) were used18,32,40. Conversely, this lineage of ammonia oxidizers is common in terrestrial environments such as soils (Fig. 2a)41–44. The presence of these obligate aerobes in the gut is somehow surprising, but oxygen is available in some sections of the intestine and in proximity to the gut wall45 - and some animals can host more aerobic communities than others46. Nevertheless, the combination of the sequencing and quantitative data reveals that Nitrososphaeraceae/Thaumarchaeota are generally present in low abundance in the gut (Fig. 2c), even in samples where they are the dominant archaea (Fig. 2b).

Finally, although Bathyarchaeota were not common in our samples, most of the sequences we retrieved are closely related to a clade formed by “Ca. Termiticorpusculum” and “Ca. Termitimicrobium” (>95% id to termite sequences), two lineages recently identified in the termite gut53. Together with sequences from anaerobic digestors and sediments, our sequences from mammal, birds, reptiles, and crayfish, form a sister clade to termite sequences (Supplementary Fig. 2), suggesting that some general traits needed to be maintained in the gut are shared by these Bathyarchaeota.

In mammals, the main factors that significantly affect the beta diversity of archaea are host taxonomy/phylogeny > coefficient of gut differentiation > host diet > digestive tract type (Table 1; Supplementary Fig. 3). There is a significant phylosymbiotic association between mammals and archaea (Mantel test, p = 0.001) (Table 1). The importance of host phylogeny/taxonomy and diet parallels what has been previously observed for the gut bacterial community of mammals9,10,46,54–57. Other factors such as the geographic origin of the samples and the body mass have little influence on the archaeal community structure (Supplementary text; Supplementary Fig. 4).

Host phylogeny also influences the absolute abundance and the alpha diversity of archaea. Indeed, mammals and reptiles tend to host higher abundances of archaea than other animal groups like amphibians, birds, fish, and invertebrates (Fig. 5a). This parallels what we observed for bacteria (Fig. 5b). In addition, Archaea were detected in more than 70% of the mammal, reptile, and amphibian species and less than 45% of the bird and fish species (based on archaea-specific amplifications, Fig. 1a; Supplementary Fig. 8). However, when archaeal lineages are considered separately, their absolute abundance is not significantly different between animal classes (Supplementary Fig. 9; Supplementary text). In Mammalia, samples from Perissodactyla, Cetartiodactyla, Primates, Diprotodontia and Rodentia species tend to have higher concentrations of archaea than other animals, whereas those belonging to Carnivora, Pholidota and Cingulata tend to have lower concentrations (Supplementary Fig. 10a). Conversely, the abundance of bacteria is more uniform across mammalian orders (Supplementary Fig. 10b). Closely related groups of animals also tend to have similar levels of archaeal alpha diversity, as supported by the Moran index (I = 0.08, p = 0.001, n = 150). For example, the archaeal richness is consistently high in the members of Gastropoda and in most members of the Cingulata, Equidae (order Perissodactyla) and Bovidae (order Cetartiodactyla) within Mammalia (Fig. 3b; Supplementary Data 1). Conversely, we found comparably low levels of archaeal richness within the Aves and Actinopterygii (Supplementary Fig. 11a).

Diet is another important factor affecting the gut archaeome in terms of alpha diversity, beta diversity (Table 1; Supplementary Fig. 11b) and abundance (Fig. 6). Indeed, herbivorous animals have a higher number of archaeal ASVs than carnivorous and omnivorous animals (Supplementary Fig. 11b). Moreover, the absolute and relative abundance of methanogens is higher in animals feeding on leaves than in animals feeding on meat or insects, and it tends to be intermediate in omnivorous animals (Fig. 6a). In contrast, ammonia-oxidising Thaumarchaeota are more abundant in carnivorous animals than in herbivorous animals (Supplementary Fig. 12a) which may be related to the higher availability of nitrogen compounds carnivor gut, and bacteria abundance did not show any significant differences between diet types (Supplementary Fig. 12b). The link between methanogen abundance and diet type is further supported by the strong positive correlation of both the absolute and relative abundances of methanogens with the fibre content of the diet (Fig. 6b; Supplementary Fig. 13), contrasting with the absence of correlation for Thaumarchaeota and Bacteria (Supplementary Fig. 12c and d). The increase in methanogen absolute/relative abundance reaches a limit at around 200 g of crude fibre/kg of dry matter (Fig. 6b; Supplementary Fig. 13). At a lower host taxonomic level, the positive correlation also holds for Primates, for which we sampled species with contrasting average fibre intake (Fig. 6c). An increased fibre consumption was previously reported to be associated with a higher expression level of methanogenesis genes in humans59 and greater methane production in pigs60 and ruminants61. As the vast majority of intestinal methanogens are hydrogenotrophic, these relationships can be explained by the higher production of hydrogen from fibre/carbohydrates-rich diets (plant) than from protein/fat-rich diets (meat)62.

Finally, the influence of diet is further substantiated by presence of specific archaea in the gut microbiota of both predators and their preys. Indeed, within Methanobrevibacter, sequences of insectivorous mammals from distinct orders (Aardwolf in Carnivora, Tamandua in Pilosa, Ground pangolin in Pholidota, Armadillo in Cingulata, Aardvark in Afrotheria) are clustered with sequences from insect clades reported in the literature (Fig. 4)21. A similar phylogenetic clustering of insectivores and insect-derived archaeal sequences was not observed for other known insect clades outside of Methanobrevibacter (even if a few non-mammal insectivores are present in the Methanimicrococcus insect clade (Supplementary Fig. 15)). This suggests that some Methanobrevibacter species may develop in both insect and insectivorous mammal gut, while other insect-associated methanogens are mostly transients in the gut of insectivores. Interestingly, several Thaumarchaeota ASVs are shared between some Carnivora and Gastropoda (snail/slug) species (Supplementary Figs. 7 and S16). Whether this may reflect a diet link is unknown and requires further investigation.

Both the coefficient of gut differentiation88 (i.e., proportion of the gut dedicated to fermentation) and where the fermentation takes place (e.g. foregut, hindgut, caecum) explain part of the variance in the beta diversity (Table 1). In addition, many ASVs are almost ubiquitous in Cetartiodactyla having a rumen compartment (paraphyletic, Ruminantia and Tylopoda), but mostly absent from non-ruminant Cetartiodactyla or other animals, highlighting the possible dual influence of gut physiology and host-phylogeny (Supplementary Fig. 17). Whether these archaea found in faeces originate from the rumen compartment or can colonize more largely the gut of these animal is currently unknown. The total abundance of methanogens is positively correlated with gut differentiation coefficient in mammals (R2 = 0.33, p = 0.0036, n = 25; Supplementary Fig. 18a), while there was no correlation with abundance of Thaumarchaeota and Bacteria (Supplementary Fig. 18b, c).

It has been proposed that some animals, including birds, rely relatively little on their gut microbiota96. In addition, bacteria recovered from birds show little host specificity and do not display phylosymbiotic patterns with their host or correlation with diet, differently from what has been generally observed in most mammals gut microbiota9. In our dataset, the low abundance of bacteria in the gut microbiota of bird supports the hypothesis of Hammer et al.96 and extend the observations of Song et al.9 on the particularity of the gut microbiota of these animals. However, we found that concentrations of faecal bacteria in other animals proposed to rely less on their gut microbiota, such as Carnivora species96, are as high as in other mammals (Supplementary Fig. 10b).

An analysis of the diversity of the gut archaeome in a wide range of animals was published late 202197. This study investigated samples coming largely from wild vertebrates while our study also included invertebrates and a larger proportion of captive animals. While both studies utilized amplicon sequencing to characterize the intestinal archaeome, we also acquired quantitative data (qPCR) for all main groups of gut archaea, as well as for whole archaea and bacteria.

Altogether, our work provides key insights into the lifestyle and role of intestinal archaea across a diverse range of animals. We identified several events of adaptation to the gut which will be the base for future investigation of specific traits associated with gut-colonization in the archaea. Similar to what was previously reported for bacteria, the diversity and composition of archaea are influenced by host phylogeny and diet. In addition, we found that the abundance of archaea, mostly composed of methanogens, is also strongly influenced by these factors while bacterial abundance is more homogeneous. Increased sampling efforts, time-series analyses, and metagenomic investigation will help to answer standing questions about the impact of geography, captivity, residency, and adaptations of intestinal archaea throughout the animal phylogeny.

A majority of animal faecal samples were donated from various zoological institutions in France (Supplementary Data 1). After consultation with the corresponding Ethics Committee in Animal Experimentation our study got direct clearance since the samples that were used for this project were collected either from species or by methods that are not in the scope of the current regulation protecting the animals used for scientific purposes (European Directive 2010/63/EU, and French Decree 2013-118). Fresh faecal samples (n = 391) from 269 species were stored at −20 °C until DNA extraction. Total DNA was extracted using a modified QIAamp PowerFecal DNA Kit (Hilden, Germany) protocol. Cells were lysed using the Fastprep (MP Biomedicals) cell homogenizer ‘faecal sample’ default setting in the lysis buffer provided in the PowerFecal DNA kit. For subsequent analyses, genomic DNA was diluted ten times, to limit the effect of PCR inhibitors.

Total bacteria, total archaea, and specific archaeal lineages (Methanobacteriales, Methanomassiliicoccales, Methanomicrobiales, Methanimicrococcus, Thaumarchaeota) were quantified using quantitative PCR with lineage specific primers (Supplementary Table 4). qPCR was performed on a qTower3 Touch device (Analytik Jena GmbH) using SensiFAST SYBR® & Fluorescein Kit (Bioline, Paris, France). For each run, a standard curve was prepared using a 10-fold serial dilution (109 to 101 copies/µl) of a plasmid containing a 16S rRNA. Plasmids containing a partial archaeal or bacterial 16S rRNA gene were generated through cloning PCR amplified 16S rRNA gene of the groups into E. coli. Bacterial 16S rRNA genes were amplified from a faeces sample using the B-27F-YM/B-1492R primer set98,99. Archaeal 16S rRNA genes were amplified from Methanimicrococcus blatticola, Methanocorpusculum aggregans, “Ca. Methanomethylophilus alvus”, Methanosphaera stadtmanae and Nitrososphaera viennensis using the A-21F/A-1386R primer set100,101. PCR products were cloned with a pGEM-T vector according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Promega, Charbonnières-les-Bains, France). The accuracy of the plasmid construction was confirmed through sequencing and all plasmids were diluted to 109 copies/µl, aliquoted and stored at −20 °C. The accuracy of the qPCR assay was confirmed through melting curve analysis. All quantifications were performed twice in independent runs. The final concentration of all the microbial was averaged between replicates and normalized as copies of 16S rRNA gene per gram of faeces. 50 samples from 19 species, with no/low DNA detected after extraction, also had no amplification with any primer set (including the bacterial-specific primers) and were removed from subsequent analyses, leaving 341 samples from 250 species. In addition, several samples with a low 16S rRNA gene copy number to DNA concentration ratio, mostly corresponding to Aves and Actinopterygii species, were identified (Supplementary Fig. 19). As this low ratio may be indicative of PCR assay of inhibition or high amount of host DNA, these samples were removed from subsequent analyses of qPCR results.

Archaeal 16S rRNA genes were amplified in two steps (Nested-PCR; Supplementary Table 5) to allow the inclusion of a larger range of samples. Prokaryotic 16S rRNA genes were directly amplified with Illumina tagged primer pairs (Supplementary Table 5). Sequencing was performed on an Illumina MiSeq platform (Biofidal, Vaulx-en-Velin, France) according to the Illumina protocols for PE 2 × 300 bp, and resulted in more than 21 million reads and more than 16.7 million reads for the prokaryotic and archaea specific sequencing, respectively.

Reads were processed and assigned to amplicon sequence variants (ASVs) using the DADA2 software (v1.12.1) in R (v3.6.0). Briefly, reads were trimmed and quality-filtered using the standard parameters - maximum expected errors for forward and reverse reads = 2, quality score = 2, and trimming length = 273 and 170 base pairs for forward and reverse reads, respectively. Forward and reverse reads were merged with a 20 base pair overlap, ASVs were generated, and chimeras were discarded. ASV annotation was performed using the Silva 16S rRNA database (v132). Assignment of ASVs to a main type of methane metabolism (hydrogenotrophic CO2-reducing, hydrogenotrophic CH3-reducing, acetoclastic and methylotrophic (methyl-dismutation)), was done based on their taxonomic affiliation, since all members of almost all methanogen genera/families have the same dominant type of methane metabolism (Supplementary Table 2). Methanosarcina is the main exception, as species from this group can have one or several types of methane metabolisms. All ASVs that were not annotated as archaea were removed from the archaea-specific primer generated sequences, and ASVs annotated as archaea or bacteria were kept from the prokaryotic universal primer generated sequences. Samples from the same species were merged by summing ASV abundances. These approaches resulted in 1307 archaeal ASVs from the archaea specific primers, as well as 140 archaeal ASVs and 19,145 bacterial ASVs from the prokaryotic universal primers. To estimate the novelty of the archaeal ASVs (obtained with the archaea-specific primers), we compared them using BLAST to 16S rRNA genes of isolated archaea retrieved from the Silva Living Tree Project LTP database (ltp_12_2020)102 plus additional sequences of candidate species belonging to Methanomassiliicoccales and Thaumarchaeota. For diversity analyses, rarefaction was performed to normalize sequencing depth to 3,000 reads, leading to 1,253 archaeal ASVs. Bacterial ASVs were normalized to a sequencing depth of 12,000 reads per sample. Observed richness (alpha diversity) was estimated and all beta diversity analyses were performed using the ‘phyloseq’ package in R (v1.30.0). Subsequent statistical analyses were performed using the base Rstudio ‘stats’ package (v3.6.0) as well as the R package ‘vegan’ (v2.5-6).

To test for significant differences using the various beta diversity metrics (Table 1) a ﻿permutational multivariate analysis of variation (PERMANOVA) from the R package ‘vegan’ (function adonis) was used. The Mantel Test from the R package ‘vegan’ (function mantel) and 999 permutations were used to determine the influence of the mammalian phylogeny on beta diversity metrics. The mammalian tree (n = 73) was generated using Timetree.org103 and then converted to a distance matrix using the ‘ape’ (v5.6.1, function cophenetic.phylo) package104 in R. A pairwise Wilcoxon rank sum test with continuity correction from the R package ‘stats’ (function pairwise.wilcox.test) was used to determine differences between the absolute abundance of archaea and bacteria in animal diet types, as well as between animal classes. Linear regressions from the R package ‘stats’ (function lm) were used to determine the relationships between the abundance (log-transformed) of methanogens, Thaumarchaeota and bacteria, and mean retention time (MRT) and dietary fibre consumption. Significance cut-off was p < 0.05 for all analyses. Type I errors were corrected using the Benjamini–Hochberg (BH) approach in all pairwise comparisons.

All archaeal ASVs were filtered on a per sample basis, to keep only ASVs representing at least 1% of the total number of reads of the sample. Reference sequences >1200 bp with a quality >95% were obtained from the Silva SSU 138 database35, RDP database (11.5)105, and an in-house dataset. Redundancy was removed from reference sequences with a 98% or 97% sequence identity threshold using the VSEARCH software106. For each archaeal order, long reference sequences were combined with the ASV sequences and were aligned using the G-IN-SI algorithm in MAFFT (v7.273)107. Phylogenetic trees were generated using the GTR + G4 + I model in the IQTREE (1.6.12) software108. For each animal, the ASVs representing more than 1% of the reads were mapped in front of the archaeal tree using ITOL109. Reference sequences were ultimately removed from the tree to only keep the ASVs sequences.

To identify co-occurrence signal between archaea and bacteria across Mammalia, Reptilia, and Aves, we integrated the sequences from both the universal and archaea specific 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing. Only bacterial reads were selected from the universal 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing for this analysis. We used VSEARCH (v2.17.1)106 to cluster ASVs into OTUs at 97% in order to reduce the size of the dataset and to filter out truly low abundance lineages of microbes. Then, to merge these datasets in a way that accurately represented the microbial community in terms of relative abundance between archaea and bacteria, we normalized the two datasets both in terms of sequence depth and in terms of archaea-bacterial ratios -information which was gathered through qPCR data. OTUs that were present in less than 10% of the animal classes – Mammalia, Aves, and Reptilia independently- were removed. Following this, we implemented both the SPIEC-EASI (Spiec.Easi package v1.1.0,110) and the SparCC algorithms111 (part of the Spiec.Easi package (v1.1.0)) in Rstudio (v3.6.0) to determine co-occurrence trends between archaea and bacteria. Networks were calculated with 1000 iterations. The output from these analyses were filtered using a 0.5 minimum threshold of edge stability (SPIEC-EASI) (Supplementary Data 2) and a p-value < 0.05 (SparCC), independently. Only the co-occurrence patterns identified by both algorithms were further analysed.

The 16S rRNA gene sequences from the Silva database102 originate from thousands of studies covering all types of environments and have a robust taxonomic annotation integrating most of the phylogenetic diversity. All archaeal 16S rRNA gene sequences from Silva SSU 138 database longer than 800 bp and with more than 80% sequence quality, alignment quality and pintail quality were downloaded. Sequences from shotgun-sequencing metagenomes were removed because their environmental origin was not clearly indicated. The annotation of each sequence was retrieved from GenBank and used to classify them as “Gut”, “Environment” or “Engineered” origin. Sequences from sponge, animal environments (e.g., nest) or polluted sites (e.g., dump) were not included. The relative abundance of each category was mapped on a tree of archaea built with genomic sequences used in Borrel et al.112 as well as additional DPANN sequences not present in this study.

The following chemical reactions were considered for the calculation of Gibbs free energy changes (∆G) associated with methanogenic pathways:

For each pathway, ∆G calculations were performed using the R package CHNOSZ113 considering C(methanol) between 10−3 and 10−7 mol/l, p(H2) between 1 and 10−7 bar, T = 298 K, pH = 7 and p(CO2) = p(CH4) = 10−1 bar. These calculations were used to identify pathways with the highest energy yields (the lowest ∆G) per mole of methane as a function of C(methanol) and p(H2). See also45 for another representation of the ∆G associated with these pathways as a function of p(H2).

Information of animal species were collected from various literature sources and online databases. Diet information for mammals and birds were downloaded from the EltonTraits database114, and information for other animal diets were annotated using the Animal Diversity Web database (Museum of Zoology, University of Michigan, https://animaldiversity.org/). Information on body weight were also gathered on this website. Information about coefficients of gut differentiation, pH, diet fibre content, and intestinal tract structure and mean retention time were gather from3,88,115–119. Information on methanol, H2 CO2 and CH4 in the gut and in marine sediments originate from20,45,120–128.

No statistical method was used to predetermine sample size. No data were excluded from the analyses, except for samples for which the DNA extraction wasn’t successful and led to no amplification (50 samples corresponding to 19 species), and those with low bacterial 16S rRNA gene concentration compared to the DNA concentration, removed for qPCR analyses (see Supplementary Fig. 19). The experiments were not randomized. The investigators were not blinded to allocation during experiments and outcome assessment. No statistical methods were used to predetermine sample sizes. Data met the assumptions of normality for instances in which parametric tests were used.

Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.



Nature Communications thanks the anonymous reviewers for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Peer reviewer reports are available.

Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41467-022-31038-4.

