Evaluation of existing guidelines for their adequacy for the food and feed risk assessment of microorganisms obtained through synthetic biology

EFSA was asked by the European Commission to evaluate synthetic biology (SynBio) developments for agri‐food use in the near future and to determine whether or not they are expected to constitute potential new hazards/risks. Moreover, EFSA was requested to evaluate the adequacy of existing guidelines for risk assessment of SynBio and if updated guidance is needed. The scope of this Opinion covers food and feed risk assessment, the variety of microorganisms that can be used in the food/feed chain and the whole spectrum of techniques used in SynBio. This Opinion complements a previously adopted Opinion with the evaluation of existing guidelines for the microbial characterisation and environmental risk assessment of microorganisms obtained through SynBio. The present Opinion confirms that microbial SynBio applications for food and feed use, with the exception of xenobionts, could be ready in the European Union in the next decade. New hazards were identified related to the use or production of unusual and/or new‐to‐nature components. Fifteen cases were selected for evaluating the adequacy of existing guidelines. These were generally adequate for assessing the product, the production process, nutritional and toxicological safety, allergenicity, exposure and post‐market monitoring. The comparative approach and a safety assessment per se could be applied depending on the degree of familiarity of the SynBio organism/product with the non‐genetically modified counterparts. Updated guidance is recommended for: (i) bacteriophages, protists/microalgae, (ii) exposure to plant protection products and biostimulants, (iii) xenobionts and (iv) feed additives for insects as target species. Development of risk assessment tools is recommended for assessing nutritional value of biomasses, influence of microorganisms on the gut microbiome and the gut function, allergenic potential of new‐to‐nature proteins, impact of horizontal gene transfer and potential risks of living cell intake. A further development towards a strain‐driven risk assessment approach is recommended.

Synthetic Biology (SynBio) is an interdisciplinary field at the interface of molecular engineering and biology, aiming to develop new biological systems and impart new functions to living cells, tissues and organisms. SynBio microorganisms (SynBioM) have potential applications in agri‐food systems, requiring a pre‐market authorisation in the European Union (EU). This implies an EFSA risk assessment in the context of applications for Feed additives, Food additives, enzymes and flavourings, Novel Foods, Health claims, Feed material, Food, Plant protection products and Plant biostimulants. Four categories of products have been defined by EFSA: Categories 1 and 2 are products free from DNA and cells (e.g. amino acids, vitamins, enzymes), Category 3 are products containing DNA but no viable cells (i.e. biomass) and Category 4 are products containing viable cells (e.g. probiotics, food starter cultures).

As a first step, existing guidelines for food and feed risk assessment from various domains were collected and evaluated for relevance for SynBioMs. Second, the existing guidelines were challenged towards a selection of 15 cases representing products that could reach the market in the next decade (and some for the wider future). These cases are representative for the variety of microorganisms that can be used (bacteria, fungi, viruses, bacteriophages and microalgae) and for the whole spectrum of techniques that can be used for SynBio as there are no clear criteria for differentiating between a genetically modified microorganism (GMM) and a SynBioM. A variety of exposure routes to humans and animals and a variety of phenotypic traits were covered by the selected cases, to challenge the existing guidelines that have been developed so far within EFSA and other organisations. As a third step, an overall gap analysis was performed capturing gaps disconnected from the existing guidelines and from the selected cases. EFSA consulted EU Member States and interested parties during a public consultation and addressed the comments received.

No other sectors/advances were identified in addition to the six identified by the Scientific Committee on Emerging and Newly Identified Health Risks (SCENIHR), Scientific Committee on Consumer Safety (SCCS) and Scientific Committee on Health and Environmental Risks (SCHER): (1) genetic part libraries and methods; (2) minimal cells and designer chassis; (3) protocells and artificial cells; (4) xenobiology; (5) DNA synthesis and genome editing; and (6) citizen science. There are no clear criteria to differentiate between a GMM and a SynBioM. Cases 1 and 4–15 are part of a continuum between classical GMM and SynBioM. From a technical point of view, there are SynBioM applications that could be ready for food and feed use in the EU in the next decade. However, xenobionts, falling within the remit of EFSA, are not expected for practical application in the next decade. Information on new SynBioM products may not be made publicly available, which limits the predictive capacity of this Opinion.

Unusual and/or new‐to‐nature components (e.g. xenobiotic nucleic acid (XNA), xenoproteins) may include potential concerns regarding their presence, their stability and/or their potential degradation into harmful metabolites, may trigger concern for allergenicity, may cause imbalanced nutrition (e.g. by altering bioavailability) and may cause an adverse effect on the gut environment.

The existing Guidances are generally adequate for assessing the SynBioM products, the production process and the product preparation process, the detection of viable cells and DNA, the nutritional assessment, the toxicity assessment, the evaluation of allergenicity, the calculation of exposure and the post‐market monitoring (PMM). Existing guidance describes well the principles of the comparative approach that is also applicable for SynBioM. The use of a comparator in the risk assessment is adequate for those SynBioM (Categories 1–4) with sufficient familiarity to the non‐GM counterpart. SynBioM producing new‐to‐nature products and xenobionts would require a safety assessment per se for the new‐to‐nature components. In cases when the parental organism of the GMM does not have a history of use in the particular application, conventional food products may still be used as comparators to identify possible compositional changes and to assess their safety implications. Relying on the Qualified Presumption of Safety (QPS) status for the safety assessment of building blocks of SynBioM is valid when there is sufficient familiarity of the SynBioM/chassis with the QPS microorganism.

Updated guidance is recommended:

General recommendations:

Synthetic Biology (SynBio) is an interdisciplinary field at the interface of molecular engineering and biology, aiming to develop new biological systems and impart new functions to living cells, tissues and organisms. SynBio is not a technique, or a combination of techniques, rather a process or strategy comprising also theoretical–experimental approaches. It employs engineering principles such as standardisation, modularity, modelling and computer‐aided design to improve the predictability of the bioengineering process and achieve the desired characteristics of the product (EFSA GMO Panel, 2021). By combining molecular engineering, life sciences and computational modelling, SynBio is expanding the range of applications and products that are being developed.

Therefore, as a proactive measure, the European Commission requested EFSA for an opinion on GMOs developed using SynBio approaches and the implications, if any, for risk assessment methodologies. EFSA identified a total of six work packages (WP) to be reflected in the development of six Opinions, according to organism group and risk assessment aspects (see Section 1.3). In this context, the Scientific Committee adopted in 2020 a Scientific Opinion evaluating the SynBio developments in microorganisms for deliberate release into the environment and the adequacy of existing guidelines for molecular characterisation (MC) and environmental risk assessment (ERA) (EFSA Scientific Committee, 2020). For plants obtained through SynBio, the GMO Panel also adopted its opinion on the adequacy of existing guidelines for MC and ERA and to determine if updated guidance is needed (EFSA GMO Panel, 2021).

SynBio has been previously defined as follows by the joint SCENIHR, SCCS and SCHER committees upon request of the European Commission 1 : ‘Synthetic biology is the application of science, technology and engineering to facilitate and accelerate the design, manufacture and/or modification of genetic materials in viable organisms’. Similar to the EFSA Scientific Opinions addressing WP1 [MC and ERA SynBio microorganisms] and WP2 (MC and ERA SynBio plants), this definition is used as a starting point for the present Opinion due to the request of the European Commission to build on the three Opinions of SCENIHR, SCCS, SCHER (2014, 2015a,b).

Further background and technical specificities on SynBio are provided in Section 3 of the Opinion on SynBioM (MC and ERA) (EFSA Scientific Committee, 2020).

Building on SCENIHR, SCCS, SCHER (2014, 2015a,b) and taking into account available literature and previous analyses carried out by EU Member States or at the international level, the Commission asked EFSA,3 in accordance with Article 29(1) of Regulation (EC) No 178/2002, for an opinion on GMOs developed through SynBio and its implications for risk assessment methodologies. The scope of the present mandate is limited to agri‐food uses.4 In this context:

The current opinion addresses WP3 and it is intended to complement the Scientific Committee (SC) Opinion on MC and ERA of SynBio Genetically Modified microorganisms (EFSA Scientific Committee, 2020).

The following interpretations of the ToRs were previously made in agreement with the European Commission6 (EFSA Scientific Committee, 2020). This interpretation is considered applicable to this Opinion with an adjustment for ToR2 in line with the food/feed scope of this Opinion:

This Opinion is produced not only to support the European Commission, but is also meant for the public, scientific community, stakeholders, companies and institutions, interested in or dealing with safety of SynBioM developments, all of which were given the opportunity to provide comments on the final draft opinion during the public consultation (see Section 2.2).

A horizon scan showed that SynBioM applications could be ready for deliberate release into the environment of the EU in the next decade. However, xenobionts are only expected in the wider future. For the MC and the ERA, the existing EFSA guidances are useful as a basis. The extent to which existing guidances, which are based on the comparative approach, can be used depends on the familiarity of the SynBioM with non‐modified organisms. Among the recommendations for updated guidance, are the range of uses of products to be assessed covering all agri‐food uses and taking into account all types of microorganisms, their relevant exposure routes and receiving environments. It is suggested that new EFSA guidances for microorganisms address all ‘specific areas of risk’ as per European Commission Directive 2001/18/EC (European Commission, 2001a). No novel environmental hazards are expected for current and near‐future SynBioMs. However, the efficacy by which the SynBioMs interact with the environment may differ. This could lead to increased exposure and risk. Novel hazards connected with the development of xenobionts may be expected in the wider future.

EFSA established an ad hoc expert Working Group of the Scientific Committee for the development of this Opinion on food and feed safety aspects of SynBioMs [from this point onwards referred to as the SynBioM FF Working Group (WG)].7 In delivering its Scientific Opinion, the Scientific Committee, together with the SynBio FF WG, considered:

The WG has adopted a methodology based on a three‐phase approach, as represented in Table 1.

In line with its policy on openness and transparency, EFSA consulted EU Member States and interested parties by an online public consultation. Between 19 January and 20 March 2022, stakeholders were invited to submit their comments on the draft Scientific Opinion.8 Following this consultation process, the document was revised by the SC and the members of the SynBioM FF WG. The comments received were considered and were, when appropriate, incorporated into the current Opinion. The outcome of the public consultation is reported in detail and will be published on EFSA's website as supporting document together with the final Scientific Opinion as adopted by the Scientific Committee.

The WG retrieved to the best of its knowledge all the possible relevant EFSA guidance and statement documents (including the former guidance documents), along with the current legislation and other international recognised guidance documents and guidelines until December 2021. These are presented in Table 2 and it is noted that some of these guidances might meanwhile been updated. For the development of this Opinion, the guidance documents and guidelines presented in Table 2 were screened for their scientific adequacy and sufficiency for the food and feed risk assessment of applications using current and near‐future SynBioM developments. A total number of 30 documents was screened for adequacy for this Opinion. How their content has been used in this Opinion is commented in the column ‘content’ of Table 2. In total, 20 reference documents were taken into consideration for the assessment, with the most prominent ones in bold. Ten documents, which are in italics in Table 2, were not further used for the assessment and/or superseded by more recent guidances.

To obtain an overview of the SynBio developments in microorganisms (SynBioMs) that are likely to enter the market in the next decade, different use applications of SynBioMs that fall under the remit of EFSA were considered under the scope of this Opinion.

In particular, the following applications of GMM/SynBioM as expected by the WG in the near future were considered for this Opinion and an indicative categorisation is given:

SynBio has been previously defined as follows by SCENIHR, SCCS and SCHER (SCENIHR, SCCS, SCHER, 2014, 2015a,b) upon request of the European Commission: ‘Synthetic biology is the application of science, technology and engineering to facilitate and accelerate the design, manufacture and/or modification of genetic materials in viable organisms’. This definition is used as a starting point for the present Opinion due to the request of the European Commission to build on the Opinions of SCENIHR, SCCS and SCHER.

The term ‘Genome editing’, although indicated by SCENIHR, SCCS and SCHER as a SynBio development, is not separately addressed in this Opinion. Genome editing refers to a range of techniques that edit the genome in a targeted way by inducing (site‐)specific changes with or without targeted insertion of DNA sequences (see European Commission, 2017). Although genome editing is increasingly used in SynBio, because of its capacity to ‘edit’ the genome in a targeted way, it only refers to some of the techniques available to produce a SynBio product as any other technique addressed in this Opinion.

There is no distinct borderline between the microorganisms obtained using existing genetic modification techniques and those derived from SynBio (EFSA Scientific Committee, 2020). Considering this lack of clarity, 15 case studies were selected for Phase 2 of this Opinion (Table 3). Cases 4–15 are part of a continuum between classical genetically modified and SynBio microorganisms, and Cases 1–3 are at the far end of the spectrum as being least familiar. These cases include minimal cells and xenobionts.

The reason for these selection criteria is that cases resembling (in complexity) GMMs that are already being assessed by EFSA guidances, would not challenge such guidance and therefore would not be useful to identify possible needs for respective updates. For the identification of novel hazards, phenotypes are selected that have hitherto not been evaluated by EFSA but are realistic in reaching the market in the near or wider future.

This section ‘Assessment’ follows the structure of the EFSA GMO Panel (2011) guidance that is the primary document to be checked for adequacy. This structure was complemented in the current document with information from other guidances per topic when necessary.

The risk assessment for GMMs, subject to an authorisation in the EU under specific regulations, as described in the relevant EFSA guidances, is based on a stepwise approach that can be summarised in the following main phases:

The first three points have already been extensively addressed in Opinion 1 on SynBioMs Molecular characterisation and ERA (EFSA Scientific Committee, 2020). The different EFSA guidances dealing with the 4th point – Safety for humans and animals – will be evaluated for adequacy in the current Opinion.

The guidance on the risk assessment of genetically modified microorganisms and their products intended for food and feed use (EFSA GMO Panel, 2011) identifies four different categories of GMM:

This categorisation is seen as a pragmatic approach to optimise the risk assessment of GMM and specific examples are reported in the EFSA GMO Panel (2011) guidance.



Conclusions on adequacy: The categorisation is applicable to SynBioMs and their products expected to reach the EU market in the near and wide future. Currently, Categories 1 and 2 are not distinguished in practice.

Need for updates: Categories 1 and 2 should be merged.

The adequacy of the existing guidances on microbial characterisation for SynBioMs was already addressed in the first Opinion (EFSA Scientific Committee, 2020). The section on the application of the QPS (EFSA, 2007; Herman et al., 2019) was evaluated further in view of (1) specific animal and human health considerations for the SynBioM, and (2) the extended scope of this Opinion to products belonging to Categories 1–4 and not only Category 4 as in Opinion 1 (of WP1).

For production strains, meeting the criteria for a QPS approach to safety assessment, toxicological studies will only be required in relation to possible safety concerns identified elsewhere in the assessment process, e.g. manufacturing. The QPS approach for risk assessment can be followed when the taxonomic identity of the production strain confirms that it belongs to a QPS TU and that all qualifications are met. The QPS concept and approach (Herman et al., 2019) is worthwhile to consider as a basis for the risk assessment of chassis of SynBioM and could be applied in a safety‐by‐design approach for SynBioM. In the case of chassis obtained by genome minimisation, attention should be paid to the potential consequences for safety. Although genome minimisation is used in the safe‐by‐design approach (Grosjean et al., 2021) to create safer chassis organisms, there are some reports where increased virulence was associated with evolutionary genome reduction (Diop et al., 2018; Murray et al., 2021).



Conclusions on adequacy: Relying on the QPS status for the safety assessment of building blocks of SynBioM is valid when there is sufficient familiarity of the SynBioM/chassis with the QPS organism.

Need for updates: No updates needed.

Different EFSA guidances address the assessment of the production process as a key section of the risk assessment of microbial products. Therefore, the production process, including fermentation, downstream processing and product formulation, determines the composition and purity of the end‐product and is therefore a critical factor for the risk assessment in relation to product applications as food and/or feed.

These guidances were designed to assess cellular organisms, mainly bacteria and fungi and did not provide indication on the safety assessment of bacteriophages and other viruses. For phages, the assessment of the manufacturing process can be based on: (1) the virulence and pathogenic potential of the propagating microorganism and the presence on the genome of temperate bacteriophages, (2) the growth medium ingredients, and (3) the downstream processing. This approach was followed by the EFSA BIOHAZ Panel for the bacteriophage Listex P100 (non‐GMM) to control L. monocytogenes (EFSA BIOHAZ Panel, 2016b). More recently, the same approach was followed by the EFSA FEEDAP Panel, in the assessment of the safety and efficacy of Bafasal® (four bacteriophages) to control Salmonella enterica serovar Gallinarum (EFSA FEEDAP Panel, 2021b).



Conclusions on adequacy: The existing EFSA guidances are generally adequate for assessing the product, the production process and the product preparation process and are applicable for the different SynBioMs products.

Need for updates: Update is needed for xenobionts containing XNA and/or producing xenoproteins to assess potential concerns regarding their presence, their stability and/or their potential degradation into harmful metabolites. The specificities of the manufacturing and purification processes for non‐GM, GM and SynBio protists/microalgae and bacteriophage fermentation need to be taken into account and, for bacteriophages, also the possible formation of phages with transducing properties of virulence and toxin factors.

The presence of organisms (viable and/or inactivated) and/or their genetic information (DNA or XNA) are key elements for the safety evaluation of GMMs, including SynBioMs (as was provided for in the GMM guidance, 2011). For Categories 1 and 2, the product may not contain either viable cells, viable but non‐cultivable cells (VBNC), spores or non‐viable physically intact microorganisms, including xenobionts. It also may not contain DNA or XNA. Category 3 products may contain DNA/XNA but no microorganisms in any stage of viability and Category 4 products may contain both microorganisms in any stage of viability and DNA/XNA.

The guidances cited above are relevant for detecting the presence of DNA from SynBioM in food and feed products. Guidance is missing on detection of XNA, which may not be able to be amplified by conventional PCR.



Conclusions on adequacy: The guidances cited above are adequate for detecting the different viability stages of bacteria and fungi, including spores, and the presence of DNA from SynBioM in food and feed products.

Need for updates: Guidance is missing on detection of non‐GM, GM and SynBio bacteriophages, protists and microalgae. Guidance for detection of SynBioM with XNA and/or xeno amino acids would need additional methodological guidance on adapted culturing conditions and culture‐independent detection. Guidance is missing on detection of XNA, which would not be able to be amplified by conventional PCR.

This section of the EFSA GMO Panel (2011) guidance focuses on the comparative approach as a key general principle in the RA of GMMs. For the choice of comparator, the following provisions are provided for in the legislation and are quoted in the GMM guidance:

It should be noted that the most recent EFSA guidances (EFSA, 2021, statement on WGS; EFSA CEP Panel, 2021) for RA of GMM base the safety evaluation of bacteria and yeast on the analyses of the WGS. This approach, aimed at the identification of the genetic determinants for virulence factors, toxins and of other genes of concern, focuses directly on the microorganism under evaluation and should be performed independently from the comparative approach.



Conclusions on adequacy: The EFSA GMO (2011) guidance describes well the principles of the comparative approach that is also applicable for SynBioM. The use of a comparator in the risk assessment is adequate for those SynBioM (Categories 1–4) with sufficient familiarity to the non‐GMM counterpart. SynBioM producing new‐to‐nature products and xenobionts would require a safety assessment per se for the new‐to‐nature components as provided for already in the GMM 2011 guidance. The EFSA GMO Panel (2011) guidance foresees that, in cases when the parental organism of the GMM does not have a history of use in the particular application, conventional food products may still be used as comparators to identify possible compositional changes and to assess their safety implications.

Need for updates: No updates needed.

In general terms, the part of the EFSA GMO Panel (2011) guidance on GMM is in place to cover toxicology and applies for SynBioMs and products produced by SynBioM production organisms. In addition to proteins, also new constituents other than proteins, as well as any anticipated changes in specific metabolic pathways due to the modification, are to be evaluated. This may include toxicological testing on a case‐by‐case basis.

Further information on the toxicological tests to be applied to GMMs when needed according to EFSA guidances and other international guidelines are reported in Appendix A. These approaches, which include genotoxicity, systemic toxicity and effect on the immune systems, are considered adequate for toxicological assessment of SynBioMs.



Conclusions on adequacy: In general terms, existing guidances sufficiently cover the genotoxicity and systemic toxicity assessment of SynBioM products, including those produced from and with XNA and/or xeno amino acids. Guidance for assessing SynBioM products for effects on the immune system, including inadvertent immunomodulation can be based on existing guidances from EFSA (EFSA NDA Panel, 2016b) and OECD (2018a, TG443, and 2018b, TG408), respectively.

Need for updates: Guidance for the toxicological safety assessment of non‐GM, GM and SynBioM bacteriophages is needed; especially for those propagated in pathogens. This can be based on gained experience of already evaluated non‐GM bacteriophages. Specific indications for tolerance and efficacy in insects as target species of feed additives should be developed for non‐GM, GM and SynBioM.

Available guidances: Despite its importance, limited information about the risk assessment of microorganisms or their products present in food and feed in relation to the gut environment is available in existing EFSA guidances. The most updated guidances referring to the need of studies are Chapter 4 of the EFSA GMO Panel (2011) guidance, Chapter 4 of the EFSA FEEDAP Panel (2018a) guidance and Section 8 of the EFSA FEEDAP Panel (2017b) guidance.

In general, the impacts on the gut microbiome can be anticipated as being more complicated for Categories 3 and 4 (see examples in Appendix B), considering that entire cells or their DNA can have diverse types of impact on the microbial ecosystem (including displacement due to enhanced adhesion, microbial imbalance, decrease of microbial diversity and HGT). However, in line with future/current provisions for advancing risk assessment of regulatory products, the impacts on the gut microbiome might be needed also for Categories 1 and 2 products when it is expected that the SynBio modification may lead to products that have (or are designed to have) effects on the gut microbiome.

The transfer of genetic information from a Category 4 SynBioM, or from Category 3 containing DNA, into other food microorganisms and/or intestinal microbial community may have consequences for human and animal health. DNA from the SynBioM may be transferred to members of the natural microbiomes through mechanisms such as conjugation, transformation or transduction. Genes of concern, encoding harmful traits, may spread in the microbiota providing a selective advantage to one or some of their members, and reducing or displacing other microorganisms with beneficial properties.

Potential risks as a consequence of HGT of sequences of concern are specifically addressed in the EFSA GMM guidance (EFSA GMO Panel, 2011) for microorganisms and no gaps are identified for GMMs or SynBioMs. With respect to methodology, the GMM guidance (EFSA GMO Panel, 2011) does not report methods how to assess and quantitatively measure the HGT of sequences of concern present in GMM products. This also applies to SynBioMs. An extensive risk assessment on the horizontal transfer of antimicrobial marker genes from GM plants to gut and environmental microbiota was published (EFSA, 2009; presenting the joint work of the GMO and BIOHAZ Panels). This assessment extensively documented the mechanisms and the most important environmental factors for the HGT process and the frequencies by which it may occur in the environment and in the human and animal gut. For assessing HGT of GM plants to microorganisms by means of double homologous recombination (DHR), EFSA has issued an Explanatory note (EFSA, 2017). The use of bioinformatics analysis for measuring HGT potential of GM plants is equally applicable to GMMs and SynBioMs.



Conclusions on adequacy: The existing guidances define the general framework for the risk assessment of GMM interactions in the gastrointestinal environments. In general terms this is also adequate for SynBioMs. In more detail:



The relevant existing documents for assessment of allergenicity are: Guidance on the risk assessment of genetically modified microorganisms and their products intended for food and feed use (EFSA GMO Panel, 2011), Scientific Opinion on the evaluation of allergenic foods and food ingredients for labelling purposes (EFSA NDA Panel, 2014), Guidance on allergenicity of genetically modified plants (EFSA GMO Panel, 2017), Guidance on studies concerning the safety of use of the additive for users/workers (EFSA FEEDAP Panel, 2012a), Scientific Guidance for the submission of dossiers on Food Enzymes (EFSA CEP Panel, 2021).

Methods to predict skin and respiratory sensitising capacity of agents are available (EFSA FEEDAP Panel, 2012a). In this guidance, the issue of possible allergic reactions is covered for workers and bystanders for skin and respiratory sensitisation. Tests for the skin‐sensitising potential should be performed using the appropriate form of the product. Protocols for these studies should comply with OECD guideline TG406 (skin sensitisation) (OECD, 2021) and TG429 (skin sensitisation – local lymph node assay) (OECD, 2010b). Standardised methods are currently not available for respiratory sensitisation. If the product is demonstrated to be a dermal sensitiser then it is assumed, on a precautionary basis and in the absence of other information, that it is also a respiratory sensitiser. If the product is proteinaceous in origin then it is, by default, assumed to be a respiratory sensitiser. In vitro models to predict the skin‐sensitising capacity of agents are being developed and are well underway, but it remains to be determined on a case‐by‐case basis if this is a main issue for the products that will have to be assessed. This guidance is also applicable to SynBioM products.



Conclusions on adequacy: For the evaluation of allergenicity, existing guidances for proteins, non‐IgE‐mediated immune reactions, as well as sensitisation, are also applicable for SynBioM products, with limitations in the predictive tools for allergenic potential of new‐to‐nature proteins.

Need for updates: Continuation of research as well as validation of current results to identify allergenicity and adjuvanticity; the aim is that these scientific advancements should be used in the future to update Guidance for risk assessment. This applies to non‐GM, GM and SynBioM (including new‐to‐nature proteins).

Nutritional assessment is provided for GMM in the guidance of the EFSA GMO Panel (2011) and is applicable to SynBioM. Also, a newer guidance can be consulted (EFSA NDA Panel, 2016) for nutritional assessment of SynBioM food. For animal nutrition, the EFSA FEEDAP Panel (2018b) guidance needs to be considered if the SynBioM is used as a feed additive.

For animal feed, the guidance on the assessment of the efficacy of feed additives (EFSA FEEDAP Panel, 2018b) indicates that for nutritional additives naturally occurring in plants and animals, no efficacy studies are needed. For analogues of amino acids, new forms of trace elements, and compounds with similar effects on vitamins and urea derivatives, nutritional equivalence can be demonstrated from the existing literature. If this information is not available, bioequivalence studies should be conducted. For novel additives, long‐term efficacy studies are necessary.



Conclusions on adequacy: The nutritional assessment of the food and feed products classed as Categories 1–4 SynBioMs can be based on existing guidances.

Need for updates: Current guidances do not describe in detail the methodologies (e.g. for assessing bioavailability) necessary for the nutritional assessment in general and, in particular, for non‐GM, GM or SynBioM biomasses used for food. At present this is done on case‐by‐case basis. Guidance should be developed for the nutritional assessment of new‐to‐nature products.

The GMM guidance 2011 provides for exposure assessment in general terms:

According to the intended use, various guidance documents and tools from EFSA can be consulted and are applicable for the exposure assessment/characterisation related to food and feed consumption:



Conclusions on adequacy: The existing guidances are adequate for calculating exposure to most SynBioM products derived from fermentation (Categories 1–3) and for Category 4 products. Exposure of consumers and animals (farmed and pets) to viable microbial cells through food and feed or by secondary exposure routes (e.g. plants and water) is to be assessed on a case‐by‐case basis.

Need for updates: An update is needed for oral exposure assessment of non‐GM, GM and SynBioM, able to epiphytically or endophytically colonise plants, when used as PPP and biostimulants.

In reference to European Commission Directive 2001/18/EC, post‐market environmental monitoring (PMEM) is applied to identify any direct or indirect, immediate and/or delayed adverse effects of GMOs, and their management on human health or the environment, after the GMO has been placed on the market. In line with this legal requirement, the GMM guidance (EFSA GMO Panel, 2011) provides for the assessment of both PMM plans and PMEM plans to be delivered for food and feed derived from GMMs. For feed additives, there is no need for specific requirements for a PMM plan other than those established in the Feed Hygiene Regulation18 and Good Manufacturing Practice. The PMM plan is required only for nutritional, zootechnical, coccidiostats and histomonostats, and additives derived from GMM. Also in the guidance of the EFSA FEEDAP Panel (2021) for renewals of applications, the assessment of PMM plans is envisaged.

The PMM aims to detect potential adverse effects on human health (including allergenicity), animal health and the environment as a consequence of the GMM use, this will apply equally to SynBioMs of all Categories (1–4) that will enter food and feed and, in particular, when the SynBioM product is designed to affect the nutritional characteristics of food and feed, expected to affect the gut environment, or contains xenoproteins or xenonucleic acids.



Conclusions on adequacy: EFSA guidances provide the principles for the PMM of SynBioMs products.

Need for updates:

A summary of the conclusions on adequacy and need for updates from Phases 1 and 2 can be found under each section. The final step in the methodology followed by the WG is Phase 3, which aimed at performing an overall gap analysis that could not be captured by the previous Phases 1 and 2.

In view of efforts to harness the use of microorganisms in the food and feed chain, the EFSA SC herewith recommends a concerted effort on developing internationally agreed guidance and harmonised frameworks for identifying and addressing living cell intake in the RA process. This would facilitate safety assessment, dietary exposure and related effect assessment of living microbial cells (non‐GM, GM or SynBioM) ingested by humans/animals.

In the past, RA of GMMs was based on an extensive assessment of the applied genetic modification steps and on the comparison with its non‐genetically modified counterpart. With the development in the continuum from GMM to SynBioM, the descriptions of the genetic modifications became more and more complex, making a consistent RA by this technique‐driven approach more and more challenging. Moreover, with multiple genetic modification techniques being used at the same time, finding a comparator that is suitable as the non‐genetically modified counterpart is also challenging.

Designed new‐to‐nature sequences and sequences without a non‐GM counterpart should follow a food and feed risk assessment per se, based on the molecular characterisation of the strain and on the safety of the product it produces, including e.g. testing the pathogenicity, toxicity, nutrition, allergenicity and gut–environment interactions of the product. A safety assessment per se has been already provided in the EFSA GMO Panel GMM 2011 guidance. For Category 4, see Section 4.1. As the technique‐driven risk assessment has its limitations, especially for the assessment of SynBioM, a strain‐driven approach can be envisaged for all future SynBioM assessments.

ToR1: EFSA was asked to consider whether and which newer sectors/advances should be considered among SynBio developments, in addition to the six identified by the SCs. Previous conclusions on this ToR remain valid (EFSA Scientific Committee, 2020). In the current Opinion, additional literature was searched for new developments for all category SynBioM products for all different food/feed use applications falling under the remit of EFSA. The following conclusions are complementary to the previous ones:

ToR2: EFSA was requested to identify, if possible, potential risks in terms of impact on humans, animals and the environment that current and near‐future SynBio developments could pose; EFSA was also asked to identify potential novel hazards compared with established techniques of genetic modification. For the molecular characterisation and ERA, conclusions have been published in a previous opinion (EFSA Scientific Committee, 2020). This Opinion is focused on the food and feed safety assessment for humans and animals (farmed and pets). The assessment was to identify novel hazard or risk and this should be performed on a case‐by‐case basis. Following a generic evaluation in this Opinion, it was concluded that SynBioMs may lead to novel hazards compared with microorganisms developed with established genetic modification techniques:

ToR3: EFSA was requested to determine if the existing guidelines for risk assessment were adequate and sufficient for current and near‐future SynBio developments or if there was a need for updated guidance.

Concluding remarks on the adequacy of existing guidelines for the food and feed risk safety assessment of SynBioM:

ToR4: In the latter case, EFSA was requested to identify the specific areas for which such updated guidance is needed. For food and feed safety assessment of SynBioMs, as well as for GMMs, the development of guidance and risk assessment tools are recommended as follows.

Development of risk assessment tools is recommended:





Toxicological studies required will usually consist of in vitro tests for genotoxicity and in vivo studies for systemic toxicity. For genotoxicity, the following two in vitro tests are recommended as the first step (EFSA Scientific Committee, 2011): bacterial reverse mutation assay (OECD, 2020a, TG471), and in vitro mammalian cell micronucleus test (OECD, 2016a, TG487). If the Ames test is not applicable, alternatively a test for induction of gene mutations in mammalian cells, preferably the mouse lymphoma tk assay (OECD, 2016c, TG476), could be performed, but it needs to be justified. Following one or more positive in vitro tests, further testing may be required to determine whether the hazard is expressed in vivo, unless it can be adequately demonstrated that the positive in vitro findings are not relevant for the in vivo situation. In line with the recommendation of the EFSA Scientific Committee (2011 and 2017), the following in vivo tests are considered as a suitable follow‐up for substances positive in the in vitro basic battery: the in vivo mammalian erythrocyte micronucleus assay for in vitro clastogens and aneugens (OECD, 2016b, TG474); the in vivo mammalian alkaline comet assay for substances that cause gene mutations and/or structural chromosomal aberrations (OECD, 2016d, TG489); the transgenic rodent gene mutation assay to follow‐up in vitro positive compounds for gene mutations (OECD, 2020b, TG488); or a combination of an in vivo micronucleus assay and a comet assay following a positive in vitro micronucleus assay. For further guidance on the in vivo follow‐up of substances positive in the in vitro basic battery, the Scientific Committee statement on genotoxicity assessment of chemical mixtures (EFSA Scientific Committee, 2019) should be consulted.

The term adjuvanticity is most often used in the context of vaccination, in which it is judged as a beneficial activity aimed at boosting the immune response after vaccination. In the EFSA GMM 2011 guidance (2011), it is dealt with under the heading of allergenicity, in which the term is used as the inadvertent stimulation of immune responses to allergens, i.e. boosting of specific IgE responses and resulting increased risk of allergic reactions to common allergens. However, inadvertent stimulation of immune responses may not only lead to enhanced allergen‐specific responses but may also lead to other undesired conditions such as inflammation or autoimmunity. In the context of toxicology, the term would indicate the inadvertent immunostimulation as a result of the food intake. Immunostimulation can be identified using the array of immunological measures indicated above. Judgement of the potential adversity of such effects should be done in the context of all information available, on a case‐by‐case basis. It is noted that currently there are no validated decisive in vitro methodologies for immunomodulators on which one could base a risk assessment.

Several risks specifically linked to microorganisms, non‐GM, GMM or SynBioM, and their products can be foreseen (Tyagi et al., 2016; Dou and Bennet, 2018). For example, the design of viable GMM/SynBio strains of microorganisms (Category 4) to increase their adhesion abilities to colonise the gut more effectively can displace other microbiota or disrupt the microbial balance, having an adverse long‐term effect on the gut epithelial integrity. In a worst‐case scenario it could lead to mucus invasion by undesirable microorganisms resulting in gut inflammation (Litvak and Bäumler, 2019). GMM/SynBioMs can also be designed to produce specific metabolites to be delivered in the gut that can be preferentially used by some dominant taxonomic units, therefore breaking microbial balance and metabolism.

As another example, phages may be designed to inhibit enteropathogens. For phages, safety assessment of the interaction with the microbiome, has been based on: (1) the taxonomic identification of the bacteriophage, including host range of the bacteriophage; (2) a bioinformatics analysis of the available WGS of the bacteriophages belonging to the same family for toxins and virulence factors in the light of potential transduction; and (3) the property that the pertinent bacteriophages are strictly lytic with a one unit‐length genome packaging mechanism with precise DNA termini recognition, preventing the formation of transducing bacteriophages. This approach was followed for the risk assessment and safety of bacteriophage Listex P100 (EFSA BIOHAZ Panel, 2016b) and the feed additive Bafasal® (EFSA FEEDAP Panel, 2021b).

Appendix C can be found in the online version of this output (‘Supporting information’ section): https://doi.org/10.2903/j.efsa.2022.7479

