Crosstalk between the Gut Microbiome and Colonic Motility in Chronic Constipation: Potential Mechanisms and Microbiota Modulation

Chronic constipation (CC) is a highly prevalent and burdensome gastrointestinal disorder. Accumulating evidence highlights the link between imbalances in the gut microbiome and constipation. However, the mechanisms by which the microbiome and microbial metabolites affect gut movement remain poorly understood. In this review, we discuss recent studies on the alteration in the gut microbiota in patients with CC and the effectiveness of probiotics in treating gut motility disorder. We highlight the mechanisms that explain how the gut microbiome and its metabolism are linked to gut movement and how intestinal microecological interventions may counteract these changes based on the enteric nervous system, the central nervous system, the immune function, and the ability to modify intestinal secretion and the hormonal milieu. In particular, microbiota-based approaches that modulate the levels of short-chain fatty acids and tryptophan catabolites or that target the 5-hydroxytryptamine and Toll-like receptor pathways may hold therapeutic promise. Finally, we discuss the existing limitations of microecological management in treating constipation and suggest feasible directions for future research.

Primary chronic constipation (CC), including functional constipation (FC) and constipation-predominant irritable bowel syndrome (IBS-C), is characterized by difficult bowel movements and/or a sense of incomplete evacuation, thus influencing quality of life [1]. However, the aetiology and pathophysiology of CC are largely unknown [2]. The epithelial surface of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract is inhabited by a dynamic collection of 40 trillion microbes, referred to as the gut microbiome, which has co-evolved with the host in a mutualistic relationship [3]. Gut microorganisms interact with a host’s metabolism, nervous system, immune system, and endocrine system, impacting its physiological functions [4]. Disruption of the gut microbial communities (dysbiosis) can cause a variety of changes in the host’s pathophysiology that lead to functional gastrointestinal disorders, specifically constipation [5]. Characterization of the microbiome–host crosstalk pathways provides insight into the pathogenesis of constipation.

A systematic search of published studies was performed using the Google Scholar (https://scholar.google.com; up to 30 May 2022) databases, Web of Science (http://isiknowledge.com; up to 30 May 2022), Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/cochranelibrary/search; up to 30 May 2022), and Medline (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed; up to 30 May 2022). The search items were diverse because of the large number of specialized terms involved in the mechanism review section, so only some of the search items are listed here for reference. The search terms included “constipation”, “motility”, “gut transit”, “colonic peristalsis”, “microbiota”, “microbiome”, and “metabolites”. These search items were combined with the AND operator to additional search terms for the relevant sections of the review, including “enteric nervous”, “central nervous”, “gut-brain axis”, “immune activation”, “inflammation”, “intestinal barrier”, “faecal water content”, “intestinal secretion”, “progesterone”, “estrogen”, “probiotics”, “symbiotic”, “Bifidobacterium”, “Lactobacillus”, “meta-analysis”, and “randomised controlled trials”.

Intestinal dysbiosis in patients with constipation is mainly characterized by a reduced relative abundance of specific lactate- and butyrate-producing bacteria and an elevated concentration of methanogens, which are potentially pathogenic in children and adults (Table 1) [9]. However, the relevance of these events to the disease state is still controversial. Early research used microbial culture methods to reveal that patients with FC contained significantly lower abundances of Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus, while potentially pathogenic bacteria such as Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus were increased [7]. The emergence of NGS and metagenomic technologies has provided new insights into the role of gut microbiota in gastrointestinal disease. Principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) scores of the 16S rDNA sequencing technique data indicated that the gastrointestinal microbiota composition of constipation is clearly distinct from that of normal individuals. The species diversity of microbiota in the patient samples was lower than that in healthy subjects; it was also accompanied by significantly reduced concentrations of Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus and an increased abundance of Desulfovibrionaceae [10]. In addition, the study found that the levels of butyrate-producing bacteria, such as Faecalibacterium and Roseburia, were significantly reduced in patients with FC [10]. It has also been confirmed that the relative abundance of methanogenic bacteria is increased in patients with slow transit constipation relative to healthy subjects [11]. In another study, Yutao Chen et al. collected 3056 fecal amplicon sequence data from five research cohorts and used machine-learning methods to construct the constipation discriminant model. The model identified 15 top-ranking biomarkers, particularly inflammation-related pathogenic bacterial genera Serratia, Dorea, and Aeromonas [12]. Recent advancements have used shotgun metagenomics to identify species within the gut microbiome and have performed functional analysis. Shotgun metagenomics indicated that the relative level of Roseburia intestinalis, a prominent butyrate-producing bacterium, was reduced in patients with constipation in comparison to healthy controls, and the microbiome corresponding to constipation was enriched for pathways implicated in methanogenesis [13]. In contrast, the microbiome of healthy individuals was characterized by high levels of genes associated with carbohydrate, fatty acid, and lipid metabolism [14].

↑ Significant increase; ↓ significant decrease; ↔ no change; chronic constipation: CC; functional constipation: FC.

In summary, these findings indicate that patients with constipation appear to have a unique microbiota composition, which differentiates them from healthy individuals. However, due to the large inter-individual differences of the participating patients, the temporal variability of the disease, and the defects of detection methods, the precise differences in the composition of the microbiota are poorly understood. It is necessary to restrict population characteristics, such as age and gender, record dietary habits, and establish standardized methodologies for gut microbiota research. In addition, the identification of microbiota composition down to the strain level to reveal specific microbial profiles, especially for Bifidobacteria and Bacteroidetes, is warranted. Considering that longitudinal sampling overcomes heterogeneity seen in cross-sectional microbiome studies, it is recommended to use longitudinal sampling. Technological advances, particularly capsule endoscopy, have made it possible to investigate bacterial composition along different regions of the intestinal tract. What is more, the relationship between the changes in specific microbial abundance and constipation symptoms warrants further research.

Sensory innervation of the mucosa comes from the enteric nervous system (ENS). The nerve endings are located adjacent to the mucosal sides of absorptive epithelial cells, and thereby are ideally placed to respond to commensal bacteria and modulate intestinal function (Figure 1) [26]. The influence of the gut microbiome on ENS activity is indicated by changes in gut motility patterns (such as the neurogenic colonic migrating motor complexes) [27] and the weakened excitability of enteric neurons in germ-free (GF) mice compared with wild-type mice. These effects lead to a reduction in intestinal transit rates and defects in gut motility [28]. Conversely, the acquisition of a normal gut microbiome can restore the density of the ENS network, increase the excitability of gut sensory neurons [29] and, subsequently, increase gut motility. These effects may be attributed to Toll-like receptor (TLR)-mediated effects of the microbiota on gastrointestinal motility [30]. In addition, gut microbiota also maintains adult ENS, promotes colonic neurogenesis, and regulates colon motility in a TLR2 signaling-dependent manner in mice [31]. Moreover, probiotic and pathogenic bacteria differently regulate TLR2 expression and NO production in human-derived enteric glial cells [32]. Interestingly, the effects of TLR/microbiota pathways on ENS development and homeostasis are mediated by glial cell-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) [28,33]. The gut microbiome also contributes to the functional maturation of intestinal neural networks via enteric serotonin networks, thereby initiating the release of 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) by enterochromaffin cells; 5-HT can directly act on the GI tract, causing smooth muscle relaxation or contraction [34]. This observation highlights a potential mechanism that links tryptophan metabolism to functional GI disorders [35]. Thus, microecological management that directly targets specific TLRs and 5-HT signaling pathways may be effective in promoting functional maturation of the ENS and alleviating colonic dysmotility.

Abbreviations: AHR, aryl hydrocarbon receptor; cAMP, cyclic AMP; ChAT, choline acetyltransferase; CNS, central nervous system; ENS, enteric nervous system; GLP-1, glucagon-like peptide-1; GPCRs, G-protein-coupled receptors; IL-22, Interleukin-22; MUC2, mucin 2; PXR, pregnane X receptor; TLR4, Toll-like receptor 4; NF-κB, nuclear factor kappa B; TpH1, tryptophan hydroxylase 1; 5-HT, 5-hydroxytryptamine; 5-HT3R, serotonergic subtype 3 receptor.

Collectively, microbiota and microbial mediators, including SCFAs and tryptophan metabolites, appear to modulate gut motility by exerting effects on ENS function and colonic smooth muscle; however, the mechanisms are not fully understood.

Gut microbiota are key regulators of the development, maturity, and activity of the CNS. They can influence the interactions between the gut and CNS through multiple signaling mechanisms, collectively referred to as the bidirectional ‘microbiota-gut-brain axis’ (Figure 1) [71]. Recent advances have revealed the importance of the gut microbiome in modulating brain–gut communication [72], which may participate in the pathophysiology of constipation. Signals to and from the gut and the CNS are dependent on signal transmitters, principally 5-HT and the vagus nerve, which is a key connection within the microbiota–gut–brain axis [73]. Gut microbiota can modulate 5-HT secretion in ECs, while 5-HT receptors (5-HTRs) are highly expressed in vagal afferents [74]. In addition, bacterial metabolites are also potential neuronal modulators (Figure 1 and Table 2). A recent report indicated that indole derivatives produced by Edwardsiella tarda can activate the receptor transient receptor potential ankyrin A1 (Trpa1) on epithelial sensory enteroendocrine cells (EECs). The activation of EECs mediates 5-HT secretion, transmitting bacterial signals to enteric and vagal nerves and leading to increased gut motility [54]. SCFAs also stimulate mucosal receptors connected to vagal nerves, in particular 5-HT3R, which is located on vagal afferent fibres [47]. In summary, these findings support mechanisms by which gastrointestinal microbiota-derived metabolites modulate gut transit by interacting with both the CNS and the gut through the microbiota–EC–vagal afferent. However, the molecular mechanisms by which the microbiota initiates neurotransmitter release, or how the CNS influences the microbiome and its metabolism, thereby influencing the behavior of the brain, are largely unknown.

Seventy percent of the immune system is located in the GI tract. Therefore, the gut is not only a place for digestion and absorption but also the largest immune organ. As such, it is associated with a wide range of diseases, including constipation. Constipation is accompanied by low-level inflammation and damage to the intestinal barrier [7,43]. However, the gut microbiota can regulate the integrity of the epithelial barrier and the mucosal immune system, thereby maintaining intestinal homeostasis [75].

The intestinal epithelium, together with the overlying mucus, is mainly constructed from mucins, which provide a physical and immunological barrier against potentially harmful pathogens [76]. It has been suggested that patients with constipation have increased intestinal permeability, as indicated by increased ovalbumin concentrations in serum [7]. This leads to increased exposure to intestinal epithelial bacteria and, subsequently, to the promotion of gut inflammation. A recent study demonstrated that mice colonized with microbiota from patients with constipation had abnormal defecation parameters and decreased MUC2 expression levels. The decreased MUC2 expression levels reduced the release of mucins, suggesting that constipation-induced dysbiosis results in a compromised epithelial barrier [77]. Microbiota can directly mediate the expression of tight junction proteins, such as zonula occludens-1 and claudin-3, or the expression of genes associated with tight junction signaling [78], thus impacting gut immune homeostasis. Microbe-derived butyrate is also capable of facilitating barrier function through several mechanisms, including the activation of AMP-activated protein kinase [49], the stimulation of tight junction signaling, the expression of mucin-associated peptides [50], and the modulation of goblet cells to release specific mucins, such as MUC2 [51]. In addition, tryptophan metabolites (principally indole) have been found to promote barrier integrity by enhancing the expression of genes that contribute to the maintenance of epithelial cell structure and function [57], thereby fortifying goblet cell differentiation and mucus secretion [58]. The symbiotic bacterial metabolite indole propionic acid (IPA) also acts as a ligand for PXR, a physiologic regulator of barrier integrity, thereby protecting intestinal permeability by TLR4 signaling (Figure 1 and Table 2) [59]. However, there is only one human study suggesting that intestinal barrier impairment is involved in the pathogenesis of constipation [7], and more human data are needed to confirm the relationship between constipation and increased intestinal barrier damage.

Immune activation, including host innate and adaptive immunity, has been found to occur in patients with functional bowel disease [79], and this can be modulated by the gut microbiota (Figure 1). Patients with constipation show an increase in the numbers of CD8+, CD4+, CD3+, and CD25+ T cells and an increase in the proliferation of lymphocytes, revealing the activation of T cell-mediated immunity. Infectious inflammatory-primed CD8+ T cells on the enteric neurons and the flowing immune response led to acute neuronal injury, colorectal distension, and slow colonic transit in mice [7]. Gut microbiota have been found to modulate TLR signaling, thereby influencing the initiation of innate defence responses and intestinal epithelial homeostasis, such as the synthesis of IgA and antimicrobial peptides [80]. In addition, the gut microbiota can modulate the proliferation and differentiation of T cells and induce colonic regulatory T cells (Tregs), which influences the balance of T helper type 17 (Th17) cells and Tregs and immune activation [81], suggesting that Tregs link the gut microbiota to host immune adaptation. Notably, these effects may be attributed to gut microbiota-derived bacterial fermentation products (Figure 1 and Table 2). A report revealed that SCFAs are able to restore the population and function of Tregs in GF mice, modulating inflammation and gut motility [48]. This indicates that metabolites underlie the intestinal adaptive immune response and can improve colonic homeostasis. In addition, accumulating evidence demonstrates that bacterial tryptophan catabolites, which have been described as ligands of AHR (an important factor in the immune response at barrier sites), also induce innate and adaptive immune responses via AHR activation [55]. For example, indole lactic acid was able to affect the differentiation of mouse Th17 cells in vitro [82]. Furthermore, LPS can stimulate the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines (such as tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α and interleukin (IL)-6) by macrophages via the TLR4/nuclear factor kappa B (TNF-κB) pathway, thereby inducing systemic inflammation [63]. However, the causal relationship between constipation and inflammation, including the role of the gut microbiota, remains poorly understood.

Normal defecation not only depends on normal gut motility but also on intestinal secretion function. Alterations in the transport of fluid and electrolytes in the intestine represent another pathophysiologic disturbance in constipation [83], which is also affected by gut microbiota (Figure 1). It has been shown that constipation-induced dysbiosis leads to an increase in the water-retaining capacity of the colon and a reduction in the fecal water content [77]. The gut microbiota can regulate the expression of aquaporin; the Prevotella (P) enterotype is thought to improve the fecal water content and accelerate gut transit [84]. In addition, microbial mediators regulate the 5-HT-mediated secretion of intestinal fluid and electrolytes (Figure 1 and Table 2). The host’s secretory response to 5-HT might also be mediated by the modulating effects of the gut microbiome on 5-HT3R expression within submucosal neurons through acetate production [52]. Tryptamine, a microbiota-generated indole similar to 5-HT, activates the GPCR 5-HT4R, which is present on the colonic epithelium, thereby elevating the amount of cyclic AMP (cAMP) and increasing anion-dependent fluid secretion in mice [60]. This results in an increase in the rate of whole-gut transit. In addition, Mars et al. found that tryptamine induced alterations in short-circuit current and promoted fluid secretion in human colonic biopsies [22]. Thus, bacterial metabolites, SCFAs, and tryptophan-derived metabolites can function as ligands of 5-HTRs (5-HT3R and 5-HT4R, in particular), which are responsible for modulating colonic secretion. BAs (principally chenodeoxycholate and deoxycholate) stimulate colonic secretion through multiple mechanisms, including the intracellular activation of secretory mechanisms, cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator (CFTR) mediated by cAMP, and the suppressing of apical Cl−/OH− exchange [62]. Importantly, recent publications have suggested that intestinal secretion is mediated by microbiota-derived secretory substances, such as SCFAs, tryptamine, and chenodeoxycholate, rather than by inherent defects in epithelial transport of patients with constipation [22].

However, less research has been conducted on intestinal secretion than on intestinal motility, and further study is needed to explore the mechanisms of intestinal secretion mediated by gut microbiota. Furthermore, these results are mainly based on animal models; thus, caution is needed when translating these conclusions to human conditions.

The overwhelming prevalence of constipation in women may highlight the essential role of sex hormones (such as oestrogen and progesterone) in prolonged stool transit. Clinical and animal studies have shown that hormonal disturbances are linked to the pathogenesis of functional gastrointestinal disorders [85]. In addition, research suggests that the microbiome impacts hormone production and metabolism, and, vice versa, ovarian hormones can influence the proliferation and growth of specific microbes (Figure 1) [86]. Research has demonstrated that a bidirectional relationship exists between the gut microbiota and host sex hormones [87]. Preliminary evidence suggests that the gut microbiota regulates steroid hormone metabolism via steroid enterohepatic circulation [87], bacterial hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase [88], and bacterial genes involved in oestrogen metabolism, such as β-glucuronidase. This regulation leads to oestrogen reabsorption and further alteration in the circulating hormonal profile [89], thereby influencing host physiology [90]. In addition, increased levels of progesterone cause alterations in community structure, characterized by enhanced abundances of Blautia and Bifidobacterium, and reduced abundances of Dehalobacterium and Bacteroidales [91], indicating that progesterone contributes to the changes in the gut microbial community during pregnancy [92,93]. Microbial composition is also influenced by estrogen receptor (ER) signaling within colonic mucosa, which modulates intestinal activity and gut motility [94].

In summary, these findings highlight the importance of the gut microbiome in mediating the ENS, the CNS, the immune system, and intestinal secretion and endocrine functions implicated in constipation. Perturbations in any of these overlapping functions may result in constipation symptoms. Recent advances have also highlighted the importance of microbial metabolites, such as SCFAs and tryptophan-derived compounds, in regulating gut motility and intestinal secretion. Notably, the 5-HT system and TLR signaling have emerged as key players in microbiota-mediated function; exploiting microorganisms that manipulate 5-HT and TLR signaling may pave the way to probiotic-based therapeutic modalities.

Although it is difficult to define the typical microbiota profile of patients with constipation, microecological therapy has attracted significant attention. The potential mechanisms of action of probiotics have also been extensively studied. Probiotics may contribute to the relief of constipation symptoms by modulating the intestinal microenvironment, intestinal epithelial defence responses, and intestinal secretion functions, and by regulating nervous and endocrine systems that influence gut motility and secretion (Figure 1 and Table 3).

Abbreviations: BDNF, brain-derived neurotrophic factor; CNS, central nervous system; ENS, enteric nervous system; FPR1, formyl peptide receptor 1; IL-10, Interleukin 10; IL-1β, Interleukin-1β; MUC2, mucin 2; SCFAs, short-chain fatty acids; TLR2, Toll-like receptor 2; TNF-α, tumor necrosis factor-α; 5-HT, 5-hydroxytryptamine; 5-HT4R, serotonergic subtype 4 receptor.

Perturbations in microbiota composition have been implicated in the pathogenesis of constipation. When probiotics dominate the intestinal tract, pathogens have little effect on the host, whereas, if reversed, pathogens can play a key role in intestinal disorders. Probiotic treatment increases the relative abundance of obligate microflora, such as Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus spp., and reduces the abundance of potentially pathogenic microflora (Table 3) [127]. Supplementation with L. casei strain Shirota considerably increased the abundance of bifidobacteria and lactobacilli [105] in the gut, and treatment with B. longum BB536 increased the abundance of bifidobacteria and improved the frequency of defecation [106]. In addition, a study in mice showed that the administration of Bifidobacterium spp. improved constipation symptoms, mainly by elevating the ratio of Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes, increasing the abundance of Lactobacillus, and reducing the abundance of pathogenic bacterial genera; various species of Bifidobacterium (B. longum, B. infantis, B. bifidum B. adolescentis, B. breve, and B. animalis) displayed species-specific effects on improving constipation [107]. A recent study found that B. bifidum and B. adolescentis conferred strain-specific effects on the relief of constipation [124,128]; these differing effects may be attributed to the inconsistent effects of probiotics on intestinal flora. Attention should therefore be paid to strain-specific effects during the treatment of constipation. These findings indicate that probiotic supplements may alter the microbial composition of patients with constipation to resemble that of healthy controls and alleviate constipation-related symptoms.

Microbes do not sit idly within the intestine; they must remain metabolically active to survive the environment. Thus, probiotics not only affect the gut microbiota but also affect their fermentation products, especially SCFAs and tryptophan catabolites, which improve gut motility and secretion. Different probiotic species and strains have been proven to improve constipation indicators. Examples include L. plantarum IS 10506, which increases SCFA levels [108], and B. animalis subsp. lactis MN-Gup, which increases the levels of acetate and improves GI transit rates [109]. Emerging data also indicate that tryptophan catabolites produced by tryptophan-utilising species, such as lactobacilli, are key contributors to the maintenance of colon function [110,111].

Emerging evidence suggests that probiotics alleviate constipation by activating the ENS and the CNS. Probiotics have been shown to prominently modulate enteric neurobiology (Figure 1 and Table 3). Treatment with Clostridium butyricum regulates TLR2 expression in enteric neurons, promoting intestinal motility [112]. In addition, the administration of the commensal gut microbe LGG mediates signaling in the ENS via formyl peptide receptor 1 (FPR1), which is expressed on enteric neuronal cells, thereby enhancing the expression of ChAT [113].

It has been shown that probiotics regulate CNS-dependent motility reflexes, hence inevitably sending nerve signals to the brain. For instance, L. reuteri enhances the excitability of myenteric neurons in rats and interacts with the gut–brain axis by influencing afferent sensory nerves that regulate bowel movement [114]. L. rhamnosus induces mesenteric vagal afferent firing [115], suggesting that probiotics act on the ENS and CNS. In addition, a human study indicated that long-term supplementation with L. reuteri DSM-17938 increases gut motility by reducing the levels of 5-HT and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) [116], suggesting that probiotics may improve constipation symptoms via the gut–brain axis in humans. However, this needs to be confirmed in further human studies. In summary, the relationship between the microbiota and neural signaling molecules is still not fully clear.

Probiotics primarily affect intestinal epithelial defence responses by improving the intestinal barrier and innate and adaptive defense responses (Figure 1 and Table 3) [64]. Probiotics can directly augment the expression of tight junction proteins and the MUC2 gene, thereby stimulating mucin secretion by goblet cells and diminishing the binding of intestinal pathogens to mucosal epithelial cells [117]. In addition, it has been shown that probiotic metabolites, such as SCFAs, tryptophan metabolites, and antimicrobial peptides, enhance intestinal epithelial function by competitive adhesion to enterocytes, stimulating SlgA secretion [118], and promoting the expression of genes involved in tight junctions [119]. A recent report showed that butyrate-producing bacteria can alleviate constipation symptoms by increasing the thickness of the mucosal layer [10]. A study by Shi et al. indicated that tryptophan-utilising L. plantarum KLDS 1.0386 augments tight junction proteins, elevates mucin mRNA expression and anti-inflammatory cytokine (IL-10) production, and reduces pro-inflammatory cytokine production [119].

The surface components of probiotics, especially surface-layer proteins and capsular polysaccharides, interact with specific pattern recognition receptors, such as TLRs and NF-κB, to mediate immune activation [64]. Probiotics also stimulate adaptive immune responses mediated by intestinal epithelial cells, especially the production of cytokines [129]. For example, B. longum was shown to reduce the secretion of IL-1β and TNF-α in colon tissue, thereby relieving constipation [120]. In addition, indole metabolites of Lactobacillus were shown to affect the TH17 cell/Treg balance [130] and mucosal homeostasis via IL-22, thereby attenuating intestinal inflammation in an AHR-dependent manner [56]. The ability of probiotic bacteria to improve intestinal epithelial defence may be the key mechanism by which probiotics improve intestinal function. However, the effect of probiotics on immunity, and their relationship to gut motility, is largely unknown. Critically, it is unclear whether probiotics relieve constipation, which leads to reduced inflammation, or whether they relieve inflammation, which leads to reduced constipation.

Probiotics can improve intestinal secretion and accelerate defecation by increasing SCFA levels and modulating 5-HT signaling (Figure 1 and Table 3). Bifidobacteria and Lactobacillus spp. have been shown to increase the stool water content in mice, which was attributed to elevated SCFA levels [121,128]. Additionally, recent evidence indicates that B. bifidum can enhance the expression of 5-HT4R, thereby promoting colonic peristalsis and the secretion of intestinal fluid [124]. Furthermore, colonic mucus can act as a lubricant that protects the mucosa and also contributes to stool excretion [131]. Caballerofranco C et al. suggested supplementation with Lactobacillus plantarum PS128 to stimulate mucin production [123].

It has been shown that probiotics can regulate sex hormone levels by impacting the structure of gut microbiota (Table 3). Lactobacilli and bifidobacteria have been shown to reduce the estrogen reabsorption rate and adjust the estrogen level by decreasing the relative abundance of β-glucuronidase-producing bacteria [87,132]. L. plantarum 30M5 can alter the levels of circulating estrogen by affecting the gut microbiome and its metabolism [125]. In addition, a recent publication showed that probiotic Enterococcus faecalis can modulate progesterone levels and Th1-Th2 cell homeostasis [126]. However, research is limited on the effects of probiotics on hormones and hormone receptors (especially progesterone), and, like the immune system, it is currently unclear how probiotics interact with sex hormones to improve constipation.

In summary, it has been shown that probiotics (especially bifidobacteria and lactobacilli) and their metabolites (SCFAs and tryptophan catabolites in particular) exert beneficial effects on constipation, primarily by acting on the luminal environment of the gut, the nervous system, the immune system, and the endocrine system, and by affecting intestinal secretion function. Notably, these regulatory roles are achieved by the microbiome and its metabolic products, which act as ligands for specific host receptors, in particular 5-HTRs, TLRs, and AHR. Therefore, microecological management that targets specific signaling molecules is a promising treatment for constipation. Further research into the microorganisms and mechanisms involved is warranted, especially in terms of the immune and endocrine systems.

The effects of microecological intervention, especially probiotics, on gastrointestinal symptoms and gut transit time have been studied in an increasing number of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) in children and adults, which are summarized in Table 4.

BMF: bowel movement frequency; SBMs: spontaneous bowel movements; BSFS: Bristol Stool Form Scale.

In summary, there is no clear consensus on the therapeutic effect of probiotics on adults with constipation, and the current limited evidence does not discourage the use of probiotics for the management of childhood constipation. Considering the high heterogeneity of individual studies, the differences in host constipation status, and the strain-specific effects, future RCTs that identify the symptoms and severity of patients with constipation are needed. Given that animal models have a unified genetic background, dietary habits, and disease characteristics, preclinical animal studies are required to preliminary screen effective single- and multi-species probiotics to identify ideal doses, reveal microbiome–host bidirectional interactions, enable more targeted interventions, and fully understand potential synergistic effects. Moreover, the composition of an individual’s initial gut microbiota should be paid attention and determining which gut microbiota are likely to be resistant to colonizing the probiotics used will facilitate clinical applications. What is more, future clinical trials should standardize research methods to facilitate comparison across clinical results.

The gut microbiome plays an important role in the physiology and pathophysiology of constipation. It interacts with the immune system, the ENS, and the CNS, and has the ability to modify intestinal secretion and hormonal milieu. Certain probiotics exert modulatory effects on the host’s physiological processes and can therefore be used to treat constipation. Notably, specific microbial metabolites, such as SCFAs and tryptophan catabolites, and specific signaling pathways, such as TLR-dependent pathways, play central roles in microbiota-mediated intestinal function. Therefore, approaches that manipulate SCFAs and tryptophan catabolites or target 5-HT and TLR pathways are likely to be viable therapeutic strategies for the treatment of constipation. In addition, enteric coating materials that encapsulate microbial metabolites have a significant effect on constipation and are an extraordinarily promising treatment approach. Although these results are encouraging, there are challenges ahead. No consistent “microbial signature” biomarker has been determined for constipation, and evidence for the efficacy of probiotics remains inconsistent due to the high heterogeneity of the individual studies, inconsistent criteria, and strain-specific effects. The precise mechanism of intestinal host–microbial interactions also requires further investigation.

In conclusion, the gut microbiome holds considerable potential as a source of biomarkers for the diagnosis and therapeutic interventions of constipation. Future mechanism-based studies of the gut microbiome will provide insight into next-generation personalized care.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

