Metabolic phenotyping of the human microbiome

The human microbiome has been identified as having a key role in health and numerous diseases. Trillions of microbial cells and viral particles comprise the microbiome, each representing modifiable working elements of an intricate bioactive ecosystem. The significance of the human microbiome as it relates to human biology has progressed through culture-dependent (for example, media-based methods) and, more recently, molecular (for example, genetic sequencing and metabolomic analysis) techniques. The latter have become increasingly popular and evolved from being used for taxonomic identification of microbiota to elucidation of functional capacity (sequencing) and metabolic activity (metabolomics). This review summarises key elements of the human microbiome and its metabolic capabilities within the context of health and disease.

It has been established that communities of microorganisms, microbiota, reside on or within nearly every physical substrate on our planet (and associated artificial satellites) 1– 10. Composed of organisms encompassing multiple divisions of the tree of life, such as protozoa 11– 16, fungi 17– 20, viruses 21– 24 and prokaryota 25– 29, these microbial communities are intricate ecological structures driven by the production and exchange of metabolic products 29– 34. Indeed, these communities can cause metabolic cascades that have measurable influences on their macroscopic hosts. Through recognition of these influences, the importance of the microbiome as an integral component of human biology has come to be appreciated, not only by microbiologists but by clinicians and the general public. This review describes essential background to the human microbiome, providing an overview of microbiomes delineated by human anatomy within the framework of microbe–host metabolic interaction before focusing on these interactions as they relate to the gut.

Present from birth to death, an individual’s microbiome maintains a constant presence as a chimeric organ 35– 38. Seeding of this microbial system occurs at the beginning of life via transmission of a mother’s microbiome to her infant during the birthing process 39– 43. Influenced by direct environmental transmission, a delivered infant will inherit either the mother’s vaginal and faecal microbiota as it passes through the birthing canal or the skin microbiota during caesarean delivery 39– 41. Either route of delivery imposes prolonged multifaceted effects on the infant 44, 45. Vaginal birth confers a microbiome of the mother’s urogenital system which has undergone specific alterations throughout the pregnancy which are conducive to the development of robust and functional immune and gastrointestinal (GI) systems of the infant 42. Alternatively, numerous deleterious health effects for infants delivered by caesarean section have been identified. Immediate influences upon the infant include increased risk of exposure to antibiotic-resistant bacteria from the mother’s skin 40. Long-term insults to health arising from caesarean delivery include greater risk of developing obesity, sensitivity to food and inhalant allergens, and asthma 44– 48. In light of increasing awareness of potential negative health effects associated with caesarean delivery, an experimental procedure of vaginal seeding has been developed to simulate the microbial exposures present in vaginal birth via administration of vaginal swabs to newly delivered infants 49. However, implementing vaginal seeding is a contentious issue, and many clinical practitioners are wary of the intervention prior to extensive investigation of its effects 50, 51.

Through the transition from infancy to childhood and onto adulthood, the microbiome of an individual stabilises while still being influenced by drug exposure 29, 56– 59, physical activity 60– 70, the environment 3 and diet 21, 71, 72 (discussed more elaborately in proceeding sections) 73, 74. The microbiome changes again with old age 75– 77, and microbes ultimately contribute to decomposition after death 78– 80.

Microbial communities take form within any accessible area of a host’s body. The defined niches with stable communities in humans and other mammals are currently generalised to the respiratory system 20, 81– 84, nasal 25, 85, 86 and oral 17, 25, 26, 87 cavities, skin 22, 25, 26, 41, 88– 93, vagina and urinary tract 25, 40, 41, 49, 94– 96, and GI system 21, 25– 27, 29, 36– 38, 40, 97. For each of these unique communities, varied challenges are involved in their sampling and analysis and in interpreting their impact on health or disease.

Comprising a relatively large surface area (~1.8 m 2 for an adult human) and an array of subsystems defined by folds, crevices, pH, secretion profiles, and environmental exposures, the skin supports highly varied microbial communities functioning in diverse ecological constraints ( Figure 1A) 89, 98, 99. Ecological partitioning of the skin microbiome is further defined by elementary biological traits of the host. Microbial composition at specific anatomical locations coordinates with gender 98, 100, 101. Indeed, topical sampling of hand palms demonstrates greater diversity of bacterial taxa in women than men, and specific taxa are differentially abundant between the two sexes 100, 101. Similar results have been presented for other body sites, such as the thigh and torso 98, 100. Expectedly, cohabitation of sexually active partners results in a shared skin microbiome that accurately matches couples 86% of the time 100. Ancestral host genetics have also been demonstrated to influence the composition of the skin microbiome. Male participants of diverse ethnic backgrounds, all dwelling in a single geographic location, were shown to have microbial differences specific to ethnicity 102. Furthermore, a study of both monozygotic and dizygotic twins described an association between Corynebacterium jeikeium and single-nucleotide polymorphisms of a host gene involved in epidermal barrier function 103. This finding suggests that the establishment of specific skin microbes is dependent on heritable factors of the host. Despite such associations with the skin microbiome, ancestral genetics have been shown to exert a negligible influence on the gut microbiome, where instead other factors, such as environment, play a more profound role in the form and function of the microbial community 104.

Continuous environmental interaction unsurprisingly results in the skin being our most exposed microbial ecosystem. Environmental factors shown to be influential include hygiene routines, topical medication and cosmetic use, and residential environment (for example, rural versus urban) 89, 91, 98, 101, 105. Despite its vulnerability to external perturbations, an individual’s skin microbiome maintains a consistent core structure 106. Though capable of opportunistic pathogenicity under certain conditions, constituents of this stable community perform homeostatic functions and act as a barrier against transient and potentially pathogenic species, subsequently maintaining a role in a variety of cutaneous conditions 93, 106– 108. Among these residential members are strains of Propionibacterium acnes, the fungal genus Malassezia, and Staphylococcus epidermidis 106, 108– 110. Lipophilic P. acnes and species of Malassezia proliferate in sebaceous gland–rich body sites, such as the face and back 89, 108, 109. The rich pool of triglycerides found in sebum are hydrolysed by microbes to produce fatty acids that assist in bacterial adherence and maintaining an acidic pH 108, 111. Low pH environmental conditions select for lipophilic commensals while inhibiting colonisation by potentially pathogenic strains of Staphylococcus aureus and Staphylococcus pyogenes 108, 112. P. acnes additionally contributes to suppression of methicillin-resistant S. aureus through glycerol fermentation to short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) and in particular propionic acid, which also inhibits growth of Escherichia coli and Candida albicans 107, 112, 113.

The oral cavity microbiome represents a reasonably well-defined ecosystem ( Figure 1B). Structure morphology and different tissue types within the human mouth offer a variety of microbial habitats, further delineated by conditions of oxygenation, pH, and nutrient availability 114, 115. Control of the oral microbiome is mediated in concert by factors produced by the host and the microbiota 114, 116– 118.

Periodontal disease is also caused by microorganisms. Prolonged biofilm formation at the interface of gingival tissue and the tooth surface leads to the accumulation of pathogenic bacteria that exacerbate inflammation through cytotoxic compounds such as lipopolysaccharides 116, 122. Resultant bleeding from inflammation provides a source of iron from heme, a molecule used by pathogenic microbes (for example, Porphyromonas gingivalis) 116, 122. Without disruption, periodontitis-associated microbes thrive and, with continued immunological antagonisation of the gingival tissue, contribute to induction of a dysregulated inflammatory response, permanently damaging connective tissue and bone 116, 122.

At one time, the human lung had been considered a sterile biological system unless challenged with disease. Now, however, it is clear that a respiratory microbiome exists ( Figure 1C).

Although our understanding of the respiratory microbiome’s general role in health is continuing to evolve, there is evidence of compositional alterations in the asthmatic lung microbiome in response to corticosteroid treatment 131, 137. Patients with asthma, regardless of whether the asthma is resistant or sensitive to corticosteroid treatment, show reduced Bacteroidetes abundance and increased levels of Proteobacteria and Actinobacteria species 131. Additionally, host-derived peripheral blood monocytes from the lungs of corticosteroid-resistant patients had inhibited corticosteroid response when co-cultured with an isolate of Haemophilus parainfluenzae, a potential pathogen associated with asthma 131.

The urogenital microbiome influences female health in a variety of ways. It is also responsible for seeding the microbiome of infants passing through the birth canal in the case of vaginal delivery. The establishment of this microbiome can have lifelong influences on the health of the infant 43, 44, 139– 141.

The male urogenital tract microbiome has received less attention. However, emerging investigation of the subject suggests health-relevant microbial activity within this system. Circumcision significantly modifies microbial composition of the coronal sulci of the penis, decreasing the total microbial load, including anaerobic taxa putatively associated with BV 160, 161. Reduced HIV infection rates have independently been associated with circumcision, but the underlying factors of this protective effect are unknown 162.

Of the microbial communities delineated by human physiology, those associated with the GI system have been investigated with the greatest intensity ( Figure 1E) 12, 21, 27, 29.

Gut microbiome analysis is carried out predominantly on the terminal end of the GI tract because of the relative ease with which samples can be non-invasively acquired as stool. These samples provide insight into the intestinal microbiome as excreted samples retain microbial cells and metabolites from the lumen and mucosa, although it is important to note that stool does not provide an exact recapitulation of the intestine’s various subsites 163, 164, 186.

The GI system acts as the primary site for the uptake and metabolic processing of nutrients. The gut accordingly contributes substantially to health regulation. As extensive evidence now indicates, intestinal microbes have similar significance in health maintenance and modulation of various disease states via interaction with the host’s biology and intestinal environment. Microbial contributions to this health dynamic are mediated by numerous metabolic modalities. The most prominent such metabolic circuit is between the microbiome and ingested nutrients, whereby microbes use dietary nutrients to proliferate and produce metabolites, such as SCFAs, that are involved in cross-talk with the host ( Figure 2) 29, 37, 72, 166, 167, 187, 188.

SCFAs act locally within the intestinal system but also impact on hepatic, neurological and immunological function 158, 159, 188– 192. As previously noted, microbial SCFA generation results primarily from polysaccharide utilisation, although it has also been demonstrated that some gut microbes have the capacity to produce butyrate from the metabolism of protein 188, 193– 195.

Propionate enters systemic circulation through the portal vein, where it is metabolised primarily in the liver while acetate is more broadly circulated, for example, crossing the blood–brain barrier, where it may influence satiety through action on the hypothalamus 190. On the basis of murine studies, gut-derived acetate and propionate have separately been suggested to influence asthma 159, 198, 199. While regulatory T–cell activity is enhanced by acetate-mediated inhibition of histone deacetylase 9 (HDAC9), resulting in suppression of environmental allergen hypersensitivity, propionate affects lung dendritic cells, dampening promotion of T helper type 2 cell–driven inflammation while leaving the cells’ phagocytic ability intact 81, 159, 198– 200.

BAs have been shown to be at the centre of a metabolic interplay between the host and microbes 72, 169, 170, 174, 176, 201– 203. Following post-meal metabolic cues, bile released from the canalicular membrane of hepatocytes enters the intestinal system. Primary BAs, cholic acid and chenodeoxycholic acid are converted from cholesterol and conjugated with taurine or glycine and, within the context of host physiology, are used as detergents to allow intestinal absorption of dietary lipids and fat-soluble vitamins 201, 203, 204. Microbial bile salt hydrolases (BSHs) facilitate the hydrolysis of conjugated BAs (CBAs), converting the compounds back to BAs, which permits small intestine reabsorption or additional metabolic processing 203, 204. Unconjugated and glycine-CBA absorption by passive diffusion and active transport creates a circulating pool of BAs, establishing continuous bioavailability of the compounds 202– 204. As detergents, BAs have the capacity to disrupt the lipid membrane of bacterial cells, subsequently exerting considerable influence on the microbiome. Microbes accordingly employ myriad strategies to circumvent the antimicrobial action of BAs, such as outer membrane lipid and protein modifications 203, 204. In conjunction with BA resistance, microbial alterations to BAs, affecting the hydrophobicity of the compounds, also enable some microbes to evade lipid membrane degradation while creating an inhospitable environment for competing organisms 203, 204. Microbial BSH-driven hydrolysis of CBAs to unconjugated primary BAs enables subsequent conversion to secondary BAs deoxycholic acid (DCA) and lithocholic acid 203, 204. DCA, in particular, accumulates in the enterohepatic BA pool. Relatively high concentrations of DCA result from intestinal diffusion and hepatic reuptake that is facilitated by the compound’s hydrophobicity and the human liver’s inability to rehydroxylate DCA 203.

Among the numerous detrimental effects of obesity, evidence supports a role for microbial-derived DCA as a potent tumour promoter, contributing to the development of hepatocellular carcinoma and the colorectal cancer precursor colorectal adenomas 72, 202, 210– 212. Although the associated mechanisms involved have not been studied in the human gut, DCA-driven hepatocellular carcinoma in mice is suggested to result from the compound’s provocation of the senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP) in hepatic stellate cells 211. SASP is characterised by broad alterations in gene expression and secretory profile, which affect neighbouring cells through numerous factors, namely the release of cytokines (for example, interleukin-1α and -1β), insulin-like growth factor–binding proteins, NO and reactive oxygen species and potentially the glycoprotein fibronectin 211, 213. The influence of DCA on colorectal tumorigenesis is proposed to mediate derangement of epidermal growth factor receptor–mitogen-activated protein kinase (EGFR-MAPK) regulation, specifically with DCA preventing degradation of EGFR through calcium signalling of MAPK 210. There is still much to be elucidated with respect to the interactions between gut microbes, BAs and health. Furthermore, SCFAs and BAs represent only a small component of the numerous bioactive compounds within the gut environment and thus considerable additional investigation in this area is needed.

Examination of microbiome–host interaction has revealed the integral role of microbiota in health and disease. Extensive characterisation of the microbiome’s taxonomic structure and associations between states of microbial composition and aspects of health have established the groundwork for recognition of the microbiome as a component of human biology. However, the challenge now lies in elucidating the mechanisms underlying the associations between our microbes and health. Metabolic phenotyping and identification of the microbial metabolites interacting with the host will be pivotal to this challenge. With such knowledge, progress can be made in the development of defined microbial cultures (for example, probiotics) and substrates conducive to selective growth or function of microbes (for example, prebiotics) for health enhancement. In short, there is need and opportunity for the innovative deployment of metabolic phenotyping of the human microbiome to develop a new generation of interventions to improve health.

BA, bile acid; BSH, bile salt hydrolase; BV, bacterial vaginosis; CBA, conjugated bile acid; DCA, deoxycholic acid; EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; GI, gastrointestinal; HDAC, histone deacetylase; MAPK, mitogen-activated protein kinase; NO, nitric oxide; SASP, senescence-associated secretory phenotype; SCFA, short-chain fatty acid; T2-high, type 2-high; TMAO, trimethylamine-N-oxide

F1000 Faculty Reviews are commissioned from members of the prestigious F1000 Faculty and are edited as a service to readers. In order to make these reviews as comprehensive and accessible as possible, the referees provide input before publication and only the final, revised version is published. The referees who approved the final version are listed with their names and affiliations but without their reports on earlier versions (any comments will already have been addressed in the published version).

The referees who approved this article are:

