Associations Between Nutrition, Gut Microbiome, and Health in A Novel Nonhuman Primate Model

Red-shanked doucs (Pygathrix nemaeus) are endangered, foregut-fermenting colobine primates which are difficult to maintain in captivity. There are critical gaps in our understanding of their natural lifestyle, including dietary habits such as consumption of leaves, unripe fruit, flowers, seeds, and other plant parts. There is also a lack of understanding of enteric adaptations, including their unique microflora. To address these knowledge gaps, we used the douc as a model to study relationships between gastrointestinal microbial community structure and lifestyle. We analyzed published fecal samples as well as detailed dietary history from doucs with four distinct lifestyles (wild, semi-wild, semi-captive, and captive) and determined gastrointestinal bacterial microbiome composition using 16S rRNA sequencing. A clear gradient of microbiome composition was revealed along an axis of natural lifestyle disruption, including significant associations with diet, biodiversity, and microbial function. We also identified potential microbial biomarkers of douc dysbiosis, including Bacteroides and Prevotella, which may be related to health. Our results suggest a gradient-like shift in captivity causes an attendant shift to severe gut dysbiosis, thereby resulting in gastrointestinal issues.

The primate gastrointestinal (GI) tract is home to trillions of bacteria that play major roles in digestion and metabolism, immune system development, pathogen resistance, and other important aspects of host health and behavior1–4. While there has been substantial progress in understanding the role microbial communities play in human health and disease1–3, as well as numerous microbiome studies in non-primate animal models such as mice5–9, somewhat less attention has been given to host-associated microbiomes and lifestyle, including diet, in nonhuman primates (NHPs). Developing a better understanding of the link between primate microbial communities and lifestyle, including diet and health, is important not only in the context of primate ecology, but may also have profound implications for use of NHPs as model systems for lifestyle disruption and associated microbial changes.

Here, we focus on a subset of a rich dataset we collected over a two-year period across three countries, including a comprehensive sampling of the majority of doucs in captivity. These samples have been used in work published previously31 in a broader meta-analysis framework, where a putative convergence was observed across various primate species (including humans) with increasing levels of generalized lifestyle disruption. While the broadness of such an overview was valuable in demonstrating overall trends across species, it may also mask intraspecific effects underlying a lifestyle gradient, and also limits the resolution and interpretability of correlations that can be drawn to specific lifestyle components, including diet and health, which themselves may play very different biological roles in the various species under investigation. By focusing in depth on the dietary and microbial facets associated with a single species across increasingly unnatural lifestyle conditions, we are powered to make specific conclusions relating these covariates in a common context.

All work in this study was carried out following the International Primatological Society Ethical Guidelines for the Use of Non-Human Primates in Research, and the American Society for Primatologist’s Principles for the Ethical Treatment of Non-Human Primates. All work in this study was reviewed and approved by the University of Minnesota Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee, and it was determined that no formal approval was needed because the work did not involve the handling of live animals. All laboratory protocols were reviewed and approved by the University of Minnesota Institutional Biosafety Committee under protocol number 1303–30480 H. Approvals were obtained from appropriate governmental and organizational authorities for plant and animal feces collection at all sites. These included approvals from Philadelphia Zoo, Singapore Zoo, Endangered Primate Rescue Center, Department of Forest Protection (Da Nang City, Vietnam), Da Nang University (Da Nang City, Vietnam), and Son Tra Nature Reserve Ranger Force (Da Nang City, Vietnam).

Fecal samples (n = 111 samples, at least 35 subjects) were collected opportunistically immediately after defecation from captive (n = 12 samples, 2 subjects), semi-captive (n = 15 samples, 7 subjects), semi-wild (n = 18 samples, 18 subjects), and wild (n = 66 samples, 8 or more subjects) doucs (Pygathrix nemaeus) in 2012–2013. For the wild individuals, fecal samples (n = 26 samples) were collected from eight uniquely identifiable individuals. The remaining fecal samples (n = 39) collected from the wild population originated from individuals that could not be uniquely identified, and as such these samples could have been from any of the 8 identified wild individuals or others never identified. Samples were freshly frozen after collection at −20 °C, and remained frozen during air transport to the USA. Once in the USA, samples were frozen at −80 °C until processing. The microbiota of the fecal samples were analyzed previously in a meta-analysis examining broader relationships between captivity and the microbiome31. In the wild, it can be difficult to distinguish which fecal samples came from which subjects, thus we have clarified differences between sample number and subject number above. For this analysis, doucs housed at the Endangered Primate Rescue Center (EPRC) in Cuc Phuong National Park, Ninh Binh, Vietnam served as the semi-wild population, as the doucs there live a lifestyle (including environment and diet) representing an intermediate state between wild and semi-captive. Specifically, these doucs are fed a wide variety of plants foraged daily by EPRC staff and allowed to choose which to eat. They are also fed 3x per day and allowed to eat throughout the day, which is more representative of the natural condition. Lastly, for two hours each day (approximately 12–2 pm), all staff and visitors leave the compound to allow all the primates to sleep, which is similar to how the doucs behave in the wild (Clayton, personal communication). They are not offered any supplemental dietary items, such as ripe fruits, vegetables, or vitamin supplements, all of which are fed to doucs housed at traditional zoological institutions. Additionally, while the doucs are housed in enclosures, they are kept outside year-round. However, Cuc Phuong National Park is outside of the wild douc home range. Doucs housed at the Singapore Zoo served as the semi-captive population, as they live a lifestyle (including environment and diet) representing an intermediate state between semi-wild and captive. Specifically, they are fed a diet richer in plant species compared to the captive population (15 species vs. 1 species), however, as in the captive population, their diet includes ripe fruits, vegetables, and vitamin supplements. The plants offered to the doucs are picked by staff daily and delivered to them. Additionally, the climate of Singapore is closer to that of their native habitat in Vietnam, as both countries are located in Southeast Asia. Doucs housed at the Philadelphia Zoo served as the captive population, as they live in artificial environments compared to their semi-wild and wild counterparts. The doucs are fed only a single plant species, and consume a traditional zoological diet. They also remain indoors year-round. Doucs inhabiting Son Tra Nature Reserve, Da Nang, Vietnam (16°06′–16°09′N, 108°13′–108°21′E) served as the wild population in this comparative study32,33 (Supplemental Fig. 1). Son Tra is located only 10 km from the heart of Da Nang City, which is the third largest city in Vietnam. The nature reserve is comprised of 4,439 total ha and, of those, 4,190 ha is covered by both primary and secondary forests32. Da Nang has two seasons every year, wet (September until March) and dry (April until August). We collected samples from March 2013–June 2013. The samples collected in March were collected at the end of the month. Thus, the wild douc samples were collected in the dry season. The wild doucs are the only population who forage for their preferred native plant species on their own.

Central to our re-analysis of these douc samples is the concept of lifestyle. Here we define lifestyle as a synthetic variable, an amalgamation of environmental factors that comprise the living conditions of a population. As such, this umbrella variable is a proxy for climate, diet, and geographically-localized microbial exposure, among potentially numerous other variables. This is broadly similar to the meaning of lifestyle as applied to human populations, where the descriptive comparison of different global cultures is similarly subject to innumerable covariates, known and unknown, under a similar umbrella34,35. We independently assess dietary information, which has been shown to be a critical component of lifestyle in context of the microbiome, but it is not our intention to attribute changes in microbiota, function, or health indicators to diet alone. Hence, our focus is foremost on performing correlations and gradient analysis with the backbone gradient comprised of the latent ordinal correlate “lifestyle.” We accordingly pepper this central analysis with auxiliary analyses and conjecture where appropriate to explain the trends observed.

Total DNA from each fecal sample was extracted as described with some modifications36. Briefly, two rounds of bead-beating were carried out in the presence of NaCl and sodium dodecyl sulfate, followed by sequential ammonium acetate and isopropanol precipitations; precipitated nucleic acids were treated with DNase-free RNase (Roche); and DNA was purified with the QIAmp® DNA Stool Mini Kit (QIAGEN, Valencia, CA), according to manufacturer’s recommendations. DNA quantity was assessed using a NanoDrop 1000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Massachusetts, USA).

The bacterial 16S rRNA gene was analyzed using primers 515F and 806R, which flanked the V4 hypervariable region of bacterial 16S rRNAs37. The oligonucleotide primers included Illumina sequencing adapters at the 5′ ends and template specific sequences at the 3′ ends. The primer sequences were: 515F (forward) 5′ GTGCCAGCMGCCGCGGTAA 3′ and 806R (reverse) 5′ GGACTACHVGGGTWTCTAAT 3′37. The 16S rRNA PCR amplification protocol from the earth microbiome project was used38. Each sample was amplified in two replicate 25-µL PCR reactions and pooled into a single volume of 50 µL for each sample. The amplification mix contained 13 μL of PCR grade water (MoBio, Carlsbad, CA), 10 μL of 5 PRIME HotMasterMix (5 PRIME, Gaithersburg, MD), 0.5 μL of each fusion primer, and 1.0 μL of template DNA in a reaction volume of 25 μL. PCR conditions were an initial denaturation at 94 °C for 3 m; 35 cycles of 94 °C 45 s, 50 °C for 60 s, and 72 °C for 90 s; and a final 10 m extension at 72 °C. Following PCR, concentration of PCR products was determined by a PicoGreen assay. Equal amounts of samples were pooled, and size selection was performed using the Caliper XT (cut at 386 bp +/− 15%). Final quantification was performed via a PicoGreen assay and assessment on a Bioanalyzer 2100 (Agilent, Palo Alto, California) using an Agilent High Sensitivity chip. The PCR amplicons were sequenced at the University of Minnesota Genomics Center (UMGC) using Illumina MiSeq and 2 × 300 base paired-end reads (Illumina, San Diego, California).

Raw sequences were analyzed with QIIME 1.8.0 pipeline39. The demultiplexed sequences from the UMGC were subjected to the following quality filter: 150 bp < length < 1,000 bp; average quality score >25. Preprocessed sequences were then clustered at 97% nucleotide sequence similarity level. For the diversity and taxonomic analyses, the open-reference-based OTU picking protocol in QIIME was used with GreenGenes 13_8 as the reference database40 using the USEARCH algorithm41. Unmatched reads against the reference database which also did not cluster later in the open reference pipeline were excluded from the downstream analysis. Read depth was relatively uniform across lifestyles (Supplemental Fig. 2). Taxonomy information was then assigned to each sequence cluster using RDP classifier 2.242. Closed-reference OTUs of chloroplast origin were filtered out with QIIME, and samples were rarefied to 52,918 reads for the downstream analysis.

To ensure robustness of statistical analyses in light of the varying number of fecal samples per individual in the lifestyle groups, we collapsed all replicates that could have possibly originated from a single douc into one averaged sample for that douc. We also collapsed all stool samples originating from potentially ambiguous wild doucs into a single “unknown” wild sample. This reduced the number of samples considered to 36 (a single sample per uniquely identifiable individual, plus one additional sample representing the average of all unknown wild individuals in the wild lifestyle). Specifically, after collapse, there were 2 captive samples, 7 semi-captive samples, 18 semi-wild samples, and 9 wild samples. Data from this secondary validation round are presented in supplementary material for each relevant result. P-values reported by these tests were FDR-corrected using the Benjamini-Hochberg method.

All sequencing data are deposited at the European Bioinformatics Institute under project number PRJEB11414. Additionally, all R code and raw non-sequence data used for these analyses is freely available on the project GitHub site located at https://github.com/jbclayton83/douc-microbes-paper.

One population of wild doucs was observed between January and August 2013 in Son Tra Nature Reserve, Da Nang, Vietnam. All occurrences of observed feeding behaviors were recorded. Identified plant parts ingested were recorded and reachable feeding trees were marked. The plant parts of specific trees which were prevalent in their diet and were available in sufficient quantities were sampled and dried to 95% dry matter as per a previously established method57. Samples were sent to the Biochemical Lab at The Agriculture and Forestry University in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam, for chemical analysis. Concentrations of crude protein, simple sugars, crude fiber, calcium, sodium, manganese, potassium and iron were determined on a dry matter basis, all of which follow AOAC methods 920.152, 973.18C, and 974.0658. Additionally, all plants fed to semi-wild doucs during a two-week period in October 2012 were also sent for chemical analysis for comparison. Chemical compositions of semi-captive and captive diets were constructed using the precise dietary components administered by the facilities. Nutrient contents were compiled from laboratory nutrient analysis on a concentration per dry matter basis. Wild and semi-wild nutrient contents were constructed by observed frequency.

Fecal microbiome diversity showed a steady decline from wild towards captive environments. The number of OTUs in the doucs decreased in a gradient-like fashion with the highest number in wild doucs (4231.68 ± 584.37 OTUs), and the lowest number in captive doucs (2332.08 ± 180.30 OTUs). Consistent with the gradient hypothesis, the semi-wild doucs (2845.50 ± 494.98 OTUs) and semi-captive doucs (2696.93 ± 417.00 OTUs) were intermediate. Pairwise comparison of all populations by OTU abundance showed statistically significant differences in OTU count biodiversity between all groups (p < 0.01) (Fig. 1A). In addition to investigating overall OTU diversity (i.e., number of OTUs) amongst the four unique douc populations, other alpha diversity (i.e., within-sample diversity) metrics were calculated. The mean Shannon diversity index, which measures species evenness, was highly significant across the four douc populations (wild: 7.86 ± 0.34; semi-wild: 7.07 ± 0.55; semi-captive: 7.11 ± 0.53; captive: 6.65 ± 0.53; ANOVA, p = 4.3 × 10−18). Based on the calculated Shannon diversity indices, the wild douc microbiome was the most even of the four douc populations (Fig. 1B). These trends are robust to collapsing samples by individual (Supplemental Fig. 4).

Beta diversity calculations were performed to assess whether significant differences between populations were present, using unweighted UniFrac distance (Fig. 2), as well as the weighted UniFrac and non-phylogenetic Bray-Curtis metrics (Supplemental Fig. 5). Analysis of unweighted UniFrac distance measurements is most effective at detecting differences in community membership when considering abundance differences among rare taxa59. An Adonis test on unweighted UniFrac distances revealed that fecal microbiome grouped statistically by douc population (Adonis p = 0.001), suggesting that each douc population had a unique microbiome. It also suggests that lifestyle has a major influence on gut microbial community structure, as doucs living under the most unnatural conditions had gut microbiomes most disparate from free-living wild doucs. Overall, the results of our beta diversity analyses indicated that microbiome composition was distinct for each of the four douc populations examined in this study at the 97% OTU and genus levels. Further, Fig. 2 reveals a clear gradient by naturalness of lifestyle along PC1, the primary axis of differentiation.

Broad phylum-level taxonomic summarization revealed trends among the fecal microbiomes of the four douc populations included in this study. The fecal microbiomes of wild, semi-wild, semi-captive, and captive doucs were dominated by the phylum Firmicutes. Bacteroidetes was found in very low abundance in both the wild and semi-wild populations. In contrast, Bacteroidetes was the second most abundant phylum found in both the semi-captive and captive populations. Additionally, Verrucomicrobia was much more abundant in the semi-wild fecal microbiome than the other lifestyles examined (Supplemental Figs 6,7). Bacteroides and Prevotella, as well as Methanosphaera, CF231, Treponema, and YRC22 were highly positively correlated with captivity level (all polyserial rho ≥ 0.71, p < 1 × 10−6) (Figs 3 and
4; Supplemental Fig. 7; Supplemental Table 1a). Conversely, Adlercreutzia, Anaerostipes, Blautia, Campylobacter, Dehalobacterium, Dorea, and Oscillospira were much less abundant with increasing captivity (all polyserial rho ≤ −0.65, p < 1 × 10−6) (Figs 3 and
4; Supplemental Fig. 7; Supplemental Table 1a). Although the genus Akkermansia shows a similar trend (polyserial rho = −0.57, p = 1.29 × 10−09), its abundance peaks slightly in the semi-wild population (Figs 3 and
4; Supplemental Fig. 7). These taxonomic trends are robust to collapsing samples by individual (Supplemental Table 1b; Supplemental Fig. 8).

In addition to examining relative abundances of bacterial taxa between douc groups, we calculated and compared the log Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes ratio for each douc group (Supplemental Fig. 10A,B). The log of the Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes (F:B) ratio, which has been suggested as a measure of energy harvest capacity by microbial communities5,19,60, was higher in the wild population than in the semi-wild, semi-captive, and captive populations (4.64 ± 0.94; 3.78 ± 1.14; 1.94 ± 0.81; 1.43 ± 0.50, respectively). A Kruskal-Wallis test indicated there is a significant difference in F:B ratio between at least one lifestyle group and the others. Pairwise significance between specific groups, with the exception of captive versus semi-captive (Wilcoxon rank-sum p = 0.05), were significantly different from one another for all lifestyle pairs with p < 0.01. In fact, there appears to be a relationship between lifestyle and the F:B ratio, as we see the highest ratio in wild doucs, the second highest ratio in the semi-wild doucs, the third highest ratio in semi-captive doucs, and finally the lowest ratio in captive doucs (Supplemental Fig. 10a). These trends are robust to collapsing samples by individual (Supplemental Fig. 10b).

The functional profiles of the microbial sample in this study were investigated employing PICRUSt. In captivity, we observed a general trend toward increased protein metabolism at the expense of fatty acid metabolism. Specifically, the KEGG Ortholog (KO) super-heading “Amino acid metabolism” was highly correlated with captivity status (polyserial rho = 0.85, p = 2.2 × 10−11) and the super-heading “Lipid metabolism” was highly anticorrelated (polyserial rho = −0.89, p = 7.3 × 10−12). Perhaps due to the presence of chloroplasts in the closed-reference data used for PICRUSt analysis, the photosynthesis and antenna proteins pathway was downregulated in captivity, but the porphyrin and chlorophyll metabolism pathway was upregulated. With the exception of tetracycline biosynthesis, antibiotics-related pathways, including vancomycin biosynthesis, beta-lactam resistance, and penicillin & cephalosporin biosynthesis, were positively associated with captivity. Certain xenobiotic (mainly industrial pollutants) degradation pathways were positively associated with captivity, including ethylbenzene, styrene, and toluene. Other xenobiotic pathways (such as plant toxins and wartime chemicals) were negatively associated with captivity, including xylene, dioxins, atrazine, and chloroalkanes & chloroalkenes. Lastly, chemotaxis, invasion, flagellar assembly, and cytoskeleton genes were enriched in wild doucs. All p-values for results in this paragraph were less than <1 × 10−2 (Fig. 5; Supplemental Table 2a). These trends are robust to collapsing samples by individual (Supplemental Table 2b).

The diets of the douc populations were compared to determine what factors, if any, could have contributed to the differences in microbiome composition observed (Table 1). Wild doucs fed on 57 different plant species. Sixty-one percent of all identified plant parts observed being ingested were collected and chemically analyzed. The semi-wild douc population were offered 60 plant species over the course of one year, 16 of which were never consumed61. In contrast to the high diet diversity (i.e., number of plant species) consumed by the wild and semi-wild doucs, the semi-captive and captive doucs consumed a much less diverse diet. Specifically, the semi-captive doucs were presented with approximately 15 plant species and the captive douc diet only contained one plant species31 (Fig. 6A). The semi-wild population was observed feeding on 35 different plant genera over one year, and the wild population was observed feeding on 41 different plant genera over approximately seven months (Fig. 6B; Table 2).

Nutritional composition of food items included in wild, semi-wild, semi-captive, and captive douc diets differed. Specifically, the crude protein concentration of the semi-wild, semi-captive, and captive douc diets was higher than that of the wild douc diet. The wild and semi-wild douc diets contained much more Acid Detergent Fiber (ADF) and Neutral Detergent Fiber (NDF) than did the semi-captive and captive diets. We examined the four douc diets for differences in amount of three macrominerals, including calcium, potassium, and sodium. Of the diets examined, the semi-wild douc diet contained more calcium than did the wild, semi-captive, and captive douc diets. Additionally, the diet consumed by wild doucs contained more potassium than did the diets consumed by semi-wild, semi-captive, or captive doucs. The diets of semi-wild and wild doucs contained considerably less sodium than the semi-captive and captive doucs. The semi-wild douc diet contained more iron and zinc than the wild, semi-captive, or captive diets. The concentration of sugar was not available for all lifestyle groups. The captive douc diet had the highest amount of soluble sugars compared to wild and semi-wild diets (Table 3).

In this study, the douc was used to study the relationships between lifestyle and microbial composition and function within the gastrointestinal tract. Doucs are folivorous Old World monkeys, that are anatomically, physiologically, and ecologically unique amongst the living primates62. They possess specialized GI systems similar to ruminants, allowing for the digestion and utilization of extremely high fiber diets10,11. For doucs, mutualistic microbial populations are indispensable to digestive processes such as the fermentation of polysaccharides and subsequent production of short-chain fatty acids63–65. Although the digestive specializations possessed by doucs have allowed them to thrive in their native habitat, the same specializations appear to challenge their survival in captivity, as they are highly susceptible to gastrointestinal disorders when maintained on commercially prepared diets in captive situations12–14. In order to better understand the link between lifestyle, gut microbial communities, and health, we examined the fecal microbiomes of four douc populations living four distinct lifestyles (wild, semi-wild, semi-captive, and captive).

Studies have shown that present-day (i.e., modern) humans have lost a considerable portion of their natural (i.e., historical) microbial diversity35,66,67. Reduced bacterial diversity is often viewed as a negative indicator of health68. 16S rRNA sequencing results revealed that captive doucs had a marked reduction in gut bacterial alpha diversity when compared to wild and semi-wild doucs, as we reported recently31. Considering that doucs often fail to thrive in captivity, this was a salient finding. Not only was a reduction in diversity detected in captive doucs, but a gradient-like decrease in diversity related to lifestyle was observed, as the level of diversity observed in the semi-wild doucs was intermediate between wild and semi-captive doucs, and the level of diversity seen in semi-captive doucs was intermediate between semi-captive and captive doucs. This trend is consistent between metrics of richness and evenness, and suggest that lifestyle factors, especially dietary composition, and gut bacterial diversity are interrelated for doucs. This is similar to what has been shown in humans and other organisms35,69–73.

Beta-diversity metrics revealed each douc population had a unique microbiome. Weighted UniFrac ordination, although maintaining clear group separation, did not recover a clear gradient, whereas Bray-Curtis appears similar to Unweighted UniFrac in visibly resolving the lifestyle gradient with PC1. This implies that the taxonomic membership of the gut microbiome, more than the abundance of each member, plays a dominant role in uncovering the gradient between lifestyles. Moreover, tree-independent unsupervised hierarchical clustering, utilizing only the taxonomic features significantly correlated to lifestyle gradient, preserved lifestyle group membership without erroneously assigning any samples to the wrong lifestyle groups, and found further structure within each group. This highlights the potential for using these taxa, or a subset thereof, as biomarkers capable of accurately differentiating between lifestyles.

Establishing a link between lifestyle and the microbiome, with specific emphasis on diet as a major component of lifestyle, was a major focal point of this study. GI microbiome composition is shaped by host genetics and environment, among many factors25,74. Examining four populations of the same NHP species living four very different lifestyles enabled assessment of the contribution of environmental factors independent of interspecific host variation towards shaping the microbiome. The various interacting environmental differences to which each douc population is exposed, such as climate and diet, suggest that lifestyle plays a fundamental role in shaping gut microbiome composition in wild and captive NHPs. Of these lifestyle factors that contribute to the establishment and maintenance of the gut microbiota, diet is likely the most influential, as studies have shown that changes in diet are directly associated with shifts in gut microbial community structure74–78. Examples exist of species adapting to specific dietary niches in both wild79 and captive73 settings via changes in their gut microbiota.

We examined the F:B ratio, as this ratio is important in humans in terms of dietary energy extraction5,93. We saw a higher F:B ratio in wild and semi-wild doucs compared to semi-captive and captive doucs. Ley et al.19 found an increased presence of Firmicutes with a corresponding decrease of Bacteroidetes correlating with an overall greater energy harvest19. Based on our results, it appears a decrease in the F:B ratio was clearly associated with lifestyle, notably diet, as the wild doucs had the highest ratio, followed by the semi-wild doucs, semi-captive doucs, and captive doucs. As previously mentioned, wild and semi-wild diets contained substantially more plant matter than captive diets. Naturally this equates to diets much higher in fiber fractions (ADF, NDF). Due to the scarcity of high-quality food items in the wild, we witnessed doucs ingesting very fibrous plant parts such as bark, mature leaves, flowers, seeds and unripe fruit. In the semi-wild facility, the doucs are habituated and know that they will receive leaf meals which provides them with a balance of fiber and soluble nutrients, making the ingestion of very fibrous items such as bark unnecessary. This can partially explain the higher reported NDF values in wild doucs when compared to semi-wild doucs. This relationship between F:B ratio and diet was expected, as our results show captive populations have diets lower in fiber fractions and higher in soluble carbohydrates, notably sugars, when compared to wild or semi-wild populations. It is plausible that wild doucs, which consume lower quality food items (bark, etc.), rely on a more efficient energy harvest strategy to obtain nutrients from their diet, and thus survival. Overall, the differences in the F:B ratio observed between populations living in natural versus unnatural settings, in addition to the presence of GI symptoms observed in the semi-captive and captive doucs in this study, suggests the ratio is a potential indicator of GI perturbation. A higher ratio is associated with a higher fermentation efficiency and increased VFA production5,79, but also obesity in humans5. Furthermore, doucs living under artificial (i.e., captive) conditions, which had a lower ratio in this study, often suffer from a wasting syndrome94,95.

PICRUSt-predicted functional pathways show a few interesting trends. Interestingly, captivity appears to be correlated with pathways spanning metabolism of antibiotics, nutrients, and xenobiotics, as well as other potentially relevant trends. In terms of antibiotics, resistance to beta-lactam antibiotics (penicillin and cephalosporin) was predicted to be enriched in captivity alongside biosynthesis of the same. Tetracycline biosynthesis genes, in contrast, were predicted to be elevated in the wild lifestyle and were not accompanied by a significant elevation in tetracycline resistance pathways. This pattern raises the possibility that the putative antibiotics pathways upregulated in captivity may be adapted for competition and virulence factor regulation96, whereas the pathways upregulated in the wild may play more of a quorum sensing role97.

There are some particularly intriguing trends concerning xenobiotic (pollutant) degradation. Xylene, dioxins, atrazine, and chloroalkane/ene degradation levels were predicted to be significantly associated with increasing wildness of lifestyle. Setting aside the expected presence of toxic chemicals in the douc’s natural diet, all of these compounds have been associated with wartime chemicals. Specifically, agent orange and other war chemicals deployed during the Vietnam Conflict are atrazines and dioxins. Dioxins are also byproducts of forest fires and several types of manufacturing processes. They are persistent in the environment98, and studies have shown that manufacturing workers who are in direct contact with dioxins have an increased risk for the development of cancer99. Son Tra Nature Reserve, the research site where wild douc fecal samples were collected, is located approximately 8 km from Da Nang International Airport. This airport is considered one of the world’s most dioxin-contaminated sites. There are over 187,000 square meters of contaminated soil located in several sites near the airport100. Similarly, jet fuel and industrial solvents often contain xylene, another xenobiotic upregulated in wilder lifestyles. The semi-wild population, which shows a peak in xylene degradation, is located in Singapore, which contains the largest xylene plant101. When refined into xylyl, xylene was also used as a wartime riot control agent102. Interestingly, the reverse (i.e. showing an increase with captivity) is observed for the degradation pathways of other pollutants often associated with industrialized economies such as ethylbenzenes103, styrenes (often industrially synthesized from ethylbenzenes)104, and toluene105, which may indicate forms of air contamination or other “first-world” pollutants. Given this, coupled with the fact that wild doucs consume plants rich in toxic compounds, we hypothesize that the microbiome of wild doucs serves a detoxification role for the animal and therefore is enriched for taxa with the ability to degrade local contaminants. Another interesting implication is that the microbiome may function as a geochemical sensor of environment, where passage through a host may modulate detection sensitivity for certain compounds through dietary biomagnification.

From a statistical standpoint, the treatment of microbiome data in a modern compositional framework106 frees microbial composition data from the simplex and allows many standard univariate statistical analysis techniques to apply107. With the observation that most bacterial abundances post-CLR transformation appeared to be roughly gaussian, the polyserial correlation test became applicable to assess the degree by which each microbial or functional pathway abundance was correlated with the latent continuous variable captured by the four ordered “lifestyle” categories. For additional conservatism, the nonparametric Wilcoxon rank-sum test was also used on the two extrema of the assumed gradient (the “Wild” and combined “(Semi-)captive” lifestyles), and the significance criterion for an association was amended to require both strong polyserial correlation (absolute rho above 0.3) as well as corrected Wilcoxon p-values less than 0.05. Importantly, this compositional framework allows for the highly-powered and gradient-centric interpretation and visualization of microbial and functional data. As such, the pairwise testing of extrema is best regarded as a means to contextualize and filter the results of the gradient analyses, which account for all of the data and are better suited to characterize gradients.

This analysis revealed a selection of strongly correlated, statistically significant microbial biomarkers indicative of douc lifestyle, which may be related to health and wellbeing. These trends may have implications to human and livestock health, as the douc may serve as a genetically similar model for the former, and a digestively similar model for the latter. For example, in humans, increases in Bacteroides and Preveotella, which were detected in the semi-captive and captive doucs, have also been seen in individuals with colorectal cancer. This is one major example of a potential human health link highlighted by this study, which warrants further investigation in future work108–112. Since the microbiome itself is associated with host genetics as well as digestive functions and diseases23, this study provides the framework for and invites further investigation of this potential model organism for the applicability of these findings within other species.



The authors declare no competing interests.

Electronic supplementary material

Supplementary information accompanies this paper at 10.1038/s41598-018-29277-x.

Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

