Understanding the physiological functions of the host xenobiotic-sensing nuclear receptors PXR and CAR on the gut microbiome using genetically modified mice

Pharmacological activation of the xenobiotic-sensing nuclear receptors pregnane X receptor (PXR) and constitutive androstane receptor (CAR) is well-known to increase drug metabolism and reduce inflammation. Little is known regarding their physiological functions on the gut microbiome. In this study, we discovered bivalent hormetic functions of PXR/CAR modulating the richness of the gut microbiome using genetically engineered mice. The absence of PXR or CAR increased microbial richness, and absence of both receptors synergistically increased microbial richness. PXR and CAR deficiency increased the pro-inflammatory bacteria Helicobacteraceae and Helicobacter. Deficiency in both PXR and CAR increased the relative abundance of Lactobacillus, which has bile salt hydrolase activity, corresponding to decreased primary taurine-conjugated bile acids (BAs) in feces, which may lead to higher internal burden of taurine and unconjugated BAs, both of which are linked to inflammation, oxidative stress, and cytotoxicity. The basal effect of PXR/CAR on the gut microbiome was distinct from pharmacological and toxicological activation of these receptors. Common PXR/CAR-targeted bacteria were identified, the majority of which were suppressed by these receptors. hPXR-TG mice had a distinct microbial profile as compared to wild-type mice. This study is the first to unveil the basal functions of PXR and CAR on the gut microbiome.

Contrary to the reported anti-inflammatory functions of PXR and CAR following their pharmacological activations, basal PXR and CAR activities are necessary for immune surveillance through modulating the gut microbiota.

The gut microbiome has a variety of effects on the intermediary metabolism of the host. One important function of the gut microbiome is bile acid (BA) metabolism. In humans, primary BAs are synthesized from cholesterol in the liver, and are then conjugated with taurine (T) or glycine. In mice, T-conjugated BAs are abundant. In the intestine, bacteria can perform deconjugation, dehydroxylation, and epimerization reactions, generating more hydrophobic and thus more toxic BA profiles1. The microbial enzymes bile salt hydrolase and bile acid 7α-dehydroxylase catalyze BA deconjugation and secondary BA synthesis reactions, respectively2. Specific secondary BAs are more potent activators of the host Takeda G-protein-coupled receptor 5 (TGR-5) than primary BAs, and can promote thermogenesis and energy expenditure of the host3. At exceedingly high concentrations, unconjugated secondary BAs are considered more toxic than primary BAs and are implicated in cholestatic liver injury, inflammation, and cancer4. Specifically, unconjugated BAs (both primary and secondary) produce a more prominent increase in pro-inflammatory cytokines from hepatocytes during cholestatic liver injury5. Microbially-derived BAs are also known to contribute to inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)6 and host immune surveillance by directly modulating the balance of T helper 17 (TH17) and regulator T (Treg) cells7. This highlights the importance of the gut microbiome and BAs on immune surveillance.

While a wealth of literature has demonstrated that the gut microbiome affects PXR and CAR through microbial metabolites, and that pharmacological and toxicological PXR activation affects the composition of the gut microbiome, no studies have been conducted to examine the basal physiological functions of PXR and CAR on the gut microbiome and to compare the potential differences between basal functions of these nuclear receptors and pharmacological/toxicological activation conditions. Considering the fact that genetic polymorphisms of PXR and CAR genes in humans associated with decreased PXR and CAR activity are correlated with human diseases such as liver injury32, and gut microbiome is an important molecular target for xenobiotic metabolism and nutrient homeostasis, it is important to characterize the basal regulation of gut microbiome following PXR and CAR inhibition. The present study focuses on defining the basal regulation of the microbial milieu within the intestines in mice expressing or lacking species-specific receptors, PXR/CAR.

E.Z.N.A.® Genomic DNA Isolation Kits were purchased from Omega Bio-Tek (Norcross, GA, USA). The following deuterated internal standards (IS) were used: deuterated (d4)-DCA (CDN Isotopes; CAS No: 112076-61-6), d4-glycocholic acid (GCA) (CDN Isotopes; CAS No.: 1201918-15-1), d4-chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA) (CDN Isotopes; CAS No.: 99102-69-9), d4-cholic acid (CA) (TRC, Canada; Cat No.: C432603), d4-GCDCA (Iso Sciences, CAS No.: 1201918-16-2), d4 LCA (PubChem CID of LCA: 9903, Steraloids). In total, 19 primary and secondary BAs were quantified with their T-conjugated forms, namely taurine-conjugated cholic acid (T-CA), T-α muricholic acid (T-αMCA), T-β muricholic acid (T-βMCA), T-ω muricholic acid (T-ωMCA), T-chenodeoxycholic acid (T-CDCA), T-ursodeoxycholic acid (T-UDCA), T-hyodeoxycholic acid (T-HDCA), T-deoxycholic acid (T-DCA), T-lithocholic acid (T-LCA), α-muricholic acid (αMCA), β-muricholic acid (βMCA), cholic acid (CA), chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA), ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA), ω-muricholic acid (ωMCA), murideoxycholic acid (MDCA), hyodeoxycholic acid (HDCA), deoxycholic acid (DCA), and lithocholic acid (LCA). CA, CDCA, DCA, and LCA were purchased from Sigma–Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA); αMCA, βMCA were purchased from Steraloids (Newport, Rhode Island, USA). ωMCA and T-ωMCA was a kind gift from Dr. Daniel Raftery's laboratory at the University of Washington Northwest Metabolomics Research Center. Other BAs were kindly obtained from the University of Kansas Medical Center. Agilent ZORBAX Eclipse Plus C18 columns were purchased from Agilent Technologies (Santa Clara, CA, USA). The samples were eluted using gradient mobile phases of A (10 mmol/L ammonium acetate in 20% acetonitrile) and B (10 mmol/L ammonium acetate in 80% acetonitrile). The column temperature was set at 45 °C and the sample tray temperature was maintained at 9 °C. MS/MS spectra were produced using the negative ionization mode. The UPLC–MS/MS operating parameters are shown in Supporting Information Table S1. All other chemicals and reagents, unless indicated otherwise, were purchased from Sigma–Aldrich.

C57BL/6J wild type (WT) breeders were purchased from the Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME, USA) and then bred in-house (n = 10, 5 per sex). The knockout mice were all in C57BL/6 background and have been backcrossed at least 10-generations to achieve the homogeneity of the genetic background. Specifically, PXR-null mice were generated and backcrossed into a C57BL/6 background as described previously33, and pups were obtained from in-house breeders (n = 10, 5 per sex). CAR-null mice were generated by Tularik Inc. (South San Francisco, CA, USA) as described previously34, obtained from University of Kansas Medical Center (Kansas City, KS, USA), and pups were obtained from in-house breeders (n = 10, 5 per sex). PXR-CAR-null male and female mice were generated by crossing PXR-null and CAR-null mice (n = 10, 5 per sex). FVB/NJ WT male and female mice were purchased from the Jackson Laboratory (aged 21 days upon arrival, (n = 10, 5 per sex). They were acclimated for at least 9 days within the animal facilities before experiments. Male and female humanized PXR (hPXR) breeders in the FVB/NJ background were a generous gift from Frank Gonzalez (National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA) and were bred in-house (n = 10, 5 per sex) and the characterization of this mouse model has been published before35. Specifically, this model was produced by bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) transgenesis, in which the transgene contains the complete human PXR gene and the 5′- and 3′-flanking sequences. The BAC clone was linearized by restriction enzyme digestion (P1-Sce) and purified before microinjection into fertilized FVB/N mouse eggs. Mice resulting from this breeding step that were positive for the human PXR transgene by PCR analysis were bred further with PXR-null mice. Mice positive for the human PXR transgene and the PXR null allele, as determined by PCR genotyping, were designated as PXR-humanized transgenic (hPXR) mice. Mice heterozygous for the hPXR transgene were interbred to generate a homozygous line. For the present study, the homozygous status of hPXR-TG mice was confirmed by breeding for multiple generations and all litters were tested positive for hPXR-TG by PCR genotyping (data not shown).

All mice were individually housed at weaning age in the animal facility at the University of Washington according to the Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care International guidelines (https://aaalac.org/resources/theguide.cfm). The rationale of single housing was to rule out co-housing effects such as difference in calorie intake and social stress. This is especially important for the male mice because co-housing frequently leads to injurious fighting and the dominating male has a natural advantage to the nutrient resources as compared to the other cage mates. All mice were exposed to laboratory autoclaved rodent diet (LabDiet #5010, LabDiet, St. Louis, MO, USA), non-acidified autoclaved water, and autoclaved Enrich-N’Pure bedding (Andersons, Maumee, OH, USA). All studies were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at the University of Washington. Twenty-four-hour fecal samples were collected from mice at adolescent age (1-month of age) and adult age (2–2.5 months of age).

Total DNA was isolated from frozen fecal samples using E.Z.N.A.® Genomic DNA Isolation Kits (Omega Bio-Tek, Norcross, GA, USA) according to the manufacturer's protocol, and the concentration was quantified using a Qubit fluorometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The 16S rRNA gene sequencing was performed by Novogene Corporation (Sacramento, CA, USA; 250 bp paired-end, n = 5 per group). Selected bacteria within the Lactobacillus genus and the DNA encoding bile salt hydrolase (Bsh) were confirmed by qPCR.

Approximately 50 mg of fecal samples were homogenized in 1 mL of high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) grade nano pure H2O. 10 μL of internal standard (IS) was added to 200 μL of fecal sample homogenate, mixed, and equilibrated on ice for 5–10 min. 1.5 mL of ice-cold alkaline acetonitrile (5% ammonia in acetonitrile) was added to the homogenate, which was then vortexed vigorously and shaken continuously for 1 h at room temperature. The mixture was then centrifuged at 12,000×g for 15 min at 4 °C, and the supernatant was collected into 5 mL glass tubes. The pellet was re-suspended in 750 μL of HPLC grade methanol, shaken for 5 min, and centrifuged again at 15,000×g for 20 min. The two supernatants obtained were combined, evaporated under vacuum (45 °C) for 4 h, and reconstituted in 100 μL of 50% methanol. The suspension was transferred into a 0.2 μm Costar Spin-X HPLC microcentrifuge filter (purchased from Corning Inc., Corning, NY, USA), and centrifuged at 12,000×g for 10 min. 19 BAs were quantified using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS), at negative ionization mode. Standard and different quality control samples were extracted using the similar sample preparation procedure described above.

Approximately 20 mg of fecal samples from C57BL/6 and WT FVB/NJ mice (adolescent and adult ages, males and females, n = 5 per group) were mixed with phosphate buffered saline (PBS; pH = 7.2 supplemented with 1 mmol/L phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) [final concentration] and 1 × protease inhibitor cocktail [Sigma–Aldrich, catalog No.: P8340]) to a final concentration of 100 mg/mL, and were homogenized by vortex shaker and centrifuged at 10,000×g at 4 °C for 15 min. The supernatant was collected and diluted 1:1 in the PBS solution described above. The cytokines were quantified using the Mouse Cytokine Array Pro-inflammatory Focused 10-plex (MDF10; Eve Technologies Corp., Calgary, Alberta, Canada) per manufacturer's instructions. The 10 cytokines that were determined include: granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), interferon-gamma (IFNγ), interleukin 1 beta (IL-1β), interleukin 2 (IL-2), interleukin 4 (IL-4), interleukin 6 (IL-6), interleukin 10 (IL-10), interleukin 12 (IL-12p70), monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), and tumor necrosis factor (TNF-α). The ten cytokines were simultaneously quantified in a multiplex panel using a MILLIPLEX Mouse Cytokine/Chemokine 10-Plex Kit (Millipore, St. Charles, MO, USA) according to the manufacturer's protocol, and was performed using the Luminex™ 100 system (Luminex, Austin, TX, USA). The assay sensitivities of these markers range from 0.4 to 10.9 pg/mL for the 10-Plex. Individual analyte values are available in the MILLIPLEX protocol.

Total RNA was extracted from frozen livers using RNAzol Bee reagent (Tel-Test Inc., Friendswood, TX, USA) per the manufacturer's protocol. RNA concentration was quantified using a NanoDrop Spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific, Wilmington, DE, USA) at 260 nm. The integrity of each RNA sample was evaluated by formaldehyde agarose gel electrophoresis to visualize the 18S and 28S rRNA bands.

The total RNAs of mouse livers were reverse-transcribed into cDNAs using the High Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Life Technologies, CA, USA). The resulting cDNA products were amplified by qPCR, using the Sso Advanced Universal SYBR Green Supermix in a Bio-Rad CFX384 Real-Time PCR Detection System (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). The primers for all qPCR reactions were synthesized by Integrated DNA Technologies (Coralville, IA, USA), and primer sequences are shown in Supporting Information Table S2. Data are expressed as % of the expression of the housekeeping gene glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (Gapdh).

To illustrate the potential differences between the physiological roles of PXR/CAR vs. ligand effect (pharmacological activation of PXR/CAR), or vs. toxicant effect (toxicological activation of PXR/CAR), we compared the data from the present study with the literature.

For comparison with a separate study which measured toxicant effects, we utilized a previous 16S rDNA sequencing dataset where adult C57BL/6J female mice were orally administered the environmental pollutants Fox River PCB mixture (6 mg/kg) once daily for 3 consecutive days (vehicle: corn oil, 10 mL/kg)31,40. The 3-day dosing regimen of Fox River PCB mixture was chosen to compare our findings with the previous studies regarding the regulation of host P450s in liver as well as gut microbiome31,40. The Fox River PCB mixture includes 4 Aroclors, namely Aroclor 1242 (35% of total weight), Aroclor 1248 (35%), Aroclor 1254 (15%), and Aroclor 1260 (15%). As we have previously characterized, this PCB mixture can up-regulate the prototypical aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) target genes (Cyp1a1 and 1a2), CAR-target genes Cy2b10 and 2c50, and PXR target genes Cyp3a16 and 3a41a31,40. Differentially regulated taxa from the previous study (PCBs vs. corn oil)31,40 were compared with the differentially regulated taxa from the present study in age-matched adult C57BL/6 females (PXR-null vs. WT, and CAR-null vs. WT). The filtering criteria included: average % OTUs across all groups >0.001% in each study, and P-value <0.1.

Analysis of FASTQ files was conducted using various python scripts in Quantitative Insights Into Microbial Ecology (QIIME)41, including de-multiplexing, quality filtering, OTU picking, as well as alpha- and beta-diversity determinations. Metagenome functional content was predicted using Phylogenetic Investigation of Communities by Reconstruction of Observed States (PICRUSt)42. Line plots representing the alpha diversity of each group were generated using ggplot2 (v 3.0.0) in R. Three-dimensional Principle Coordinate Analysis (PCoA) plots (beta diversity) were generated using the weighted UniFrac diversity metric in Emperor (Gigascience). OTUs were visualized using stacked bar plots generated in SigmaPlot (Systat Software, Inc.). Hierarchical clustering dendrograms (Ward's minimum variance method, distance scale) of the top significantly abundant taxa (abundance >0.005%, P < 0.05) were generated using gplots (v 3.0.1) and RColorBrewer (v 1.1-2) in R. Bar plots representing cytokine concentration, BA concentration, and SCFA concentration were generated using ggplot2 (v 3.0.0) in R. Correlation matrices representing SCFA and taxa associations were generated using reshape2 (v 1.4.3) and ggplot2 (v 3.0.0) in R.

Asterisks (∗) represent significant differences between WT and nuclear receptor-gene-null mice (P < 0.05), as well as WT and hPXR-TG mice. Statistically significant differences among WT, PXR-null, CAR-null, and PXR-CAR-null mice (all in C57BL/6 background) were determined using one-way ANOVA followed by Duncan's post hoc test in R using the DescTools package (v 0.99.26) or SPSS (IBM SPSS Statistics).

The overall experimental design is shown in Fig. 1. Three experimental settings were designed to model the effect of host PXR/CAR genetics on the gut microbiome. In Study 1, we focused on the necessity of the host PXR and CAR on the basal regulation of gut microbiome, using PXR-null, CAR-null, and PXR-CAR-double null mice (all in C57BL/6 background). In Study 2, we performed a systematic comparison between the effects of basal functions of PXR/CAR and the ligand-mediated pharmacological activation of PXR and CAR on microbiome, as well as between the effects of basal functions of PXR/CAR and the toxicological activation of PXR/CAR on microbiome. In Study 3, we compared the gut microbiomes between the mice that carry mPXR vs. mice that carry hPXR (both in FVB background), to determine how species-differences of this host drug–receptor modulate the gut microbiome. Due to the markedly reduced pregnancy rate and litter size of the hCAR-TG colony and the lack of availability of hCAR-TG in other genetic backgrounds, the comparison of hCAR vs. mCar was not part of the scope of the present study.

16S rRNA gene sequencing was conducted on feces collected over a 24-h period of adolescent and adult aged WT, PXR-null, CAR-null, and PXR-CAR-double null male and female mice (all in the C57BL/6 background, n = 5 per group), to determine the necessity of host nuclear receptors on the composition and function of the gut microbiome. As shown in Fig. 2A, the alpha diversity of PXR and CAR single or double knockout mice tended to have greater richness than WT controls in all groups, and this trend was especially prominent for PXR-CAR double null mice. The only exception was in adult males; CAR-null mice had the highest richness as compared to the other genotypes. Increased diversity of the gut microbiome due to absence of PXR or CAR has also been shown elsewhere43. As shown in Fig. 2B, regarding the beta diversity, all four genotypes of mice (WT, PXR-null, CAR-null, and PXR-CAR-double null) exhibited distinct separations among their microbial communities at both ages and sexes. The microbial separations indicate that PXR and CAR are essential and unique modulators of the gut microbiome.

Because there was a marked increase in the BA-deconjugating Lactobacillus in the PXR/CAR-double null mice (and to a lesser extent tended to be higher in the single null mice), we hypothesized that this would result in a reduction in conjugated BAs in feces of the PXR/CAR-null mice. To test this hypothesis, we conducted LC–MS-based targeted metabolomics of all major BAs in mice (Fig. 6 and Supporting Information Figs. S2–S5). As expected, as shown in Fig. 6, the most abundant conjugated BAs in mice, namely T-CA, T-αMCA, T-βMCA, and T-ωMCA, tended to be lower in feces of the PXR/CAR single and double null mice, and the trend was most predominant in the PXR/CAR double null mice. Thus the qPCR data on the bsh-expressing bacteria and the bsh DNA (Fig. 5) at least partly explained the reduction in taurine-conjugated bile acids in observed in the feces of the receptor null mice. Other bacteria that express Bsh from different DNA sequences, which were not probed in the present study due to lack of a complete reference sequences of the microbes at this time in history, may also contribute to the increased deconjugation reactions. Other minor T-conjugated secondary BAs, such as T-HDCA T-UDCA, were also decreased in the knockout mice in an age and sex-dependent manner (Figs. S2–S5). We also observed a slight increase in the major unconjugated secondary BA LCA in adolescent PXR/CAR double null mice of both sexes (Figs. S2 and S4). However, several other unconjugated secondary BAs were lower in adult PXR/CAR null mice. It is speculated that enhanced BA de-conjugation may prime the host for inflammation related diseases5.

To compare the effects of physiological and pharmacological activation of PXR and CAR on the gut microbiome, we examined the following two datasets using age-, sex- and genetic background matched mice (adult C57BL/6J males) with the goal to seek novel bacterial targets of PXR and CAR: 1) 16S rDNA sequencing data of nuclear receptor gene null mice vs. WT mice (present study); and 2) 16S rDNA sequencing data of prototypical PXR ligand (PCN) and CAR ligand (TCPOBOP) treated WT mice30. A microbe that is consistently regulated under both basal conditions and under receptor-activated conditions is considered to be a PXR/CAR target with high confidence. As shown in Supporting Information Fig. S6A, there were 2 taxa that were differentially regulated in both conditions, among which Dorea sp. was suppressed by the basal presence of PXR, and was further decreased by PCN, suggesting that this bacterium is a PXR target and is suppressed by this nuclear receptor. Conversely, the constitutive abundance of Blautia sp. depends on the basal presence of PXR, whereas PCN suppressed its abundance, suggesting that PXR has context-specific duality between basal and pharmacological activation conditions.

As shown in Fig. S6B, there were 3 taxa that were differentially regulated in both conditions, among which Coprobacillus sp. and a member of the Peptococcaceae family were suppressed by the basal presence of CAR, and were further decreased by TCPOBOP, suggesting that these bacteria are CAR-targets and are suppressed by this nuclear receptor. Additionally, there was an unassigned taxon that was increased by both CAR deficiency and CAR ligand, suggesting that CAR also has context-specific duality between basal and pharmacological activation conditions.

To compare the roles of basal PXR/CAR vs. toxicological activation of PXR/CAR by known activators on the gut microbiome, we examined the following two datasets using age-, sex- and genetic background matched mice (adult C57BL/6J males): 1) 16S rDNA sequencing data of nuclear receptor gene null mice vs. WT mice (present study); and 2) 16S rDNA sequencing data of PBDEs-exposed WT mice9,13,37. To note, the two diet-enriched PBDE congers, namely BDE-47 and BDE-99, are known activators of PXR and CAR as evidenced by the up-regulation of prototypical PXR and CAR target genes9,38,39. As shown in Supporting Information Fig. S7A, there were 3 taxa that were commonly regulated by the basal presence of PXR and BDE-47, and 4 taxa that were commonly regulated by the basal presence of PXR and BDE-99. Interestingly, Dorea sp. which was a PXR-suppressed target under both basal and pharmacological activation conditions (Fig. S6A), was also consistently suppressed by both PBDE congeners, indicating its down-regulation is mediated by PXR and not by off-target effects of the toxicants. In addition, a member of the Mogibacteriaceae family was consistently suppressed by basal presence of PXR and both PBDE congeners, whereas a member of the Lachnospiraceae family was consistently suppressed by basal presence of PXR and BDE-47, whereas Clostridium sp. and Adlercreutzia sp. were consistently suppressed by basal presence of PXR and BDE-99. These observations suggest that these bacteria are also common targets of PXR under both basal and toxicological activation conditions.

In summary, we have performed a systematic comparison among PXR and CAR targeted bacteria under basal, pharmacological, and toxicological conditions in mice, and identified bacteria that are commonly regulated under basal and at least one of the two receptor-activated conditions, suggesting that these bacteria are novel targets of these host receptors. The bacteria commonly regulated across PXR-null vs. WT and CAR-null vs. WT comparisons are shown in Supporting Information Table S3. Although we do not know at this point whether the changes in these bacteria were due directly to the immediate effects of PXR/CAR absence/activation, a clear PXR/CAR dependency in their regulation was observed.

To compare the role of mouse and human PXR genes on the composition and function of the gut microbiome, 16S rRNA gene sequencing was conducted on feces collected over a 24-h period of adolescent and adult aged wild type (WT) and hPXR-TG male and female mice (n = 5 per group). Both of these two mouse strains were in the FVB genetic background. The overall microbial richness was similar between WT and hPXR-TG mice, except for adolescent males, as evidenced by a higher microbial richness in hPXR-TG mice (Fig. 7A). As shown in Fig. 7B, in all 4 comparisons, hPXR-TG and WT mice exhibited distinct separations between their microbial communities as measured by beta diversity (weighted uniFrac).

As shown in Fig. 9, BA profiles were different between WT and hPXR-TG mice. Specifically, the largest increase in relative concentration occurred with the secondary BA DCA in hPXR-TG adult male mice, and this trend was seen in the other groups as well. The primary BA CA, which is the precursor of DCA, also tended to be higher in hPXR-TG mice at all 4 comparisons. Conversely, the major secondary BA T-ωMCA tended to be lower in hPXR-TG mice in all 4 comparisons, and its unconjugated form ωMCA also tended to be lower in female hPXR-TG mice. Regarding other minor BAs in feces, HDCA was lower in both hPXR-TG adult mice groups, with this trend observed in the adolescent mice, and UDCA was higher in adolescent male and adult female hPXR-TG mice, with this trend continuing in the other groups as well.

As summarized in Fig. 10, through three independent experimental settings, the present study has determined that host genetics and differences in the xenobiotic-sensing nuclear receptors PXR and CAR profoundly influence the composition and predicted functions of the gut microbiome, and there is an apparent association between increased bsh-expressing bacteria and reduced conjugated BAs. Specifically, although at the descriptive level at this point, our study suggests that the presence of the drug receptors PXR and CAR prevents the bloom of other types of bacteria that contribute to the richness of the gut microbiome, likely serving a protective mechanism against opportunistic bacteria that may be harmful to the host. The absence of PXR and CAR also led to an increase in the Lactobacillus genus, corresponding to reduced taurine-conjugated BAs. Interestingly, through a comprehensive comparison between the present study and published datasets, we showed that the physiological, pharmacological, and toxicological activation of PXR produces mostly distinct effects on gut microbiome. We identified several intestinal bacteria that are PXR/CAR targets commonly targeted under both basal and receptor-activated conditions, including Dorea sp., a member of the Mogibacteriaceae family, a member of the Ruminococcaceae family, Streptococcus sp., and Anaeroplasma sp. for PXR, as well as Coprobacillus sp., Lactobacillus sp., and a member of the Ruminococcaceae family for CAR. Context-specific duality of PXR and CAR in regulating gut microbiome has also been observed. Lastly, species differences in PXR (mPXR vs. hPXR) also profoundly altered the gut microbiome, including higher Prevotella sp. as well as lower A. muciniphila, both of which are hallmarks of inflammatory bowel disease58,59, thus caution is warranted when using WT mouse models to study PXR and inflammation, as mice (with mPXR) may be more resistant to GI inflammation than humans (with hPXR).

A limitation in the present study is not being able to compare the effect of hPXR activation and mPXR activation on the gut microbiome under pharmacological or toxicological conditions. There are no published datasets on pharmacological activation of human PXR in hPXR-TG mice with a focus on the gut microbiome for us to compare with our dataset on pharmacological activation of mouse PXR (by PCN)13. While the primary focus of the present manuscript is the basal regulation of the gut microbiome by PXR and CAR under physiological conditions, we will address the issue in our future directions.

Well-known as xenobiotic-sensing receptors, pharmacologically activated PXR and CAR have been shown to have anti-inflammatory and cytoprotective effects114, 115, 116, as well as lead to a reduction in the BA-deconjugation enzyme bsh and lower hepatic secondary BAs30. The present study has been the first to establish the physiological functions of the host PXR and CAR on the compositions of the gut microbiome as well as the microbial functions related to basal immune surveillance and BA metabolism. Specifically, we showed that lack of PXR and CAR individually and synergistically increased the richness of the gut microbiome, also accompanied by a pro-inflammatory microbial signature. This suggests that the presence of PXR/CAR is necessary in preventing the disproportional blooming of certain commensal bacteria, which can become pathogenic if they escape their original niche. Lack of both PXR and CAR also reduced BA-deconjugating bacteria and levels of major taurine-conjugated BAs in feces, suggesting increased hydrophobicity of the internal load of unconjugated BAs and the co-substrate taurine, which may further prime the host for inflammatory response induced by secondary insults. The basal roles of PXR/CAR in gut microbiome regulation are distinct from the pharmacological and toxicological activations of PXR/CAR, highlighting the context-specific functions of these host nuclear receptors. PXR/CAR targeted intestinal bacteria have also been identified, and most of them were suppressed by these host receptors. Finally, mPXR and hPXR have different effects on the gut microbiome. Taken together, the bivalent hormetic functions of PXR and CAR under physiological conditions highlight the novel roles of these host drug receptors in modulating the host immune surveillance and BA metabolism through targeting the gut microbiome.

Peer review under responsibility of Chinese Pharmaceutical Association and Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences.

Participated in research design: Mallory Little and Julia Yue Cui; Conducted experiments: Mallory Little, Moumita Dutta, Hao Li, Adam Matson, Xiaojian Shi, Haiwei Gu, Sridhar Mani, Julia Yue Cui, Gabby Mascarinas, Bruk Molla, and Kris Weigel; Contributed new reagents or analytic tools: Haiwei Gu, Sridhar Mani, and Julia Yue Cui; Performed data analysis: Mallory Little, Moumita Dutta, Hao Li, Adam Matson, and Xiaojian Shi; Wrote or contribute to the writing of the manuscript: Mallory Little, Moumita Dutta, Hao Li, Adam Matson, Xiaojian Shi, Haiwei Gu, Sridhar Mani, and Julia Yue Cui.

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

The datasets generated during the current study are available in the Dryad database with the Accession Number https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.5mkkwh72v.

The following are the Supplementary data to this article:

