Directed remodeling of the mouse gut microbiome inhibits the development of atherosclerosis





The gut microbiome is a malleable microbial community that can remodel in response to a number of factors, including diet, and contribute to the development of several chronic diseases, including atherosclerosis. We devised an in vitro screening protocol of the mouse gut microbiome to discover molecules that can selectively modify bacterial growth. This approach was used to identify cyclic d,l-α-peptides that remodeled the Western diet (WD) gut microbiome toward the low fat diet microbiome state. Daily oral administration of the peptides in WD-fed LDLr−/− mice reduced plasma total cholesterol levels and atherosclerotic plaques. Depletion of the microbiome with antibiotics abrogated these effects. Peptide treatment reprogrammed the microbiome transcriptome, suppressed the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines (including IL-6, TNF-α, and IL-1β), rebalanced levels of short-chain fatty acids and bile acids, improved gut barrier integrity, and increased intestinal T regulatory cells. Directed chemical manipulation provides an additional tool to decipher the chemical biology of the gut microbiome and may advance microbiome-targeted therapeutics.

The gut microbiome plays a fundamental role in host physiology and health1–3. In humans and animals, gut microbiome dysbiosis can promote onset and progression of chronic diseases, such as cardiovascular disease3, obesity4,5, diabetes6,7, and central nervous system disorders8. Diet can play an important role in disease, both by shaping the microbiome and direct effects on the host. For example, consumption of the calorically rich Western diet (WD) can transform the gut microbiome into a maladaptive state, promoting systemic inflammation and progression of chronic diseases, including atherosclerosis9–11. Certain gut bacteria convert choline-rich food to trimethylamine (TMA), ultimately leading to increased risk of cardiovascular disease3. Other gut bacterial metabolites, such as short-chain fatty acids (SCFA)12–14, 4-ethylphenylsulfate (4EPS)15, aromatic amino acid metabolites16, and secondary bile acids17–19 also affect host physiology.

Directed remodeling is an alternative approach for exploring the therapeutic potential of the gut microbiome. We define directed remodeling of the gut microbiome as a process that can alter, in a deliberate and predetermined fashion, the bacterial composition and/or its transcriptome from a given state into another. Given the sensitivity (plasticity) of microbiota to changes in the chemical milieu within the gut, a wide range of compounds, including natural product supplements26 or prescribed therapeutics27, have the potential to cause remodeling of the gut microbiota. We postulated that a rational molecular approach for directed microbiome remodeling would require two basic elements: i) molecular scaffolds that can potentially exert differential bacterial growth modulating activities against selected members of the gut microbiota, and ii) a predictive in vitro screen for compound selection for the in vivo studies. Here, we report the rationale, approaches, and evidence that synthetic self-assembling cyclic D,L-α-peptides selected from an in vitro en masse gut microbiota screen selectively remodel a WD-induced gut microbiome in vivo into a low fat diet-like state to prevent the development of atherosclerosis.

Low-density lipoprotein receptor null (LDLr−/−) mice have a human-like lipoprotein profile and have been widely used as an animal model for diet-induced atherosclerosis. LDLr−/− mice develop hypercholesterolemia and arterial plaques after several weeks on a WD, but not on a Chow diet (CHD). Feeding a WD to LDLr−/− mice for two weeks caused remodeling of their gut microbiome as compared to mice fed a CHD (Extended Data Fig. 1a, Supplementary Table 1), consistent with the observed impacts of a WD on the gut microbiome of wild-type mice11. Thus, depending on the diet, LDLr−/− mice exhibit two distinct gut microbiome states that are associated with different phenotypic outcomes (designated here as: “WD state” exhibiting hyperlipidemia and atherosclerosis phenotype, and “CHD state” exhibiting healthy phenotype). We hypothesized that if the WD-induced gut microbiome is causal in the onset and progression of atherosclerosis in LDLr−/− mice, then remodeling the composition of microbiota in vivo (even under the influence of WD) toward a CHD state should ameliorate disease progression, thereby testing the therapeutic potential of gut microbiome remodeling.

Cyclic peptides with an even number of alternating d-, and l-α−amino acid configuration (typically 6 or 8 residues) can self-assemble under conditions that favor hydrogen bonding (such as in a lipid membrane environment) into extended β-sheet-like hollow tubular structures (Fig. 1a)28–30. By appropriate choice of the sequence, cyclic d,l-α-peptides can selectively partition into bacterial membranes, interrupt transmembrane potential and/or ion gradients, and impair cell growth31–33. We hypothesized that oral administration of a given cyclic d,l-α-peptide sequence, selected to possess differential bacterial growth modulating activities against certain members of the gut microbiota, could be used to remodel the microbiome.

We developed an en masse screening approach for assessing the effects of compounds on the gut microbiota as a whole (Fig. 1b). Such an approach would be inherently data rich, internally consistent, and could account for potential indirect growth-modulating effects that might exist within the bacterial community.

We isolated fresh gut microbiome content from LDLr−/− mice conditioned for at least two weeks on WD by surgically removing cecum under anaerobic conditions. The cecal contents were then mixed with growth media, distributed in 96-well plates, and incubated overnight in the presence of the test peptides. The activity and selectivity of each peptide for remodeling the gut microbiota community was assessed en masse by 16S rRNA sequencing of each well. A number of challenges had to be addressed in developing this protocol, including inoculum handling, choice of growth media, assay duration, etc. Our current assay culture condition maintains 50 bacterial genera (overnight culture), which is fairly representative of the 67 genera found in the uncultured community (Supplementary Table 2). As expected, the overnight in vitro culturing resulted in changes in the relative composition of the microbiome (Extended Data Fig. 2), but the assay condition maintains a sufficient bacterial diversity to enable en masse assessment of the relative changes in bacterial composition between peptide-treated and untreated samples.

We used a distance scoring algorithm for a more refined compound selection, in which peptides that remodel the microbiota community most completely from the WD state toward the CHD state are scored higher (Extended Data Fig. 1d). Briefly, we first eliminated cyclic d,l-α-peptides that had broad-spectrum antibacterial activity (inhibit ≥95% of growth of ≥20 species in the community). The remaining compounds were then ranked based on how well they suppressed the bacterial species that grew in abundance in WD-fed mice compared to CHD-fed mice (see Supplementary Table 4 for peptide ranking). Based on these analyses, we chose two peptides for further in vivo validation and efficacy studies: the cationic peptide 1, c[wLwKhShK], and the zwitterionic peptide 11, c[wLwReQeR], which ranked high within their respective peptide clusters (Figure 1d).

We carried out a 10-week study of cyclic peptides c[wLwKhShK] and c[wLwReQeR] vs. vehicle-treated WD and CHD controls in LDLr−/− mice to determine the safety and effects of the peptides on the gut microbiota and on atherosclerosis. The abiotic structures of cyclic d,l-α-peptides renders them proteolytically stable, allowing oral administration (ad libitum in the drinking water, ~35 mg/kg/day peptide dose). There were no signs of discomfort or toxicity (body weight, liver and spleen weight, AST and ALT enzyme levels), even after a 10-week daily-dosing regimen (Extended Data Fig. 5). Pharmacokinetic and excretion studies involving c[wLwKhShK] and c[wLwReQeR] demonstrated that these peptides are non-absorbable (lack oral systemic bioavailability), remain largely intact throughout the gut, and are cleared via fecal excretion (Supplementary Table 5, Extended Data Fig. 6), thereby strongly supporting the gut as the site of action.

As predicted from the in vitro screen, the Bacteroidetes/Firmicutes ratio34 increased (within 2 weeks by peptide c[wLwKhShK] and within 6 weeks by peptide c[wLwReQeR]) in treated animals relative to the vehicle WD-fed group (Fig. 2a and Extended Data Fig. 7). Consistent with previous reports11,35,36, we also observed reduction in gut microbiome richness (Chao1 index) in WD-fed LDLr−/− mice, but administration of peptides 1 and 11 to the WD-fed mice reversed this reduction in gut microbiome richness, restoring it to a level similar to that of CHD-fed mice (Extended Data Fig. 7). Consistent with the in vitro screen (Fig. 1c), zwitterionic peptide c[wLwReQeR] acted more selectively in vivo against WD-remodeled gut bacteria than the cationic peptide c[wLwKhShK] (Fig. 2b and Extended Data Fig. 8). The two peptides initially targeted different bacterial genera but over the course of the 10-week study, the remodeled gut microbiome induced by the peptides became more similar (Extended Data Fig. 7). Although the overall microbiota alpha diversity was unchanged by peptide treatment (Fig. 2c), the microbiota populations in treated animals were distinct from untreated animals (Fig. 2d). A total of 73 OTUs were identified at the species level in the culture of the in vitro assay; similarly, 72 OTUs were identified at the species level in the uncultured mouse cecum samples. Of these, 42 species (~58%) were present in both the cultured and uncultured samples. Out of these 42 species, 14 species underwent statistically significant changes in abundance after peptide treatment in vivo, while the other 28 species remained unaffected by peptide treatment. Of the 14 species that were significantly affected by peptide treatment in vivo, most were affected in the same general way in the in vitro assay (Fig. 2e), supporting that the assay can be predictive of changes in vivo.

Peptide treatment induced widespread reprogramming of the microbiota transcriptome, as determined by RNA-Seq of bacterial RNA from the feces following a 2-week treatment period (Fig. 3a). The observed gene expression differences (out of ~53,800 total annotated bacterial genes) could be grouped into three main clusters. Two clusters contained bacterial genes for which expression was increased (Cluster 1) or decreased (Cluster 2) by peptide treatment. Cluster 3 contained genes that were altered by the WD, but not affected by peptide treatment. The majority of bacterial species in the feces sample contained genes present in all three clusters (Fig. 3), indicative of pervasive changes not only to the structure, but also the transcriptional activities of the microbiota. Overall gene expression from Firmicutes was reduced and overall gene expression from Bacteroidetes was increased by c[wLwReQeR] treatment (Clusters 1 compared to Cluster 2 and 3) (Extended Data Fig. 9).

SCFAs are generated by bacterial fermentation of carbohydrates in the gut and are involved in several microbiota-mediated effects on host metabolism and physiology12–14. In the context of atherosclerosis, it is notable that SCFAs can play roles in innate immunity and inflammatory processes through histone deacetylase (HDAC) and/or G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR)-dependent mechanisms37. Functional metagenomics analyses suggested that peptide treatment induced changes in enzyme expression levels that would lead to increased butyrate biosynthesis (Fig. 3d). Treatment with c[wLwReQeR] led to higher acetoacetate-CoA transferase levels compared to vehicle (Fig. 3d), which would promote production of butyrate. The observed changes in expression levels for acetoacetate CoA-transferase were ~2.5-fold higher than would be expected based on a random distribution of all changes observed in the RNA-Seq analysis. Indeed, targeted metabolomics analysis of fecal samples taken after a two-week treatment period confirmed that animals treated with peptide c[wLwReQeR] had increased levels of fatty acids containing 4–6 carbons, including butyrate (Fig. 3e). In addition, functional pathway analysis predicted reduced catabolism of tryptophan and phenylalanine (~60% reduction for Trp catabolism, ~20% reduction for Phe catabolism) in CHD or WD peptide-treated animals compared to WD vehicle animals (Fig. 3c). Indeed, targeted metabolomics revealed higher levels of tryptophan and phenylalanine in the feces of peptide-treated animals after a two-week course (Fig. 3f).

Plasma cholesterol levels and atherosclerotic lesions were strikingly reduced in the mice on WD following peptide treatment. By the two-week time point, oral administration of peptides c[wLwKhShK] and c[wLwReQeR] had reduced the mouse plasma total cholesterol by 37% and 36%, respectively, compared to the untreated WD group (Fig. 4a). There was no analogous peptide-mediated reduction in cholesterol in the CHD-fed mice (Supplementary Fig. 1). In addition, peptide c[wLwReQeR] also reduced plasma triglyceride levels in WD-fed mice by 56% compared to vehicle (Supplementary Fig. 1). Moreover, analysis of plasma lipoprotein fractions by FPLC indicated that the reduction in total plasma cholesterol levels stems from marked reductions in the levels of VLDL and LDL in the peptide-treated WD-fed mice (Fig. 4b). We also confirmed that peptide treatment did not reduce absorption of dietary cholesterol by carrying out a fecal dual-isotope cholesterol absorption assay (Supplementary Fig. 1). At the completion of the 10-week study, analysis of the whole aorta lesion area indicated striking reductions in atherosclerotic lesions of 37% and 48% by peptides c[wLwKhShK] and c[wLwReQeR], respectively (Fig. 4d and Fig. 4e). Similarly, the aortic sinus lesion volume was significantly reduced by 44% and 37%, respectively (Fig. 4f). Microbiota composition analysis indicated that eight microbiota taxa had a positive correlation (ρ>0.4) with plasma cholesterol levels, while five taxa were negatively correlated (ρ<−0.4) (Fig. 4c). The peptides generally decreased the abundance of the positively correlated taxa and increased the abundance of negatively correlated taxa (Fig. 4c).

We used two additional peptides (peptide 30: c[wMeLwRMeeQeR] and peptide 15: c[fWwYqHhQ]) as negative controls for in vivo studies to further probe the link between peptide treatment, remodeling of gut microbiome, and observed phenotypic changes. The control peptide c[wMeLwRMeeQeR] has an identical amino acid sequence as the active peptide 11 (c[wLwReQeR]) but two of its eight backbone amide groups are N-methylated (Extended Data Fig. 4), which prevents peptide self-assembly and antimicrobial activity38. As opposed to peptide c[wLwReQeR], peptide c[wMeLwRMeeQeR] is incapable of ring stacking and inter-subunit hydrogen bonding because it lacks two amide hydrogen bonding donor sites and suffers from inter-subunit steric encumbrances created by the N-methyl moieties (Extended Data Fig. 4)38. Therefore, peptide c[wMeLwRMeeQeR] is an interesting control and mechanism of action probe because of its inability to self-assemble into nanotubes and exert similar antimicrobial activity, despite having identical amino acid sequence as the active peptide c[wLwReQeR]. We carried out a 10-week oral dosing study with peptide c[wMeLwRMeeQeR] in LDLr−/− mice fed WD, analogous to the studies described above for peptides c[wLwKhShK] and c[wLwReQeR]. Peptide c[wMeLwRMeeQeR] did not reduce total plasma cholesterol levels compared to vehicle controls at 2-wk (Fig. 4a) or 10-wk (Supplementary Fig. 1) timepoints, nor any reduction in aortic sinus plaque volumes at 10-wk (Fig. 4f). As an additional control peptide, we used c[fWwYqHhQ] (peptide 15), which scored lowest of all peptides tested in the in vitro en masse microbiome remodeling (Fig. 1, Supplementary Table 4). As indicated by its low ranking, c[fWwYqHhQ] remodeled the gut microbiota in vitro, but not toward a CHD-like state according to our scoring algorithm. Similar to the control peptide c[wMeLwRMeeQeR], peptide c[fWwYqHhQ] did not reduce plasma total cholesterol levels compared to vehicle controls at the 2-wk timepoint (Fig. 4a), after which the study was discontinued. Together, these studies indicated that peptides lacking antimicrobial activity or causing inappropriate remodeling of the gut microbiota did not bring about positive phenotypic changes.

We also treated animals with a cocktail of broad-spectrum antibiotics to deplete the microbiome39–41. A key phenotypic marker for atherosclerosis is plasma cholesterol level, which strongly correlates with arterial plaque development. Therefore, we measured plasma cholesterol levels following 2-wk peptide treatment in gut microbiome-depleted LDLr−/− mice (Fig.4a and Supplementary Fig. 2). Under these conditions, peptide 11 completely lost its ability to reduce plasma cholesterol levels compared to control peptide 30 or vehicle control (Fig. 4a). Quantitation of bacterial DNA present in fecal pellets showed depletion of the gut microbiota over the course of the study (Supplementary Fig. 2). These studies provide additional support that the mechanism of action involves direct targeting and remodeling of the gut microbiota by the peptides.

Analysis of mouse liver and ileum (small intestine) samples by RNA-seq (Fig. 5a and Supplementary Fig. 3) revealed that c[wLwReQeR] treatment restored expression of many genes that were downregulated or upregulated in the WD-fed group compared to CHD-fed animals. Most notably, gene ontology analysis indicated that lipid metabolism was upregulated and inflammation- and immune-related responses were downregulated following peptide treatment (Fig 5b and Supplementary Fig. 3). Expression of cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase (Cyp7a1), the rate-limiting enzyme in the bile acid (BA) biosynthesis pathway, was significantly increased in peptide-treated WD animals (Fig. 5c), suggesting increased conversion of dietary cholesterol to bile acids as a possible mechanism for the reduced plasma LDL cholesterol levels. Indeed, we found that the total bile acid in the peptide-treated vs. control WD-fed mice was two-fold higher in the feces and three-fold lower in the plasma (Fig. 5d). This is consistent with CYP7A1 transgenic mice having a ~2–3 fold increase in total bile acid pool due to increased hepatic cholesterol catabolism, with associated resistance to diet-induced hypercholesterolemia and atherosclerosis42.

Cyp7a1 expression is tightly regulated through a feedback control system, in which high levels of dietary cholesterol induce Cyp7a1 expression, while high plasma levels of bile acids act as signaling molecules to inhibit Cyp7a1 expression and bile acid metabolism by activating the farnesoid X receptor (FXR) and the FGF15/19 endocrine axis17,43. The gut microbiota can modulate FXR signaling in the gut via bile acid metabolism and processing17–19. FXR-deficient mice on an LDLr−/− background were found to have an improved lipid profile when fed a high-fat diet and were protected against diet-induced obesity and atherosclerosis44. Consistent with higher expression of Cyp7a1, we observed that the intestinal expression of FXR and its targets, including fibroblast growth factor 15 (FGF15), were downregulated in peptide-treated animals (Fig. 5c). Furthermore, not only did peptide-mediated remodeling of the gut microbiota alter the total bile acid pool size, it also significantly impacted the relative composition and abundance of certain bile acids in fecal and plasma samples (Supplementary Table 6). For example, the levels of taurine-conjugated muricholic acids (T-α,β-MCAs), known FXR antagonists23,45 were increased by peptide treatment, as revealed by targeted metabolomics (Fig. 5e). Likewise, the expression of intestinal bile acid transporters Asbt, Mrp2, and Mrp3 were significantly altered by the peptide treatment (Fig. 5c). Together, these data suggest that downregulation of the FGF15 endocrine axis (resulting from the altered processing of bile acids by the remodeled gut microbiota), along with decreased absorption of primary bile acids in the ileum, is likely responsible for maintaining an upregulated bile acid metabolism in the liver, resulting in increased conversion of cholesterol to bile acids that contributes to lower plasma cholesterol levels. It should be noted that T-α,β-MCAs are not found in significant levels in humans, so the observed effects may not be directly applicable to human biology.

Inflammation plays a critical role in the development of atherosclerosis46,47. We found that peptide-induced remodeling of the gut microbiome reduced the inflammation caused by WD via several gut microbiota-dependent mechanisms (Supplementary Fig. 3). Some commensal gut bacteria play key roles in the maintenance of gut integrity48. Impaired gut integrity can lead to increased leakage of microbiota-derived lipopolysaccharide (LPS) from the gut, causing systemic inflammation that intensifies atherosclerosis pathogenesis49. We found that several genes related to tight junctions in the ileum were upregulated by peptide treatment (Fig. 6a and Supplementary Fig. 3), and LPS-lipopolysaccharide response pathways were downregulated (Fig. 5b), suggesting that the defects in gut integrity caused by a WD regimen had been largely mitigated. Indeed, the villi width in the ileum (although not the length) was significantly increased in peptide-treated animals compared to vehicle controls (Fig. 6b, Fig. 6c, and Supplementary Fig. 3).

Interleukin-1β (IL-1β) is a proinflammatory cytokine central to the inflammatory response driven by the interlukin-6 (IL-6) signaling pathway. Inhibition of IL-1β has been shown to reduce the development of atherosclerotic plaques in mice and significantly lower the incidence of recurrent cardiovascular events in humans46. In addition to IL-1β, a pathogenic role of IL-1α in vascular inflammation and atherosclerosis has been described56. Analysis of liver tissue from WD animals (peptide c[wLwReQeR] treated vs vehicle) using a Luminex assay showed significant reductions in several cytokine and chemokine levels, including IL-1β, IL-1α, IL-6, and TNF-α (Fig. 6e and Supplementary Table 7), providing further support for the systemic anti-inflammatory effects of peptide-induced remodeling of a WD-fed gut microbiome.

We developed an en masse in vitro screening protocol to select self-assembling cyclic d,l-α-peptides that function as bacterial growth modulators and showed that the oral administration of selected peptides was effective in remodeling, in a targeted manner, a WD-induced gut microbiome in vivo to prevent development of atherosclerosis in LDLr−/− mice. Our data suggest that the observed reductions in plasma cholesterol levels observed resulted from altered processing of bile acids by the remodeled gut microbiota which in turn led to downregulation of the FGF15 endocrine axis, increasing the expression of cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase (Cyp7a1), and ultimately increasing conversion of cholesterol to bile acids. In addition, cyclic d,l-α-peptide remodeling of WD gut microbiome improved gut barrier integrity, suppressed the production of a number of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines (including IL-1β, IL-1α, IL-6, and TNF-α), increased relative populations of intestinal Helios+ Treg immune cells, and rebalanced levels of disease-relevant metabolites, such as short-chain fatty acids.

In this study we have determined the feasibility of directed remodeling of a gut microbiome for preventing the onset and progression of atherosclerosis in LDLr−/− mice. Further studies in other animal models of atherosclerosis and other microbiome-associated diseases would be necessary to establish the generality, scope, and limitations of the approach.

All procedures involving live animals were approved by the Scripps Research Institute Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. LDL receptor-null (LDLr−/−) mice on a C57BL/6J background bred in house. Unless otherwise noted, all experiments were performed with female LDLr−/− mice. Mice were housed in cages with paper bedding, 4 animals per cage, with a 12 hour light/dark cycle. For studies involving analysis of the gut microbiome, the mice were rotated between cages and co-housed with the mice from different cages for at least one week before the beginning of each study to reduce the variation in the composition of gut microbiome caused by the housing environment. The mice were weaned at 4 weeks of age and were fed ad libitum a standard chow diet (Harlan Teklad 7019) until they were 8–12-weeks old, when they were switched to a high-fat diet (WD) containing 15.8% (wt/wt) fat, 1.25% (wt/wt) cholesterol, and no cholate (Harlan Teklad 94059). At the time that the WD was started, the cyclic peptide was added to the drinking water at a dose of 180 μM and the mice were continued on WD for 10 weeks. The lyophilized peptide was dissolved with sonication in PBS (pH 7.4) containing 1% sucrose, resulting in a clear solution. The drinking water solution was replaced with fresh solution daily for c[wLwReQeR] and c[wMeLwRMeeQeR] or every other day for c[wLwKhShK] and c[fWwYqHhQ]. A control group of mice was fed WD and provided vehicle (PBS with 1% sucrose) drinking water. The mice each consumed approximately 4.0 mL of water per day, and there was no significant difference in water or food consumption between groups. The 10-wk efficacy studies were carried out twice for both c[wLwReQeR] and c[wLwKhShK]. The first studies used standard, non-sterilized diet and handling conditions. To lessen the possibility that bacteria from the environment would affect the gut microbiota composition during the study, in the second set of 10-wk efficacy studies we sought to prevent the introduction of exogenous bacteria to the mice. These studies involved sterilized diet (irradiated LabDiet 5053, UV-irradiated by the manufacturer), sterilized cages/bedding/water bottles (autoclaved as a unit prior to cage changes), and cages were only opened inside a HEPA filtered animal transfer station for cage changing or to take mouse samples. No differences were observed in the effects of the peptides on plasma total cholesterol levels or atherosclerotic lesions between the standard handling and “sterile” studies. For various follow up mechanistic studies, additional, shorter two- or four-wk studies were carried out for c[wLwReQeR] (including one study conducted by different personnel at a different facility with mice from a different colony, at Bristol-Myers-Squibb in Hopewell, NJ); in each of these studies we observed the same degree of reductions in plasma total cholesterol. Power analysis: For the 2-week plasma cholesterol levels and 10-week plasma cholesterol and atherosclerotic lesion levels, differences of ≥30% between groups is typical, and the standard deviation within groups is typically less than 25% from the mean. Based on these values, a Power analysis indicates that our group size of n=8 animals/group is sufficient to detect statistically significant changes (alpha = 0.05) with >90% probability.

Peptides were synthesized by using standard Fmoc chemistry with on-resin peptide cyclization. For additional experimental details, please see Supplementary Note. Characterization data for the peptides used in this study are given in Supplementary Table 3.

To prepare peptide stock solutions for the assay, a 20 mM peptide stock in DMSO was diluted to 1 mM in 10% sucrose. From that, a 0.64 mM and 0.16 mM peptide dilution in 10% sucrose was prepared. The use of 10% sucrose in the peptide stock was found to prevent the peptides from precipitating over time. The concentration of peptides in stock solutions was calculated based on A280 measurement.

Following the in vitro en masse assay, peptides were scored/ranked as follows. First, we removed peptide sequences that exhibited broad-spectrum antibacterial activity, as defined by causing a ≥95% reduction of observed reads compared to the vehicle-treated control for ≥20 species. Of the 29 peptides screened, 6 were eliminated due to broad antibacterial activity. The remaining 23 compounds were then ranked based on the degree to which they suppressed the growth of the 19 bacterial species that increased in abundance in WD-fed mice compared to CHD-fed mice (found in Supplementary Table 1). These 19 targeted bacterial species were identified as follows: out of the 54 bacterial genera that showed significant (adjusted p<0.05) changes in abundance in LDLr−/− mice fed CHD vs. WD (Supplementary Table 1), 40 genera decreased while 14 genera increased in abundance with WD feeding. Within the 14 genera that increased in abundance, there were 19 bacterial species that were also present in our in vitro culture system. Peptides were scored by summing the observed changes in abundance for each of the identified bacteria, with shifts toward the CHD state being considered positive and shifts away being negative. Compounds scored highly when they reduced the levels of the 19 bacterial species (lowest summed differences in relative abundance). The peptide ranking is found in Supplementary Table 4.

For details of in vitro MIC assays against nine representative laboratory strains of gut bacteria, see Supplementary Note.

The feces samples were freshly collected after 2, 6, and 10 weeks of treatment, snap-frozen, and stored at −80°C. Microbial genomic DNA was isolated with PowerSoil DNA isolation kit by following manufacturer’s instructions (Mo Bio).

PCR amplicons of the V3-V4 16S rRNA region were amplified and sequenced using an Illumina MiSeq platform. For each sample, duplicate 25 μl PCR reactions were performed, each containing 50 ng of purified DNA, 12.5 μl 2X KAPA HiFi HotStart ReadyMix (Kapa biosystem), and 0.15 μM of each primer designed to amplify the V3-V4 region: forward primer (5’-AATGATACGGCGACCACCGAGATCTACACTCTTTCCCTACACGACG CTCTTCCGATCTNNNNNNNNNNNNACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAG-3’) and reverse primer (5’-CAAGCAGAAGACGGCATACGAGATNNNNNNNNNNNNGTGACTGGA GTTCAGACGTGTGCTCTTCCGATCTnnnnnnnnnnGGACTACHVGGGTWTCTAAT-3’). A unique 12-base sequence (N’s) was included for sample identification. We also included unique molecular identifiers (n’s) to correct PCR duplication artifacts during the library preparation. Cycling conditions were 98°C for 2 min, followed by 20 cycles of 98°C for 10 s, 60°C for 30 s, and 72°C for 45 s. A condition of 72°C for 5 min was used for the final elongation step. Replicate PCR samples were pooled, and amplicons were qualified with Quant-iT dsDNA Assay kit (ThermoFisher). Each sample was combined at an equimolar amount before DNA purification with Agencourt AMPure XP (Beckman Coulter). The completed library was sequenced on an Illumina MiSeq platform following the Illumina recommended procedures, to an average depth of 177,286 ± 33,033 read pairs per sample.

We used custom python scripts to demultiplex sequencing reads based on the second barcode index and remove PCR duplication artifacts found using unique molecular identifiers prior to analyzing sequences using the mothur57 (version 1.36.1). We developed a custom analysis pipeline based on the MiSeq SOP published by the curators of mothur. Briefly, contigs were generated by combining forward and reverse paired-end reads using the mothur make.contigs command. 177,286 ± 33,033 contigs were generated per pair (11,346,311 total). The contigs were filtered based on their length (440–480bp for V3-V4 region), and any contigs with ambiguous bases were removed. Redundant contigs were then consolidated from the remaining 9,653,596 contigs, and 1,176,445 unique contigs were then aligned to a reference database (SILVA non-redundant dataset v119). The contigs that didn’t align properly based on position of alignment and those with homopolymers of length > 8 were removed before the downstream analysis. We performed a pre-clustering step to cluster reads up to 2 bp apart and removed all chimeric sequences. Finally, we used a k-mer based method to classify the sequences to individual taxonomic groups to get counts per group. Scripts used for calculating the Chao1 index can be found at: https://github.com/bmolparia/species_richness. Furthermore, we performed statistical analysis on the 16S data using DESeq258 to identify significantly altered bacterial genera (adjusted p-value < 0.1) and compare the distribution of various groups using principal-component analysis. Shannon diversity was calculated using the following equation, where H is the Shannon diversity index, G is the number of genera present in each sample, and pi is the relative abundance of each genera within the sample:

Plasma cholesterol and liver enzyme activities were determined using enzymatic assays. See Supplementary Note for additional details.

The cyclic peptide was extracted from plasma or feces and measured by using reverse-phase HPLC coupled with mass spectrometry selected ion monitoring. See Supplementary Note for additional details.

To assess the effects of c[wLwReQeR] on intestinal absorption of cholesterol, a dual fecal isotope ratio method was used. See Supplementary Note for additional details.

Pooled plasma (240 μL total, 30 μL from each, n = 8 fasted mice per group) from the two-week blood draw was used for fast protein liquid chromatography (FPLC) analysis. Lipoproteins were separated by using 3 Superdex 200 10/30 columns connected in series (GE Healthcare). The plasma was centrifuged at 11,000 rpm for 10 min at room temperature to remove particulates (floating material was gently mixed into liquid before removing the supernatant for FPLC injection). 200 μL of the pooled plasma was injected on the system eluted with 10 mM tris-HCl buffer, pH 7.4, containing 1 mM EDTA and 150 mM NaCl; a flow rate of 0.5 ml/min and fraction size of 0.5 mL were used.

Atherosclerotic lesion severity was assessed by en face analysis of the entire mouse aorta and analysis of lesions in the aortic root (heart sinus). See Supplementary Note for additional details.

We used a gut microbiota depletion procedure described by Staley et al59. Female LDLr−/− mice (n = 35), 8–20 weeks of age were randomized twice between 7 cages in groups of 5 mice/cage to equalize the microbiota and even out age spread. Housing units (cage, bedding, and water bottles) were autoclaved over the entire course of the study. Food was irradiated by vendors. Mice were fed standard chow diet (PicoLab Rodent Diet 20, #5053, % Kcal from: protein 24.65%, carbohydrate 62.14 %, fat 13.20 %) prior to the study and then switched to a high fat diet (Envigo #TD.94059, % Kcal from: protein 20.4 %, carbohydrate 42.7 %, fat 36.9 %) on day −21. The antibiotic cocktail was prepared fresh daily one day prior to consumption, stored at 4°C, and replaced daily. The cocktail consisted of three nonabsorbable antibiotics each at 1 mg ml−1 in the drinking water (ertapenem sodium salt, neomycin sulfate, vancomycin hydrochloride). Peptides were dissolved in sterile 1.2% sucrose prior to the study and stored at −20°C and then diluted with 10X PBS to final 1X. PBS was used as vehicle control. Final concentrations of peptide were 180 μM in drinking water (corresponding to a dose of ~30 mg kg−1 day−1). The timeline of the study is shown in Supplementary Figure 2. Blood and fecal samples were collected at each timepoint and mice were weighed. One cage received no treatment as a control. DNA was isolated from the fecal samples using a DNeasy Powersoil kit (Qiagen). Genomic DNA was measured using a nanodrop 2000. 5 ng of gDNA was amplified using forward and reverse 16Sv3–4 primers (as described elsewhere). Amplicon concentrations were measured using a Qubit dsDNA HS (High Sensitivity) Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher). Equal amounts of each amplicon were combined into one of two libraries (each library containing either 2 or 3 of the 5 replicates from each treatment group, n = 112 or 114 samples, respectively) and cleaned up using Ampure XP beads (Beckman Coulter). Purity was checked using Bioanalyzer High Sensitivity DNA kit (Agilent) and the libraries were sequenced using an Illumina MiSeq (2×300 kit) using a full flow cell run with 20% added PhiX.

RNA-seq was carried out using a single sample from each group to generate profiling information that could be validated and confirmed by using qPCR and metabolomics analyses. Total bacterial RNA from feces samples was isolated with ZR Soil/Fecal RNA MicroPrep (Zymo research) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, the sample was suspended in RNA lysis buffer and lysed by the mixer (Retsch). The supernatant was transferred to a RNA-binding column and washed several times with RNA wash buffer. In-column DNaseI digestion at 25°C for 15 min was performed to eliminate DNA contamination in the sample. The presence of genomic DNA contamination was assessed by PCR with universal 16S rRNA gene primers. Before RNA-seq library preparation, rRNA was removed from 2 μg of total bacterial RNA with Ribo-Zero Bacteria kit (Illumina). 100 ng of purified RNA was used for RNA-seq library preparation as described previously60. The cDNA was synthesized by reverse transcription with SuperScript III (Life technologies) and second-strand synthesis (New England Biolabs). The sequencing library was generated from purified cDNA with Nextera XT DNA library preparation kit (Illumina) and amplified by PCR. Cycling conditions were 72°C for 3 min, 95°C for 30 s, followed by 16 cycles of 95°C for 10 s, 55°C for 30 s, and 72°C for 30 s. A condition of 72°C for 5 min was used for the final elongation step. Libraries with different indexes were pooled and sequenced on an Illumina NextSeq at the Scripps Research Institute next generation sequencing core. 4,453,883, 8,956,883, and 9,166,765 reads were generated from the CHD, WD, and WD + c[wLwReQeR] samples, respectively. Of these reads, 1,367,533 were mappable for CHD (30.7% of total generated reads), 4,411,184, were mappable for WD (49.2% of total generated reads), and 4,470,591 were mappable WD + c[wLwReQeR] (48.8% of total generated reads).

We used BWA (version 0.7.12) read alignment program61 and a custom-built bacterial reference database, which contains 4,700 bacterial genomes from NCBI NR sequence database, to map RNA-seq reads. The reads aligned to individual bacterial genes were counted using HTSeq count62 (version 0.6.0) and the counts were further normalized based on size factors estimated using the median of the ratios of observed counts method as described previously63. The proteins predicted by RNA-seq read alignment were annotated with DIAMOND64 (version 0.8.26) using the NCBI nonredundant (NCBI-nr) database65 and the default setting (BLASTX e value < 10−3, bit score > 50). For query genes with multiple matches, the annotated reference gene with the lowest e value was chosen. The functional analysis was performed by MEGAN66 (version 5.11.3) and KEGG analyzer was used to determine read counts in different metabolic pathways from each group. The aggregate expression level changes for sequences within a given function were normalized before the comparison between each group.

Fecal SCFA and amino acid content were measured by targeted metabolomics. See Supplementary Note for additional details.

Mouse tissues were harvested after 2 weeks of treatment, stored in RNAlater, and snap-frozen. 20–30 mg of mouse tissue was used for RNA extraction with RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Ribosomal RNA was removed from total RNA with Ribo-Zero Gold rRNA removal kit (Illumina). Strand-specific RNA-seq libraries were constructed as described previously67. Libraries with different barcodes were pooled and single-end sequencing (75bp) was performed on an Illumina NextSeq at the Scripps Research Institute next generation sequencing core.

After ribosomal RNA sequences were removed, the RNA transcripts were quantified using RSEM68. Differentially expressed genes were identified by DESeq258 and significantly changed genes were selected using a cutoff of adjusted p-value < 0.1, comparing peptide-treated animals (n=3) to vehicle-control animals (n=3) for each group (CHD or WD-fed animals). Enrichment of Gene Ontology terms and categories was performed with DAVID 6.869,70.

To validate selected gene expression results, qPCR reactions were carried out. Mouse livers were harvested two weeks after peptide treatment and total RNA was extracted using RNeasy Mini (Qiagen) following manufacturer’s instructions. Reverse transcription was performed for 1 h using random priming (Promega). qPCR reactions (0.5 μl cDNA, 0.2 μM each primer, SYBR green Master Mix (Kapa biosystems)) were performed on a Bio-Rad CFX384 Touch Real-Time PCR detection system, using primers specific for each gene (Supplementary Table 8). Data were normalized to loading controls (16S and β-actin).

Total bile acids were measured enzymatically using a total bile acid assay kit (Cell Biolabs) following manufacturer’s instruction. Individual bile acids were measured using targeted metabolomics. See Supplementary Note for additional details.

Lamina propria (LP) immune cells from the small intestine were isolated using a lamina propria dissociation kit and quantified using flow cytometry. See Supplementary Note for additional details.

Data are expressed as the mean ± S.D. Statistical significance was determined by analysis of variance (ANOVA) or Student’s t-test (details are provided in corresponding figure legends), as determined by using GraphPad Prism software (version 8.3.1). p values <0.05 were considered as statistically significant for in vivo animal study.

Source Data for quantifications mentioned either in the text or shown in graphs are available by request from the corresponding authors. RNA-seq data have been deposited in the Gene Expression Omibus under accession GSE104915; 16S rRNA sequencing reads have been deposited in MG-RAST under accession 93528, 93529, and 93586.

Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interests.

