Host-mycobiome metabolic interactions in health and disease

Fungal communities (mycobiome) have an important role in sustaining the resilience of complex microbial communities and maintenance of homeostasis. The mycobiome remains relatively unexplored compared to the bacteriome despite increasing evidence highlighting their contribution to host-microbiome interactions in health and disease. Despite being a small proportion of the total species, fungi constitute a large proportion of the biomass within the human microbiome and thus serve as a potential target for metabolic reprogramming in pathogenesis and disease mechanism. Metabolites produced by fungi shape host niches, induce immune tolerance and changes in their levels prelude changes associated with metabolic diseases and cancer. Given the complexity of microbial interactions, studying the metabolic interplay of the mycobiome with both host and microbiome is a demanding but crucial task. However, genome-scale modelling and synthetic biology can provide an integrative platform that allows elucidation of the multifaceted interactions between mycobiome, microbiome and host. The inferences gained from understanding mycobiome interplay with other organisms can delineate the key role of the mycobiome in pathophysiology and reveal its role in human disease.

Until recently, fungal infections, unlike bacterial and viral infections, had been largely neglected despite being a significant cause of global morbidity and mortality.1,2 The importance of fungi in the host has been largely overlooked as the number of fungal genes in the gut is relatively low compared to bacterial genes, as reported by the Human Microbiome Project (HMP).3 With the advent of high throughput sequencing technologies, our knowledge of the bacterial communities of the microbiome has expanded exponentially, along with our understanding of their potential roles in disease pathology. In contrast, the mycobiome (fungal community) study remains in its formative years.4–6 To date, there are substantially fewer studies focused on fungi within the microbiome due to difficulties in nucleic acid extraction, rudimentary fungal genome annotations and limited bioinformatic tools to analyse these data or established standards. Early studies using culture-dependent studies suggested that only 70% of the population harboured a fungal population.7 A total of 267 fungal taxa have been identified in the human gut mycobiome by several studies. However, the validity of some of these fungal species (e.g. Penicillium) is unclear as they cannot be grown under human gut conditions in the laboratory.8 The long-term residence of fungi in the gut microbiome is thus still the subject of debate as the longevity of fungal species within a mycobiome is undetermined.8 Further, fungal genes within the microbial metagenome have been estimated to only make up 0.1% of the total microbial genes.9 However, the importance of fungi to the host cannot be determined by measures of the overall relative abundance of their genetic material within the microbiome. Production of metabolites and small molecules by fungi potentially has a more significant impact in the microbiota and host compared to bacterial production, owing to the greater fungal biomass and associated higher occupation of surface area, however, this remains largely unproven.9–11 A summary table of mycobiome studies associated with dysbiosis highlights the increasing relevance of fungi (Table 1).

Although increasingly being seen as important, investigations of the impact of the mycobiota on both host and microbiome are in their infancy. In particular, our understanding of host-fungal metabolic interactions is limited in both health and disease. Although host-microbiome metabolic interactions have been studied, further development is needed in understanding the impact of fungal biochemical pathways and their downstream metabolites in these interactions.19 In this review, we explore the role of fungal metabolism in human disease, and this will help us understand the extent of how mycobiome interacts with its environment. This review will go onto explore the impact of secondary metabolites and how we can use systems-level approaches to explore this deeper level of functioning of the mycobiome for therapeutic use.

In the last decade, fungal infection research has exploded, focussing on the host immune response towards these microbes, including adaptive and innate immunity.20,21 Even though fungal disease leads to inflammation, the mechanisms at mucosal surfaces are not well elucidated.2 However, the host immune response and subsequent imbalance of homeostatic microbial communities can lead to dysbiosis. Dysbiosis is the unfavourable changes/imbalance in the community of organisms within the microbiota, leading to the progression of the disease. This term is highly used in microbiome research and infers misunderstanding as the biological context is undetermined as healthy microbiota remains unknown and not specific to the presence of a particular genus or community distribution.22 Detailed information of data source was tabulated for in vivo and in vitro mycobiome studies (Table 2).

*in vitro (lab experiments), in vivo (animal experiments), in silico (computational analysis) and human data (clinical sample collection)

Mycobiome dysbiosis is a predisposing factor in other diseases as well.37,40 For example, the mycobiome is associated with cancer development and progression,46 where Malassezia spp. are increased in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) in an in vivo (murine) study.46 In contrast, Candida tropicalis, another commensal fungus, is associated with slower or lack of tumour development.46 This study, among others, indicates that mycobiome composition is paramount to host health and disease status. However, specific fungal species do not exclusively drive these interactions. In order to survive, fungi adapt to their local environment; this includes adjusting to acidic environments through morphology switching and metabolic plasticity. Biofilms are a classic example of fungi changing their growth pattern in response to host responses and environmental cues. Fungi-microbe interactions play a key role in adaptation. Fungi cooperate with bacteria to increase fungal biofilm potential, resulting in significant increases in the severity of inflammatory diseases – most notably in IBD.37 Alternatively, Pichia spp. interaction with Candida results in the reduction of biofilm due to competition in the environment.47 Thus, mycobiome composition plays a significant role in the maintenance of the homeostatic relationship within the microbiota. Determining whether fungal-bacterial-host relationships drive compositional changes and whether controlling each element in these networks could potentially prevent disease is a fundamental goal for future microbiome research.

The interplay between the mycobiome and host immune responses involves physical interactions at the cell surface, metabolic reprogramming, regulatory pathways, and secretion of small molecules. Exposure to host responses and environmental stressors provides a platform for metabolic plasticity to manipulate host interactions and promote invasion48 or modulate immunological responses.49 These host immune responses to fungal infection have been reviewed extensively elsewhere.20,50–54 To creates symbiotic relationship with microbiota for host immune-tolerance, there is a positive exchange of compounds and nutrients. With evidence of fungi producing vitamins and fatty acids,55–57 there is an opportunity and potential for these exchanges with the mycobiome that remains to be investigated.

Microbial metabolism, including fungal metabolism, has been associated with driving inflammation, various diseases and even cancer progression.58–60 For instance, short-chain fatty acids (SCFA), tryptophan and branched-chain amino acids have all been identified as playing a role in immune and homeostatic responses.61 Short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) available within the host are necessary for regulating some fungal growth as well as modulating immune responses. Fungi are capable of producing vitamins, notably including vitamin D and B6, that can impact the immune system.62–66 The different fungal moieties, such as cell wall polysaccharides and melanin,67 drive metabolic reprogramming of innate immune cells to confer protective inflammation and activate antimicrobial defences.68–70 Equally, contact with host cells drives shifts in fungal metabolism.52 For instance, host recognition of ß-glucan from fungal cell walls reprogrammes macrophage glucose metabolism towards aerobic glycolysis, promoting more rapid ATP creation.67 Importantly, however, C. albicans undergoes a similar metabolic reprogramming, meaning that local glucose is rapidly depleted, leading to the premature death of macrophages.52 As C. albicans has a significant degree of metabolic plasticity, it can then revert to using alternative carbon sources to survive. Melanin produced by Aspergillus fumigatus is recognised by macrophages via MelLec (a C-type melanin-sensing receptor) via calcium sequestering in phagosomes, leading to activation of antifungal defences within the host.71 A. fumigatus responds further by reducing melanin for fungal persistence, leading to conidia germination and increased glycolysis allows metabolic repurposing of macrophage response for effective fungal defence.70 Hosts defensive metabolic responses and the parallel evasive mechanistic pathways in fungi demonstrate a need to understand metabolic networks in host mycobiome in health and disease.52

In a series of animal model studies, the interaction between host-mycobiome and fungus-bacterium has been linked to the health status of the host (expansion of the in vivo data set sources is listed in Table 2).37,72–74 The interaction of fungi and bacteria occurs on several different levels. Physical contact can occur between members of microbial communities leading to the exchange of secreted products and communication between the two cell surfaces. Cell signalling between microbes also provides regulation and trade of metabolites and genetic materials through different mechanisms, such as horizontal gene transfer, signal transduction and interaction with the host.75,76 This exchange allows for an interplay between microbes that can maintain the ecosystem’s resilience or drive a dysbiosis state. This interplay within the host means there is a knock-on effect for the host, potentially resulting in disease pathology. For example, C. tropicalis is significantly more abundant in Crohn’s disease (CD) patients in comparison to non-CD relatives.37 This increased abundance correlates with increased abundance of some bacterial species and related improved biofilm formation and disease severity. These interactions can potentially be bi-directional. For example, Escherichia coli, Serratia marcescens, and Candida tropicalis together exhibit enhanced biofilm formation, giving a thicker, more robust film.37 Furthermore, the production of bile acids (e.g. cholic acid) from the microbiota and environment have been shown to promote the growth and morphogenetic plasticity of C. albicans,77 whilst hexadecanedioic and caproic acids have demonstrated antifungal activity.29

Alteration of the bacteriome composition drives diverse changes in metabolite levels in the gut and effects on the mycobiome. For example, antibiotic-treated mice have increased levels of C. albicans in their gut.77 Whilst it could be argued that this is purely due to an increase in the available nutrients, this is unlikely to be the sole reason, given the lack of presence of this species in mice under normal conditions. There is evidence of SCFA release by bacteria incurring modifications in host transcription activation,86–88 signalling89,90 and chromatin changes91 in the host. The increased fungal presence may be due to bacterial species reduction resulting in diminished SFCA production, giving rise to changes in pH. Therefore, the changes in bacterial abundance due to antibiotics drive shifts in gut bacteriome composition and abundance, altering cross-talk with the mycobiome. There is further potential for fungi to interact with SCFAs. Aspergillus can produce SCFAs from aromatic compounds biodegradation. A. fumigatus degrades these compounds to produce acetic acid, among others.92 Investigation of the effects of SCFAs on C. albicans in the presence of bacteria found they control yeast growth.93 Further investigation revealed that butyrate and lactic acid inhibit hyphal germination94,95 whilst sodium butyrate increases phagocytic macrophage rates along with increasing production of nitric acid.96 SCFAs also induce biofilm formation in C. albicans, decreasing its metabolic activity.77 Acetate exhibited the most potent inhibitory effects on C. albicans, directly preventing germ tube formation and adherence independent of pH.77 These studies indicate that microbially-produced SCFAs (from either bacteriome or mycobiome) affect both confirmation and community structure of the mycobiome, potentially leading to dysbiosis.

Fungi produce an expansive variety of metabolites with varied impacts on their survival, as well as host and microbiota interactions. For example, the fungal metabolite N-acetyl-L-glutamic acid has hypotensive effects.29 The natural ability of fungi to produce this cornucopia leads to ripple effects in their environment.97 The metabolic activity of fungal communities has a pivotal role in microbiome modulation, contributing to disease pathogenesis and pathology. Fungi can catabolise a panoply of different substrates, including carbohydrates, amino acids, lipids, proteins, and vitamins utilising both primary and secondary metabolism. Primary metabolism is involved in the growth and development of the cell, whilst secondary metabolism increases fungal viability in the environment. Fungi produce a variety of secondary metabolites, including acids, toxins, polyols and sugars that mediate cross-talk and are considered a by-product of other reactions.98

Secondary metabolites can have a knock-on effect on host metabolism, and this has been used extensively for therapeutic effects (Table 3). One metabolite isolated from Aspergillus species is naptho-γ-pyrones. This natural metabolite has various biological effects, including anti-bacterial and anti-oxidant activity.120–124 The wide variety of fungal metabolite functions makes them ideal targets for therapeutic use. This can be done by targeting metabolic pathways to derive benefits. For example, by driving immunometabolic shifts that affect glucose competition and redirecting pathways for cancer treatment.125 As well as direct impacts on the host whether as colonisers or during infection, these metabolites are ideal potential drugs for treating the microbiome directly. For example Penicillium produces a mycotoxin called citrinin that has antibiotic properties against bacteria and can have a toxic effect on kidney and liver.126–128 Secondary metabolites can thus conceivably both provide diagnostic markers for the detection of disease and manipulate metabolic pathways, altering host health status. System biology contributes useful tools in investigating metabolic pathways in fungi in the context of the human mycobiome.

To date, mycobiome studies have primarily been grounded in culture-based techniques that are hostage to the diverse requirements of each community member, meaning many fungi remain undetected and undiscovered.4 The development of molecular techniques such as 18S ribosomal RNA and inter transcribed spacer (ITS) sequencing has profoundly impacted the detection of fungi and the characterisation of the mycobiome. However, these techniques are limited in understanding the mycobiome community’s overall structure, function, and dynamic existence on a large-scale platform.129 Many mycologists face the obstacle of limited bioinformatic tools and databases available compared to bacteriologists. With improving next generation sequencing (NGS) technologies and lower costs, multi-omics data generation is increasing rapidly. Multi-omics data includes metagenomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics and fluxomics that impart in-depth information that has enabled us to learn about microbiota interactions (Figure 2).130–132 Each multi-omics dataset provides a different view on either single species or communities of varied microbes.133,134 Experimental studies and multi-omics data generate abundant information; however, we currently lack the ability to fully integrate this information to give us a systematic overview. Individual data have so far failed to elucidate the interactions involved in fungi-fungi, fungi-bacteria and fungi-host relationships. Systems biology, by its holistic approach and mathematical models, provides a computational platform to integrate the different multi-omics datasets, presenting a better structure to understand the relationship between gene, protein and metabolites, and additionally to explore the interactions between organisms in a complex community.33,135–137 Among the mathematical models as the core of the systems biology approach, genome-scale metabolic models (GSMM) has proven to enable the genotype-phenotype relationships through a series of connected gene-protein-reaction links, providing a powerful predictive toolkit.135 GSMM have been applied in different microbial and human studies as a discovery platform to propose novel markers, treatments and bioproduction enhancement.138–141 GSMM predictions and discovery can be further evaluated and validated using synthetic biology, such as CRISPR-cas systems (Clustered Regularly Interspace Short Palindromic Repeat) for genome editing to test and manipulate molecular and metabolic pathways.142

The difficulties lie in exploiting fungal models and synthetic biology due to annotation accuracy with high plasticity of metabolic pathways, diverse morphology, and evolutionary adaptive traits. There is a lagging development of fungal GSMM and applying CRISPR system in clinical and healthcare settings due to a lack of quantitative tools to study fungal genomes a lack of annotation and validation in the model. The global overview provided by this approach offers the potential to drive strategies to manipulate the mycobiome to make predictions, test hypotheses, propose clinical areas for manipulation, identify new diagnostics target areas with better understanding, and discover novel therapeutic targets.135,136,167

Understanding the behaviour of fungi, both individually and as a community, is essential in elucidating the role of the mycobiome in health and disease. Untethering the distinct metabolic interactions and effects of secondary metabolism provide an opportunity for disease intervention, determining the point at which dysbiosis arises, identifying biomarkers for better diagnostics and novel therapeutic targets. Metabolism is a holistic and integrative subject that combines genetics, molecular pathways, signalling and environmental factors. Multi-disciplinary tools and methods such as system biology are needed to develop in silico models as a predictive tool to validate current datasets and knowledge. In doing so, we will generate a platform to answer how mycobiome metabolism affects the host in health and disease.

Genome-scale metabolic models (GSMM) are a systematic and curated method to establish genotype-phenotype relationships. GSMM aim to bridge together the complex network of genes, reactions and thousands of metabolites in silico while sustaining full metabolic flux functionality of the system. The functionality of a model refers to the natural ability of the model to undertake reactions, a realistic rate of energy consumption, rate of energy production and apply physio-chemical laws and environmental input to create a system that is true-to-life.168 The conversion of the reactions into a stoichiometric matrix allows mathematical inferences to integrate data into a predictive biological framework called constraint-based modelling.169 This developmental process of integration requires automated and manual curation for efficient quality standards. The GSMM community has developed a MEMOTE suite package to ensure the models’ standardisation and functional feasibility.170 With synthetic biology approach of genome engineering techniques pave the way for validating fungal species’ biological mechanisms underlying these systematic alterations in response to different environmental changes such as response to anti-fungal drug and the host organism’s reaction during fungal infection (Martins-Santana et al., 2018).142 Figure 2 demonstrates the step-by-step inferences for creating a GSMM and synthetic biology to determine the interaction of mycobiome within the community.

CRISPR (Clustered Regularly Interspace Short Palindromic Repeat-associated (Cas) is a robust and customised method of gene editing which is adapted from the immune mechanism in bacteria and archaea against viral (bacteriophage) invasion (Mojica et al. 2005).173 What makes Type-II CRISPR-Cas9 a well-established CRISPR approach in the genome-editing field is the ability of manipulation at genome level using just chimeric single guide RNA, making double-strand breaks to insert-deletion gene (indel) using cas9 nuclease, followed by homologous/non-homologues recombination and multiple genes indel (Pourcel et al. 2005; Brouns et al. 2008).109–119,174,175

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Supplemental data for this article can be accessed online at https://doi.org/10.1080/19490976.2022.2121576.

