Gut Microbiome and Common Variable Immunodeficiency: Few Certainties and Many Outstanding Questions

Common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) is the most common symptomatic primary antibody immunodeficiency, characterized by reduced serum levels of IgG, IgA, and/or IgM. The vast majority of CVID patients have polygenic inheritance. Immune dysfunction in CVID can frequently involve the gastrointestinal tract and lung. Few studies have started to investigate the gut microbiota profile in CVID patients. Overall, the results suggest that in CVID patients there is a reduction of alpha and beta diversity compared to controls. In addition, these patients can exhibit increased plasma levels of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and markers (sCD14 and sCD25) of systemic immune cell activation. CVID patients with enteropathy exhibit decreased IgA expression in duodenal tissue. Mouse models for CVID unsatisfactorily recapitulate the polygenic causes of human CVID. The molecular pathways by which gut microbiota contribute to systemic inflammation and possibly tumorigenesis in CVID patients remain poorly understood. Several fundamental questions concerning the relationships between gut microbiota and the development of chronic inflammatory conditions, autoimmune disorders or cancer in CVID patients remain unanswered. Moreover, it is unknown whether it is possible to modify the microbiome and the outcome of CVID patients through specific therapeutic interventions.

Elie Metchnikoff, a founder of modern Immunology, suggested that indigenous microbiota provide several pivotal functions for health and disease (1). However, only in recent years, due to the growing access to DNA sequencing technology, important mechanistic insights have been clarified (2). The human gut microbiota consists of 10-100 trillion symbiotic microbes (e.g., bacteria, yeast, and viruses) within each individual (3), whereas the human microbiome encodes over 3 million genes these cells harbor (4). New culture-independent techniques based on high-throughput or next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies have revolutionized the knowledge of the gut microbiota (5). These approaches have allowed comprehensive analysis of the gut microbiota composition without the limitations of classic culture methods. The most common omics quantification is sequencing of the 16S ribosomal RNA subunit. Such sequencing is relatively simple, but can miss potentially relevant pathobions (6). The whole-community shotgun sequencing (WCS) has been proposed to be a more accurate technique (7). In addition, new omics technologies (e.g., metabolomics and proteomics) go beyond species abundance and have enabled more comprehensive insights on microbiota functions in health and disease (8, 9).

The aim of this review was to provide an overview of current results and many outstanding questions related to the study of microbiome in common variable immunodeficiency (CVID). We will outline the factors (e.g., decreased secretory IgA, recurrent infections, antibiotics) that shape gut microbiota composition in patients with CVID, and the potential clinical interventions (e.g., diet, probiotics, prebiotics, drugs and fecal microbiota transplantation) to re-establish and/or to promote a “healthier” microbial community.

Common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) is the most common symptomatic primary antibody immunodeficiency (PID) in adulthood with a prevalence of approximately 1/25,000 (26). CVID is characterized by low serum levels of IgG, IgA, and/or IgM and impaired antibody synthesis in response to vaccines and pathogens (27, 28). CVID may present with a wide spectrum of clinical manifestations including increased susceptibility to infections, inflammatory and autoimmune diseases, solid and hematological malignancies (29, 30). The age of onset of CVID varies between 20 and 40 years. The variable age of onset and the heterogeneity of clinical manifestations, which can involve various segments of the respiratory and gastrointestinal tract, is consistent with different phenotypes of this PID.

The gastrointestinal tracts involved in CVID display a wide spectrum of histologic patterns. The intestinal mucosa can show increased intraepithelial lymphocytes, villous blunting, crypt distortion, overexpression of apoptosis, paucity of plasma cells and nodular lymphoid hyperplasia, reflecting a mucosal response to gut antigens (51, 52). Among this broad spectrum of gastrointestinal manifestations, CVID-related enteropathy (E-CVID) is characterized by villous atrophy, malabsorption and diarrhea (48, 53).

In the last decade, few studies have started to investigate the gut microbiota profile in CVID patients. Gut microbial imbalance of patients with CVID mainly includes changes in microbial diversity, decrease in symbiotic beneficial bacteria, and increase in pathobionts (22, 54–56). The term alpha diversity was introduced to describe the mean microbial species diversity in the gut (43). Higher species diversity leads to higher resilience in the gut ecosystem. In other words, a healthy, resilient gut microbiome relies on high richness and biodiversity (57).

Figure 1 schematically illustrates some of the structural features and the cells of the innate and adaptive immune system in human colonic mucosa in normal subjects and in CVID patients.

CD19 deficiency is a risk factor for monogenic CVID in humans (99). A mouse model of CVID (CD19−/− mice) is characterized by intestinal malabsorption and defects in lipid metabolism and transport (100). CD19−/− mice develop defective maturation, proliferation, and selection of B cells in the intestinal germinal center, thus resulting in impaired B cell memory and insufficient synthesis of high-affinity antibodies (101) (102, 103). CD19−/− mice had a B cell deficiency in gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT) resulting in a dramatic decrease of fecal IgA, IgG, and IgM compared to wild-type (WT) mice. As a consequence, CD19−/− mice cannot bind intestinal bacteria with IgA with subsequent expansion of fecal anaerobic bacteria. These mice develop chronic intestinal malabsorption and altered microbiota composition characterized by outgrowth of anaerobic bacteria within the order Bacteroidales (e.g., Rikenellaceae and Lachnospiraceae), in addition to specific species [Staphylococcus spp., Sutterella spp., segmented filamentous bacteria (SFB), an undescribed species of alphaproteobacteria, and Bilophila spp]. Intestinal malabsorption was associated with intestinal mast cell activation. In this study, treatment with metronidazole and the subsequent reduction in the severity of malabsorption highlights the hypothesis that expansion of anaerobic bacteria was driving the malabsorption in CD19−/− mice. In order to determine whether the intestinal malabsorption was due to dietary gluten exposure, the authors applied a strict gluten-free diet (GFD). Five weeks after initial GFD-exposure the intestinal mucosa histologically showed a reduction of malabsorption. The authors suggested that malabsorption in CD19−/− mice was, at least in part, not only microbiota-dependent but also gluten-sensitive. Of note, gluten sensitivity in patients with CVID is still a matter of debate (100). The results of the previous study suggest that gut microbiota could be an important co-factor in CD19−/− mice. Modification of gluten antigens by microbial transglutaminase may enhance the immunogenicity of gluten peptides, unleashing the inflammatory response (100). In this scenario, the mucosal IgA seems to play an intriguing role as modulators of the gut microbiota (104). In fact, secretory IgA regulates the composition and functions of the gut microbiota by promoting symbiosis between bacteria (105), whereas commensal bacteria induce local IgA response. In addition, IgA binds to members of the commensal gut microbiota and affects colonization levels (106). IgA-coated species include members of the Proteobacteria phylum (e.g., Enterobacteriaceae) and Firmicutes phylum (e.g., Lactobacilli), which were relatively increased in the CVID cohort studied by Fiedorová and colleagues. Hence, reduced secretory IgA in CVID patients with enteropathy can lead to microbial dysbiosis.

The use of CD19-/- mice as a clinically relevant model for CVID has been critically examined by Jorgensen and collaborators (107). These authors emphasized that this mouse model does not reflect the polygenic causes of the majority of CVID patients. Therefore, animal models should be carefully considered when studying the interplay between microbiota and immunodeficiency.

A recent cross-sectional study on a cohort of 27 CVID individuals reported that symptoms of small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO) were found in the majority (> 60%) of patients (72). This disorder is characterized by the presence of a pathological concentration of bacteria in the jejunal aspirate equal to or greater than 105 colony-forming units (CFU) per ml. Recognition of this syndrome is made possible by the non-invasive hydrogen tests, such as glucose and lactulose breath tests (108). Symptoms traditionally linked to SIBO include bloating, diarrhea, and abdominal pain/discomfort (72). Steatorrhoea is present in more severe cases. SIBO can contribute to or worsen the nutritional status of CVID patients. In fact, bacterial overgrowth can compromise the absorption of proteins, fats, carbohydrates, vitamins, and other micronutrients. For example, B-12 deficiency is caused by the consumption of cobalamin by anaerobes, malabsorption of the vitamin due to competitive binding with cobalamin from bacterially generated metabolites of cobalamin at the ileal receptor, and in more severe overgrowth, mucosal injury involving the binding site (109). The excess of bacteria, in addition to competing for nutrient intake, can also produce toxic metabolites (e.g., bile acids, hydroxylated fatty acids, and other organic acids) and cause direct damage to the enterocytes of the small intestine, leading to increased intestinal permeability (110). Deconjugation of bile acids by intestinal bacteria may result in malabsorption of fat and fat-soluble vitamins with consequent steatorrhoea and fat-soluble vitamin deficiencies. Bacterial synthesis of folic acid may be responsible for the unusual combination of high folate and B12 deficiency (72).

There is compelling evidence of bidirectional gut-lung axis in CVID. Several studies have demonstrated that respiratory infections, mostly prevalent in CVID, are associated with a change in the composition of the gut microbiota (111–117). In particular, many respiratory infections, common in CVID patients, are often accompanied by gastrointestinal symptoms (112, 118). In animal models, bacterial infections or intratracheal instillation of LPS led to alterations in the intestinal microbiota (118, 119). On the other side, repeated and/or chronic gastrointestinal infections can damage the intestinal epithelium resulting in an increased microbial translocation (88). Soluble microbial components (e.g., LPS, peptidoglycans) and metabolites (e.g., butyrate, acetate, propionate, TMAO) transported via the circulation are one means of communication between the gut microbiota and the lungs (2, 89, 95, 96). Immune cells can also migrate from the intestine to the respiratory tract via the circulation (120). Finally, the gut can modulate immunological and non-immunological responses in the lungs via host-derived inflammatory mediators (121). Further studies are needed to ascertain the pathophysiological relevance of the routes of communications within the gut-lung axis in CVID.

The microbiota-gut-liver axis might be a key player in the pathogenesis of liver involvement in CVID (44), as the passage of bacteria-derived products into the portal circulation can activate specific receptors on cells of innate immunity (e.g., TLR4 receptors on macrophages and monocytes), leading to liver inflammation (96).

Further studies should investigate possible alterations of bile acid metabolites and host immunological homeostasis in CVID patients.

Several studies reported an increased risk of malignancies in CVID (131–134). Gastric cancer is the leading cause of death in Italian CVID patients (135). The pathophysiological pathways underlying the relationships between CVID and the increased prevalence of cancers in CVID are of paramount importance but not fully understood. It is well established that chronic low-grade inflammation is a driving force of tumor initiation and progression (136, 137). Moreover, inflammatory stimuli such as LPS, activate immune cells (e.g., macrophages, neutrophils) present in tumor microenvironment (90, 91) and play a role in the switch between dormancy and proliferation of metastatic cells (138, 139). CVID patients exhibit immunological evidence of local and systemic inflammation (22, 61, 66, 67). Future studies should evaluate whether the gut microbiome could be used to identify CVID patients who may develop cancer.

The link between Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) and gastric cancer represents a prototype of interactions between chronic low-grade inflammation caused by a pathobiont and cancer (140). H. pylori is a pathogen recognized to play a role in gastric tumorigenesis. H. pylori infection in CVID patients appears to facilitate the progression to gastric atrophy and cancer with higher rates compared with the general population, and this could be explained by impaired mucosal immune response to pathogens (141). In particular, low mucosal IgA levels (with bactericidal activity against H. pylori) and hypochlorhydria may enhance H. pylori colonization and mucosal inflammation, thus promoting gastric carcinogenesis (142). H. pylori may not be the only microbe implicated in gastric cancer development. Several studies demonstrate differences in the microbiota of individuals with atrophic gastritis and gastric cancer, suggesting that the alteration of gastric microbiome modulates gastric cancer initiation and progression (143–148). H. pylori colonization gradually fades in the final steps of gastric carcinogenesis with H. pylori frequently absent/undetectable at the cancer stage (143, 149, 150). Of note, progression to gastric cancer in some patients, can occur after H. pylori eradication (135). The latter findings highlight the involvement of additional factors (e.g., other components of the gastric microbiota) in the carcinogenesis process. The latter observation is clinically relevant because follow-up strategies targeting gastric cancer secondary prevention cannot rely exclusively on H. pylori identification but also on implementation of upper endoscopies in CVID patients. Further studies appear necessary to identify an altered gastric microbiome in CVID patients at risk of developing gastric cancer.

Despite adequate i.v. or s.c. IgRT, recurrent respiratory and gastrointestinal infections are the commonest clinical features in CVID (26, 151). Consequently, a significant percentage of CVID patients are frequently treated with antibiotics to control acute infections or as prophylaxis to reduce infection frequency (152). Antibiotics have also detrimental effects inducing profound alterations of the gut microbiota or dysbiosis and development of bacterial resistance (153). Interestingly, some antibiotics might also have beneficial effects on gut microbiota. For example, rifaximin demonstrated to have eubiotic effect on gut microbiota by increasing the abundance of some bacterial species considered to be beneficial in patients affected by different gastrointestinal and liver diseases (154). Early studies reported that rifaximin reduced plasma endotoxin levels in patients with cirrhosis (155, 156). By contrast, rifaximin had no effect on circulating markers of systemic inflammation (sCD14, sCD25 or LPS), whereas decreased microbial alpha diversity in patients with CVID (66). Moreover, none of the ten major bacteria hitherto indicated to differentiate CVID patients and healthy controls, the CVID specific dysbiosis index (22), was significantly modified by rifaximin. The CVID specific dysbiosis index correlates with circulating biomarkers of systemic inflammation and gut leakage. Hence, it is possible to hypothesize that the lack of CVID specific dysbiosis index modification could explain the absence of an anti-inflammatory effect of rifaximin.

The term “gut resistome” describes the collection of genes or genetic material of gut microbiota that confers antimicrobial resistance (157, 158). Microbial genes conferring resistance to antibiotics can be transferred to gut pathogens in a process named horizontal gene transfer (HGT), thus inducing disease in the host (159). Hence, gut microbiota can be considered as a potential reservoir of antibiotic resistance particularly following recurrent antibiotic therapy (160). Antibiotic-induced resistances can be found even years after the drug administration (161–164). These observations are relevant because prolonged or recurrent antibiotic treatments are frequently administered to CVID patients (152). Antibiotic therapies can also induce impairment in an otherwise healthy gut microbiota, thus contributing to Clostridioides difficile infection (CDI) (165, 166). Several antibiotics (i.e., clindamycin, cephalosporins, penicillins, and fluoroquinolones) have been associated with the development of CDI (167). Drug-related factors (e.g., antibiotic class, duration, dose and route of administration of therapy) and host-related factors can profoundly influence the microbial composition. This post-antibiotic dysbiosis can be expressed by loss of diversity, loss of crucial taxa, shifts of metabolic pathways, and reduced colonization resistance against invading pathogens. For these reasons targeted therapies with narrow-spectrum antibiotics and shorter treatment courses are advisable in CVID patients.

The human microbiological ecosystem changes in response to a variety of environmental stimuli, making difficult to identify specific microbiome signatures in human diseases. Assuming that human microbiome is easily shaped, perhaps we could modulate it to favor a desired outcome (168). The emerging field of microbiome engineering is in its infancy and faces several challenges (169). Figure 2 provides examples of treatments that can modify the microbiome.

Despite increasing evidence involving gut microbiota in CVID (54, 63, 66, 67), the therapeutic modulation of the gut microbiome has not been investigated yet as a potential treatment for these patients. Elie Metchnikoff first noted that not all microbes are dangerous and envisioned that oral administration of lactic acid-producing bacteria with food (e.g., soured milk) might improve health and longevity (1). Therefore, Metchnikoff was acclaimed as a founding father of contemporary probiotics. There is some evidence that probiotics exert immunomodulatory effects and are considered a promising alternative for the prevention and treatment of certain inflammatory disorders (183). Recent evidence indicates that probiotic-derived metabolites promote differentiation of Foxp3+ Tregs (184). The latter observation deserves attention because CVID patients have lower numbers of Treg cell compared to healthy controls in their peripheral blood (185, 186).

Dietary contributions to health and chronic conditions, such as obesity, cardiovascular and gastrointestinal disorders, and cancer are of universal importance. Gut microbiome has been implicated as one of several potentially causal human-environment interactions in these disorders (187–189). Host diet plays a fundamental role in shaping the gut microbiota (170–172, 188, 189). Dietary antigens can induce Foxp3+ Treg cells in the intestine (173), essential regulators of immunological homeostasis in the colon (190). Diet can modulate the population of colonic Treg cells in mice (130). The relationships between different habitual diets (e.g., healthy plant-based foods, animal-based foods, and butyrate-producer foods), microbiome composition and peripheral and colonic Treg cells in CVID are presently unknown and should be investigated.

Fecal microbiota transplant (FMT), which transfers an entire microbiome from a healthy donor to a recipient, is a therapeutic tool with several potential applications but numerous specific caveats. Transplant can be performed via an oral capsule containing fecal extracts (191–193), colonoscopy-guided insertion (193, 194), or enema (195, 196). Healthy donors vary widely in microbiome composition, and donor composition can affect success rates (197, 198). FMT involves risks, and regulatory bodies have recently released safety alerts regarding the risk for transmission of infectious agents via FMT (199). Specific guidelines have been released to offer FMT with high levels of safety at the time of COVID-19 pandemic (200).

Another approach is to administer a formulation of compounds and spores that promote growth of desirable bacteria in the gut. These are referred to as probiotics, although the term refers to formulations containing live microorganisms (201). The term prebiotics refers to compounds (e.g., oligosaccharides and fibers) promoting the growth of specific bacteria (174, 175). The combination of probiotics and prebiotics is called a synbiotic (202). The latter strategy is appealing because one could incorporate any combination of microorganisms to construct a personalized symbiotic (203). The variety of possible synbiotics different formulations, doses, and regimens makes it difficult to make comparisons. The activity of taxonomically similar or even identical strains manufactured by different producers varies. Therefore, the therapeutic properties of a formulation cannot be extrapolated from one preparation to another (203, 204). Moreover, it is not always evident whether gut microbiome can be actually altered by synbiotic regimens. Finally, synbiotics themselves can be associated with adverse events and their safety profile is often overlooked (205, 206). Probiotics, prebiotics, and synbiotics have shown some efficacy in certain experimental (203) and clinical studies (176). However, there is no published evidence addressing these issues in CVID patients.

Several bacterial genera have been engineered to produce microorganisms with modified genetic payloads. Steidler et al. developed a genetically modified strain of Lactococcus lactis to deliver IL-10 to treat colitis in a mouse model (180). It has been postulated that synthetic bacteria could become in the future a tool for microbiome engineering (207). No successful interventions that utilize engineered microbes to improve patient outcomes have been described.

Although phage therapy is a potential application for microbiome engineering (182), this approach poses several challenges. Phages are live organisms and they could theoretically evolve and cause unknown effects on a microbial community (210).

In the past decade, several studies have started to identify quantitative and qualitative gut microbiota alterations in CVID patients. It is unclear whether the disruption of eubiotic microbiota observed in CVID is primary or secondary to environmental exposures, antibiotic therapies or diet. Evidence for a role of gut microbiota in the development of local and systemic complications in CVID is still limited. Developments in microbiome field will allow as to shift from a statistical to a casual association research. CVID is not a single disease, but rather a heterogeneous syndrome. Therefore, specific and detailed analyses of the composition (e.g., bacteria, yeast, and viruses) of gut microbiota in different phenotypes of CVID are urgently needed. A common omics quantification of microbiota is sequencing of the 16S ribosomal RNA subunit (22, 54, 63). This is a relatively simple and convenient way to identify organisms in a microbiome, but can miss potentially relevant pathobionts (6, 168). Whole-community shotgun sequencing (WCS) is more accurate to identify individual species and genes (7, 211, 212). We anticipate that advances in sample and sequencing will be critical for further advances in the field. Table 1 summarizes some of the outstanding pathophysiological questions that should be addressed to better highlight the complex interactions between specific gut microbial species and different phenotypes of CVID.

Table 2 illustrates some of the outstanding questions concerning the therapeutic corrections of microbiome in CVID patients (213). Further advances in this field might have the potential to revolutionize the approach to prevention and treatment of different phenotypes of CVID.

GV, RP, and GS conceived and wrote the manuscript and prepared figures. GI, AP, GM, and AG contributed to the modification and revision of the manuscript. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.

This work was supported in part by grants from the CISI-Lab Project (University of Naples Federico II), TIMING Project and Campania Bioscience (Regione Campania).

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

