Tumor-Associated Microbiome: Where Do We Stand?

The study of the human microbiome in oncology is a growing and rapidly evolving field. In the past few years, there has been an exponential increase in the number of studies investigating associations of microbiome and cancer, from oncogenesis and cancer progression to resistance or sensitivity to specific anticancer therapies. The gut microbiome is now known to play a significant role in antitumor immune responses and in predicting the efficacy of immune-checkpoint inhibitors in cancer patients. Beyond the gut, the tumor-associated microbiome—microbe communities located either in the tumor or within its body compartment—seems to interact with the local microenvironment and the tumor immune contexture, ultimately impacting cancer progression and treatment outcome. However, pre-clinical research focusing on causality and mechanistic pathways as well as proof-of-concept studies are still needed to fully understand the potential clinical utility of microbiome in cancer patients. Moreover, there is a need for the standardization of methodology and the implementation of quality control across microbiome studies to allow for a better interpretation and greater comparability of the results reported between them. This review summarizes the accumulating evidence in the field and discusses the current and upcoming challenges of microbiome studies.

This is the “decade of microbiome”, reported Forbes’ last publication of 2019. While the existing link between microbiome and health in the human host has been known for years, it was not until recently that the influence of the microbiome reached several medical disciplines, including oncology, going from unknown to mainstream.

In addition to its role in tumorigenesis and cancer progression, the microbiome has also emerged as a new potential biomarker in cancer diagnosis, risk stratification, and prognosis. Microbial signatures detected in cell-free DNA from human fluids have been linked to specific tumor types and could be used for diagnostic purposes [11]. Other studies have shown a correlation between tumor-associated bacteria and survival or response to anticancer therapies [12,13]. Recently, accumulating evidence has implicated the gut microbiome in the modulation of host anticancer immune responses and the efficacy of immune-checkpoint inhibitors across many tumor types [14,15,16,17]. These findings have led to preclinical and clinical investigations on how to manipulate the microbiome to use it as a therapeutic tool to boost the efficacy of anticancer therapies through different strategies, from dietary interventions and probiotic/antibiotic therapies to fecal microbial transplantation [3,18] (NCT04264975, NCT01895530, NCT03817125).

Bacteria, viruses, and other micro-organisms located in different body compartments have been correlated with increased susceptibility of developing different cancers [19,20,21,22]. Cancer patients seem to harbor a specific microbiome composition in the tumor niche and also within the tumor’s body compartment, which differs from healthy controls [23,24,25,26]. These specific changes in the microbial communities intratumor or nearby observed in cancer patients are what we define as tumor-associated microbiome. Whether this tumor-associated microbiome is involved in carcinogenesis or if it is merely a by-stander effect due to the tumor microenvironment is yet to be fully elucidated. It is hypothesized that a dysbiosis in a specific compartment or tissue could start an oncogenic process through (1) the induction of chronic inflammation, (2) the inhibition of cellular apoptosis, (3) the production and release of carcinogenic substances, or (4) the modulation of local anti-tumor immunity and tumor microenvironment [27]. For instance, changes in the relative abundance (RA) of a given group of bacteria has been shown to directly cause DNA damage leading to genetic dysregulation and initiation of tumorigenesis [28,29]. A recent elegant study conducted by Nejman et al. revealed that intra-tumor microbiome composition is diverse and cancer type-specific [23]. Interestingly, bacteria found in tumor tissue were biologically active and mainly located in the cytoplasm of both tumor and immune cells, suggesting an implication in both oncogenesis and antitumor immunity.

In this section, we revise the evidence available on the tumor-associated microbiome by cancer type and its potential clinical use as a diagnostic, prognostic, or predictive biomarker (Table 1).

Abbreviations: SCC = squamous cell carcinoma; ADC = adenocarcinoma; HR = hormonal receptors; HPV = human papillomavirus; EBV = Epstein–Barr virus.

Head and neck, esophageal, and gastric cancers arise from the epithelium and mucosa of the oro-gastrointestinal tracts and upper airway. These compartments are constantly exposed to external aggressions such as smoking, alcohol consumption, or infections, which can alter their microbiome composition [62,63]. Some viral infections such as Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) and human papillomavirus (HPV) are well-established etiopathological agents of nasopharyngeal (NPC) and oropharyngeal carcinomas (OPC), respectively [60,64], while the bacterial species Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) is causally associated with the incidence of gastric adenocarcinomas and mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma [6,65]

Fewer studies are available on the potential impact of tumor-associated microbiome on outcome and response to therapy in patients with cancer of the upper aerodigestive tract. In HNC, there is no evidence of oral/tumor-associated microbiome as a biomarker of response to standard therapies such as radiotherapy, chemotherapy, or immunotherapy, although studies are underway (NCT03410615). To date, the only study that evaluated the oral microbiome in a subgroup of patients with recurrent/metastatic HNSCC treated with antiPD-1 agent nivolumab within the CheckMate-141 clinical trial failed to show any correlation with treatment response [78]. However, the small number of patients and the low percentage of responses might have influenced these results. In terms of toxicity, two studies have shown a correlation between oral dysbiosis and increased radiation-induced mucositis in patients with HNC [79,80]. In patients with esophageal SCC, increased RA of intratumoral F. nucleatum has been associated with poor response to neoadjuvant chemoradiation and higher risk of recurrence [13].

Cancers from the hepato-biliary system are under the influence of the microbiomes belonging to each of the organs involved but also of the gut microbiome via blood flow through the portal vein [37]. The relationships between gut microbiome, biliary acids, and liver diseases, including hepatic steatosis, non-alcoholic liver disease, non-alcoholic steatohepatitis, cirrhosis, biliary tract cancers, and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), have been reviewed extensively [81,82]. A recent pre-clinical study by Zhang et al. evaluated the gut microbiome in 127 mouse models for primary sclerosis cholangitis, colitis, and cholangiocarcinoma [83]. They were able to show that Gram-negative commensal bacteria from the gut control the accumulation of hepatic myeloid-derived immunosuppressive cells (MDSCs) through a TLR4/CXCL1/CXCR2129-dependent mechanism and thus contribute to an immune-suppressive microenvironment in the liver [83].

In HCC, a small study evaluated the changes in gut microbiome after antiPD-1 therapy in eight patients with Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer (BCLC) Stage C disease. Differences in microbiome diversity and composition were observed between responders and non-responders, thus suggesting that gut microbiome dynamics might be predictive of response to these agents in patients with HCC [87].

The microbiome in colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most studied across malignancies, but its role in the development of this tumor is still a matter of debate. The “Driver-Passenger CRC model” defines as drivers those bacteria with pro-carcinogenic features that are found in pre-malignant lesions or in early CRC, while the term “passengers” refers to bacteria that act as tumor promoters or suppressors in later stages of disease [88]. Among drivers, enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis drives tumor growth through different mechanisms encompassed in the so-called alpha-bugs hypothesis, such as DNA damage, induction of cell proliferation, and induction of T helper 17 inflammation [44]. Escherichia coli, which is a producer of toxin colibactin (pk+), has also raised interest as a driver, since it may cause toxin-induced DNA damage, promoting a specific CRC mutational profile based on insertions and deletions [45]. F. nucleatum is the paradigmatic passenger bacterium because it is rarely detected in adenoma, but it may have a relevant role at latter stages of carcinogenesis [89]. Preclinical studies have shown that this species is capable of activating oncogenic pathways such as MAPK and Wnt [19,90], and to impair antitumor immune response through the activation of NF-κB signature and the interaction with immune-checkpoints [91,92,93]. Of note, its presence has been also found in synchronous or metachronous liver metastases from CRC primary tumors harboring this bacterium [94], suggesting that F. nucleatum could disseminate to other organs/locations via systemic circulation, such as cancer cells. Moreover, F. nucleatum is more abundant in right-sided tumors [95] and those with mismatch repair deficiency, indicating a potential relationship with the mutator phenotype pathway of CRC carcinogenesis [39,40].

Beyond bacteria, the composition of other microbiota such as viruses, fungi, and archaea seem to be different in CRC but their direct impact in CRC carcinogenesis or their utility in tumor management are still unknown [46,47,48].

Genitourinary cancers are a miscellany of tumors whose data regarding their tumor-associated microbiome is scarcer than in other malignancies. Like stool in CRC, urine must also be considered in the study of microbiome associated with kidney cancer and urothelial carcinoma. In spite of the postulated sterility of urine, very preliminary data obtained through sequencing methods suggest the presence of bacteria in the urine of healthy individuals [98].

The contribution of genital tract microbiome in the pathogenesis of female genital-tract malignancies is also raising interest. Ovarian cancer tissue samples associate a specific microbiome profile of fungi, viruses, parasites, and bacteria [100]. In the same way, endometrial cancer shows higher representation of Porphyromonas sp. and Atopobium vaginae compared with healthy tissue [54].

HPV- and EBV-related cancers: both HPV and EBV are known to initiate the oncogenic process through viral DNA integration into the human genome and through acquisition of cell survival capabilities, causing different tumors depending on the body compartment or organ infected [64,101]. HPV is a well-established cause of oropharyngeal and anogenital tract squamous cell carcinomas, while EBV is directly related with nasopharyngeal and gastric cancers as well as some types of lymphoma [60,101,102,103]. Beyond the etiopathogenic role of these agents, they also seem to impact the composition of the tumor-associated microbiome. The group of Guerrero-Preston reported different prevalence and RA of specific taxa between HPV-related and unrelated oropharyngeal carcinomas [32]. Interestingly, this study also observed that the saliva of patients with HPV-related oropharyngeal carcinomas was found to be enriched in commensal species (Lactobacillus species) from the vaginal flora. In this regard, changes in the composition of the vaginal microbiome have been associated with the risk and clearance of HPV infection as well as with development of pre-malignant cervical lesions [59]. However, the mechanisms involved in these correlations have not been elucidated. Beyond vaginal fluid, stool samples from patients with localized cervical cancer showed different microbiome composition when compared to healthy controls. This brings about the possibility of using stools as a diagnostic tool for early-stage cervical cancer and, in fact, preliminary data have shown good performance in differentiating healthy patients from cancer patients according to gut microbiome profile using stool samples [104].

In lung cancer, many studies have consistently reported different bacterial communities in the lung tissue of patients with lung cancer when compared to healthy individuals [22,106,107]. A meta-analysis of epidemiologic studies analyzed previous lung infections as risk factors for lung cancer. The results showed that a previous infection by Chlamydia pneumoniae or Mycobacterium tuberculosis was associated with an increased risk of lung cancer [55]. Although the potential mechanisms between the microbiome and lung carcinogenesis are not well-known, it seems that the metabolites produced by certain bacteria might be potentially oncogenic [56]. In that sense, pre-clinical in vitro and in vivo research from Tsay et al. showed that exposure to Veillonella, Prevotella, and Streptococcus bacteria are capable of inducing epithelial cell transformation through the activation of the PI3K and ERK pathways [56].

The crosstalk between gut microbiome and the immune system is key to maintain the intestinal homeostasis as it enables tolerance to commensal microorganisms while inducing inflammatory responses against invading pathogens. These gut microbiome interactions are in fact crucial for shaping and modulating innate and adaptive immune responses locally and also systemically, as they are responsible for the development and maturation of myeloid and lymphoid cells [108,109,110,111]. Gut microbial communities can balance immune responses towards an anti- or pro-inflammatory effect, depending on the type of immune cell they affect [112]—specific bacteria and their by-products (metabolites) have anti-inflammatory effects by inducing T regulatory cell differentiation [113,114,115], while other are pro-inflammatory as they activate/stimulate dendritic cells (DC), T helper cells, or CD8+ cells [116,117,118,119,120]. Multiple mechanisms orchestrate this microbiome–immune system crosstalk [121]. For example, microbial-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs) from gut bacteria are detected by toll-like receptors (TLR) and can directly modify the function and maturation of innate immune cells [122]. Additionally, metabolites produced by certain bacteria such as trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO) [123] and butyrate [124] can modulate innate immune cell differentiation and polarization [121]. Hence, the gut microbiome not only contributes to the immune system development, but also balances pro- and anti-inflammatory immune cell responses, ultimately having an effect on a variety of diseases such as cancer, auto-immune diseases, and obesity [125].

Beyond the gut, the tumor-associated microbiome might also play a role in antitumor immune responses, although less data are available in this regard [13,38,85]. Unraveling the exact mechanisms through which gut- and tumor-associated microbiome can mediate antitumor immune-responses will be crucial in order to tailor microbiome manipulation to boost antitumor responses in cancer patients.

Preclinical and clinical studies strongly support the key role of the gut microbiome in the modulation of systemic and antitumor immune responses in cancer patients [139]. However, many host intrinsic and extrinsic factors such as genetic susceptibility, dietary habits, or concurrent medication contribute to the microbiome composition and diversity and might ultimately affect immune-mediated antitumor responses [140,141]. For example, antibiotics are a known cause of gut dysbiosis [4], and their use seems to detrimentally impact on the overall survival and progression-free survival of cancer patients [142,143,144], and also impair responses to ICI [145,146].

Other strategies such as FMT, that is, a fecal suspension into the digestive tract, or stool substitutes such as oral bacterial consortia (mixture of pure live cultures of bacteria, often isolated from a stool sample of a healthy donor) are promising [155]. FMT has been proven successful for recurrent and refractory Clostridium difficile infection and has rapidly expanded to multiple fields of extra-gastrointestinal diseases [156,157]. Recently, Baruch et al. performed a phase I clinical trial to assess the safety, feasibility, and immune cell impact of FMT plus anti-P-D1 in PD-1 in refractory metastatic melanoma patients. Interestingly, this combination appeared safe and induced radiological tumor responses and tumor immune infiltration by CD8+T cells [131].

A recent report from the International Agency for Cancer Research points out a high degree of heterogeneity across microbiome studies in terms of method of description, techniques used, taxonomic deepness, and lack of information about confounding factors [22]. There is an urge for standardization of methodology and result-reporting as well as for bias control in microbiome-related studies. Figure 2 summarizes the current challenges of microbiome studies in cancer.

Microbiome analyses can be performed in multiple types of biological samples (e.g., tumor tissue, body fluids, or stools) and using different collection and preservation methods, and as such, results obtained might vary. For instance, while gut bacterial communities seem to have a homogeneous distribution along the colon mucosa, the overall diversity of the microbiome differs when we use stool samples versus intestinal mucosal tissue [158]. The choice of sample type and collection and storage methods when studying tumor-associated microbiome is highly relevant. While it might be obvious that microbiome composition will differ between separated body compartments (e.g., oral vs urinary tract), it is unclear whether tumor tissue or a sample from the cancer-associated compartment (e.g., oral cancer tissue vs. saliva or CRC tissue vs. stool) would be equally representative. Stool samples currently used for gut microbiome analysis are limited if the goal is to study CRC-associated microbial communities [159]. In contrast, in HNC studies, microbiome composition, and diversity appeared similar when using saliva, tumor tissue, or tumor swab [33]. The same has been shown in patients with urothelial cancer when using urine and tumor tissue [160]. However, more studies to further evaluate this are needed.

For large-scale epidemiological studies, samples collected during CRC screening for the fecal occult blood test have been used successfully, and no major degradation of bacterial DNA has been observed. Validation studies have shown that the collection kits kept at room temperature maintain stable results up to 14 days when compared to immediately frozen samples [165].

Even after the microbial genetic material has been extracted, there are many technologies and techniques available for sequencing and bioinformatic analysis, each with advantages and shortcomings (Table 2). Not only have we not reached standardization of methodology, but the human microbiome itself still remains partially unknown, with different levels of “dark matter” [166].

The most widely used sequencing techniques to perform microbiome analysis and characterize community composition (taxonomic relative abundance) in human samples are high throughput 16S ribosomal RNA gene amplicon sequencing (16S rRNAseq) and whole shotgun metagenomics [166]. 16S rRNAseq is based on amplifying the 16S rRNA gene of bacteria by PCR before sequencing, allowing for a cheap characterization of the microbiome. Usually, a few variable regions of the 16S rRNA gene are sequenced (V3–V4), providing a resolution limited to the genus level [167]. The 16S rRNA can also be sequenced with long reads, expanding the whole gene, providing higher resolution [168]. Whole shotgun metagenomics, on the other hand, is based on sequencing the whole DNA present in samples and allows for the identification of species and genes of all microorganisms, not only of bacteria, provided that sequencing depth is adequate. In the case of 16S sequencing, the PCR amplification step guarantees that only microbial DNA will be sequenced. This is not the case for shotgun sequencing, where the DNA samples need to be enriched for microbial DNA beforehand.

Bioinformatics analysis of 16S samples has traditionally relied on clustering similar sequencing reads up to a level of similarity (normally, 97%) into operational taxonomic units (OTUs). This clustering removes sequencing errors, but this also implies a loss of information. Alternatively, novel approaches attempt to retain all amplicon sequence variants (ASV). As opposed to clustering reads, they attempt to algorithmically distinguish sequencing errors from biological variation [169,170]. QIIME2 is a bioinformatics toolkit that provides frameworks for integrating all steps of 16S analysis [171].

In the case of shotgun metagenomics, many analysis lines are available. On one hand, read-based classification algorithms aim to provide a taxonomic assignment to each sequencing read. Taxonomic profiles allow us to analyze which microorganisms are present in biological samples, qualitatively and/or quantitatively. Different software implementations are available for this task [172]. Reads can also be classified by functional potential as opposed to taxonomy. These algorithms classify reads into gene families, which can provide different insights (identification of toxicity genes, reconstruction of pathways, etc.). In both cases, what can be detectable is limited to what is present in the databases that are used. Lastly, shotgun metagenomics reads can be used to reconstruct the original genomes (de novo assembly). This approach does not rely on any database, and thus it can be used to discover new genomes. For a review of bioinformatics methodology for shotgun metagenomics, please see the study by Breitwieser et al. [173].

Calculation of diversity metrics is common when analyzing taxonomic profiles. Diversity measures (Shannon, Simpson indices) are used to query the within-sample diversity or diversity, while β diversity metrics (Bray–Curtis, UniFrac) are used to investigate between-sample diversity. Besides diversity analyses, common statistics may be used to find statistically significant differences between groups. However, it is important to note that sequencing-derived microbiome datasets are compositional, that is, they do not provide absolute descriptions of the microbiome, but are relative to the whole microbiome present in each sample, requiring specific statistical methodology [174]. This complicates the interpretation of results and arises the possibility of spurious associations unless specific methodology is used. Alternatively, quantification of the total microbial load completely avoids the problem of compositionality and has been shown to provide more insights [175].

Although metagenomic and metatranscriptomic analyses have revolutionized the study of microbial communities, they have the main drawback of not providing spatial information on how these communities are distributed in the sample, thus preventing a full understanding of how the bacteria interact with each other or with the microenvironment [176,177]. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) targeting the rRNA can identify almost any microbe in a given tissue sample [178]. Fluorescence spectral imaging allows for the differentiation of many fluorophores identifying all members of a complex microbial community, thus offering a systems-level view of the spatial structure of the microbiome [179]. Because of technical limitations, rRNA FISH can only be used to differentiate only two or three microbial types simultaneously.

RNAscope is a recently developed RNA in situ hybridization technology that allows for direct visualization of RNA in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue, enabling sensitive and specific spatial analysis of all RNA molecules present in a sample simultaneously [180]. In a study conducted by Serna et al., RNAscope technology was used to visualize F. nucleatum in rectal cancer tissue and to evaluate how this species [42] interacts with host cells within the tumor microenvironment. An automated version of the RNA in situ hybridization assay was originally developed for bacteria visualization in matched primary and metastatic CRC-intact FFPE tissues [94].

In vivo models are needed to understand the mechanisms through which some microbial communities or specific single microorganisms drive tumorigenesis [181]. Murine models provide excellent tools to study microbiota-associated human diseases [182]. Two main methods have emerged to explore the effects of the microbiota on physiology and disease in mice: germ-free models, which can be used for studying the functional properties of microbiome, and broad-spectrum antibiotic-treated models, which are used to study the cause–effect relationship between dysbiosis and resistance to therapies.

Another in vitro model is the Bioreactor system, which allows for the study of complex gut microbial ecosystems in a controlled environment [187]. The “Robogut” bioreactor has been established in the Allen-Vercoe laboratory to culture gut microbial ecosystems in vitro under physiologically relevant conditions [188]. The laboratory uses the bioreactors as a model of the colonic microbiota in determining the effectiveness of antibiotic pretreatment in ulcerative colitis caused by Clostridioides [189]. The goal of this technology is to culture novel and highly fastidious species that cannot be cultured using conventional methods of cell culture in static dishes [190].

Observational studies of the intra-tumoral microbiome can be broadly grouped into (1) those with the goal of evaluating tissue microbiome composition in relation to prognostic events (treatment response/resistance, tumor recurrence, and tumor-related mortality) in patients with cancer or precursor lesions (case-only studies), and (2) those with the goal of comparing tissue microbiome composition between patients with cancer (or precursor lesions) and individuals free of cancer (case–control studies). A key component of group 1 studies is the evaluation of prognostic events over time. As in all clinical or epidemiological studies of the microbiome, other sources of microbiome variation need to be accounted for in the statistical analysis if they act as confounders or modifiers of the association between microbiome composition and prognostic events. Depending upon the tumor type, these could include clinical features of the diagnosed tumors (e.g., diagnostic method and stage, previous surgeries, familial gene mutations, other genetic variants, and diagnostic or prognostic biomarker levels), recent usage of pharmaceutical drugs (e.g., antibiotics, proton-pump inhibitors, metformin, and non-steroidal anti-inflammatories), demographic factors (e.g., place of residence, age, sex, and race/ethnicity), and lifestyle factors (e.g., diet or nutritional status at diagnosis, body weight, tobacco smoking, and alcohol consumption). Measurement errors in assessing lifestyle factors, especially dietary intake, must be carefully considered when planning a study. Nutritional status at diagnosis or surgery could be an alternative if an accurate dietary assessment by questionnaire is not available or feasible. Ideally, tissue specimens for microbiome analysis should be collected before therapeutic interventions, but this may not be possible if neoadjuvant chemo- or radiotherapy is indicated. In general, lifestyle and demographic factors have not shown strong associations with microbiome composition in terms of stool samples, but it should be noted that these associations remain largely unexplored in studies of tissue-specific or organ-specific microbiomes [191].

It is important to note that in the absence of a truly prospective cohort study in which biological samples for microbiome composition are collected before disease onset, microbiome-disease association signals observed in retrospective case–control studies may or may not be causal. Replication of observed association signals in additional case–control studies from similar and different populations is therefore necessary, as well as deeper mechanistic investigation through in vivo studies, for instance [191].

The study of microbiome as a new hallmark of cancer is just getting started. In this past year, 2048 publications related to “microbiome AND cancer” were indexed in PubMed, nearly 2000 more than 10 years ago. Whether understanding the tumor-associated microbiome will lead to a better comprehension of the pathogenesis of disease and corresponding molecular traits and will ultimately become a clinically useful biomarker tool for cancer prevention, diagnosis, and treatment is yet to be fully established, although evidence for this is beginning to accumulate. Examples of that are the microbiome-based screening tests for early detection of CRC, or the encouraging results of a phase I trial using FMT to boost ICI responses in refractory melanoma patients [131,193].

Microbiome research in oncology is an exciting field to be explored. The creation of collaborative multidisciplinary networks will be fundamental to augment the knowledge and optimize resources. Continued efforts should be made to overcome the challenges and ensure that we are ready for prime time.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

