Calorie restriction prevents age-related changes in the intestinal microbiota

The effect of calorie restriction (CR) on the microbiome, fecal metabolome, and colon transcriptome of adult and old male mice was compared. Life-long CR increased microbial diversity and the Bacteroidetes/Firmicutes ratio and prevented the age-related changes in the microbiota, shifting it to a younger microbial and fecal metabolite profile in both C57BL/6JN and B6D2F1 mice. Old mice fed CR were enriched in the Rikenellaceae, S24-7 and Bacteroides families. The changes in the microbiome that occur with age and CR were initiated in the cecum and further modified in the colon. Short-term CR in adult mice had a minor effect on the microbiome but a major effect on the transcriptome of the colon mucosa. These data suggest that CR has a major impact on the physiological status of the gastrointestinal system, maintaining it in a more youthful state, which in turn could result in a more diverse and youthful microbiome.

The first and the most studied manipulation shown to increase lifespan in mammals is caloric restriction (CR). The classic study by McCay et al. showed that one could increase the lifespan of rats by dramatically reducing their food consumption [1]. Since this initial observation, numerous laboratories have confirmed these results and have shown that reducing food consumption 30 to 50% (without malnutrition) consistently increases both the mean and maximum lifespans of both laboratory rats and mice [2, 3]. For example, Turturro et al. showed that 40% CR increased the lifespan of four inbred strains of male and female laboratory mice and three inbred strains of male and female laboratory rats [4]. The effect of CR on longevity is not limited to rodents as CR has been shown to increase the lifespan of a large number of diverse animal models ranging from invertebrates (yeast, C. elegans, and Drosophila) to dogs and non-human primates [5]. Because CR has a broad effect on lifespan, it is generally considered that the effect of CR on lifespan is universal, i.e., it occurs in all organisms.

Because the gastrointestinal (GI) system is the first organ/tissue that encounters the impact of reduced food consumption, there have been several studies on the effect of CR on the GI-system. Early studies, primarily from Peter Holt’s laboratory, showed that CR had a major impact on the colon. CR was shown to prevent/delay the age-related changes in rat colon, e.g., crypt hyperplasia, and expression of mucosal enzymes, reduced cell proliferation, and enhance apoptosis [6–9]. As expected from these findings, CR has also been shown to reduce colorectal cancer in various rodent models [10–12]. With the advent of 16S rRNA sequencing and metagenomics, it is now possible to interrogate the colon microbiome and study the effect of CR. Two groups have reported that long-term CR had a significant impact on the microbiome of old mice [13, 14]. These studies were conducted with aging colonies of mice specific to those particular laboratories and for which there were no lifespan data. Because the institutional animal husbandry environment and the health status of the host can have a major impact on the microbiome, we felt it was important to establish the effect of CR on the microbiome of well characterized mice from the aging colony maintained by National Institute on Aging (NIA) [15]. Out data show that life-long CR had a major impact on the colon microbiome of both C57BL/6JN and B6D2F1 mice, resulting in a ‘younger’ appearing microbiome and these changes appear to be the result of the effect of CR on the host gastrointestinal system.

Using male mice obtained from the aging colony maintained by the NIA, we studied the microbiota composition of the cecum and colon of 9- and 24-month old male C57BL/6JN mice fed AL or CR (started at 14 weeks of age) by sequencing the V4 region of the bacterial 16S rRNA gene. These data are presented in Supplementary Tables 1, 2. Because genotype of the host can impact the microbiome, we also analyzed the microbiome of male B6D2F1 mice obtained from the NIA. Adult B6D2F1 were not available from the NIA; therefore, we were only able to measure the microbiome of the cecum and colon of 24-month-old B6D2F1 mice fed either AL or CR (Supplementary Table 3). The data in Supplementary Tables 1–3 were analyzed by principal component analysis (PCA), and the results are shown in Figure 1. For C57BL/6JN mice (Figure 1A,
1B), adult mice fed AL or CR and the old mice fed CR grouped together for both the cecum and colon. Importantly, old AL mice were clearly segregated from the other three groups for both the cecum and colon, indicating that CR attenuated the effect of age on the microbiome in the old mice. In old B6D2F1 mice (Figure 1C,
1D), we observed a clear separation in the colon microbiome for mice fed AL and CR; however, the microbiome of the cecum of the AL and CR groups overlapped primarily because of one animal (Figure 1C). Figure 1 also shows that when projecting all of the data in the same space, the old mice fed AL consistently occurred on the left side of the plots, indicating that age and CR have similar metagenomic effects in the two strains of mice in both the cecum and colon. In Figure 1E,
1F, we directly compared the microbiome data for the cecum or colon in old C57BL/6JN and B6D2F1 mice. In the cecum, there was very little separation between the four groups. In contrast, we observed a clear separation between AL and CR mice in the colon, suggesting that the effect of CR on the microbiome becomes modified as the fecal material transits to the colon. Interestingly, the C57BL/6JN and B6D2F1 mice grouped together for both AL and CR, indicating that diet was a more important variable than strain with respect to the effect of age and CR on the microbiome.

We next determined the degree of association in the abundance of the four microbial classes that made up the majority of microbes that changed with age and diet. Figure 6 shows the t-statistic from the OLS model when each coefficient is plotted for each microbial class. A positive t-statistic for diet indicates that microbial abundance in that class increases with CR, and a positive t-statistic for age indicates that microbial abundance increases with age. The data in Figure 6 show a negative correlation for the phylogenetic class with CR and age, indicating that CR has opposing effects on the gut microbiome compared to age. In addition, the phylogenetic class Bacteroidia is associated with CR and youth, whereas the class Clostridia is associated with AL and age.

To understand how age and CR might affect the microbiome, we also measured the metabolites in the fecal pellets from the colon of the C57BL/6JN and B6D2F1 mice by targeted liquid chromatography mass spectrometry as described in the Methods. Supplementary Table 5 lists the 98 metabolites detected in the fecal samples and the levels of these metabolites in the fecal pellets obtained from the two strains of mice. We observed that the levels of 57 of the 98 metabolites exhibited a significant change with either age (old AL vs adult AL in C57BL/6JN) or CR in the C57BL/6JN (old AL vs old CR) and B6D2F1 (old AL vs old CR) mice as shown in the Venn diagram in Figure 7A. The levels of 36 metabolites changed with age in AL C57BL/6JN mice, 30 changed with CR in the old C57BL/6JN mice, and 43 changed with CR in the old B5D2F1 mice. Approximately 60% of the metabolites that changed with age were significantly attenuated by CR in the C57BL/6JN mice and two-thirds of the metabolites that changed with CR were the same for the old C57BL/6JN and B6D2F1 mice. The data in Supplementary Table 5 were analyzed by principal component analysis, and the results are shown in Figure 7B,
7C. For the C57BL/6JN mice, the adult AL and CR mice and the old CR mice overlapped; however, the old mice fed AL formed a separate cluster (Figure 7B). Figure 7C shows the PCA for old mice fed either AL or CR. While there was some overlap between old C57BL/6JN and B6D2F1 mice fed AL, the old CR C57BL/6JN or B6D2F1 mice were clearly separated from the old mice fed AL, with the B6D2F1 mice showing the greatest separation.

We next determined the effects of age, diet, and strain on the metabolomic profile using an OLS linear model. The coefficients of this model reflect the independent fold changes on metabolic pathways represented by the metabolites that changed with age, diet, and strain. The heatmap in Figure 9A shows the average log2FC attributable to age, diet, and strain among all the metabolites measured in the respective pathways. The data show the following: the metabolomic effects of age and CR are broadly anti-correlated and the metabolomic profile of the B6D2F1 mice is correlated with that of CR and anti-correlated with that of age, suggesting that the B6D2F1 mice have bacteria that produce metabolites that are more reflective of the bacteria in younger animals and CR mice compared to the C57BL/6JN mice. To contrast the effects of age and CR on the metabolomic profile, we again used an OLS linear model where the coefficients reflect the independent fold changes in metabolome abundance resulting from age and diet. Figure 9B shows the average log2FC attributable to age and diet among all the metabolites measured in their respective pathways. The data show that the effects of age and CR on the metabolome are broadly anti-correlated as one would predict. In addition, pathways related to amino acid metabolism broadly increase with age and decrease with CR, whereas pathways associated with nucleotide metabolism increase with CR and decrease with age.

To gain an understanding of the potential interaction between the microbiome and intestine, we studied the effect of age and CR on the transcriptome of intestinal mucosa isolated from the colon of C57BL/6JN mice used to study the microbiome and metabolome. We identified a total of 45,796 transcripts, and after filtering for low raw counts, there were 36,083 transcripts. Differential expression analysis showed that the expression of 723 mucosal genes changed significantly [P (Corr) < 0.05 and 2.0-fold] with either age (old AL vs adult AL) or CR (old CR vs old AL and adult CR vs adult AL) in C57BL/6JN mice. Of the 660 genes that changed with age (279 increased, 381 decreased), CR reversed the age-related changes in 189 of the genes (29%) in old mice. In addition, CR significantly changed the levels of 57 genes that did not change with age in old mice, i.e., approximately one-fourth of the genes that changed with CR did not change with age. Interestingly, CR resulted in significant changes in 94 of the genes in adult mice and over 50% of these genes remained changed by CR in the old mice. Supplementary Table 6 lists the top 20 genes whose expression changed the most with age and CR.

Figure 10A shows PCA analysis of differentially expressed genes [P (Corr) < 0.05 and 2.0-fold] in old CR, old AL, adult CR based on adult AL in the C57BL/6JN mice. The transcriptomes of the adult and old CR mice formed clusters that were clearly separated from each other. In contrast to what we observed for the microbiome and metabolome, both adult CR and old CR formed clusters that were clearly separate from their AL counterparts. Interestingly, adult and old CR mice formed clusters that overlapped, suggesting a similarity in the transcriptome of adult and old CR mice. Figure 10B shows the heatmap of genes that changed significantly in the C57BL/6JN mice. CR resulted in a major shift in the transcriptome pattern in both adult and old mice. These data agree with the PCA data in Figure 10A, which showed that CR altered the transcriptome in both adult mice and old mice.

The first study to show that life-long CR (30% started at 5 weeks of age) significantly changed the gut microbiota of old (15 and 35 months) mice was reported by Zhang et al. [13]. Subsequently, Kok et al. also reported that life-long CR (30% started at 9 weeks of age) significantly changed the microbiome of old (28 months) mice [14]. However, in a study focusing primarily on response to influenza, Bartley et al. reported that CR (40% starting at 3-4 months of age) had very little effect on the microbiome of old (19 to 21 months) mice [21]. These three studies used male C57BL/6 mice. The studies by Zhang et al. and Kok et al. were conducted on C57BL/6 obtained and maintained in either China or The Netherlands, respectively, while Bartley et al. used C57BL/6JN mice obtained from the animal colony maintained by NIA [13, 14, 21]. Because environment can have a major impact on the gut microbiome and the NIA animal colony is maintained under optimal husbandry and used by investigators across the country, we believed it was important to characterize in detail the effect of CR on the microbiome in mice from the NIA animal colony microbiome [15]. In this study, we evaluated the effect of 40% CR started at 3-4 months of age on the microbiota of both the cecum and colon of 9- and 24-month-old C57BL/6JN mice, i.e., mice were fed a CR-diet for either 5 or 20 months. This is the first study to assess the effect of age or CR on the cecum and to simultaneously compare the effect of short term and life-long CR on the microbiome. Our data show that both age and CR brought about significant changes in the microbiome in both the cecum and colon of C57BL/6JN mice. Most interestingly, CR attenuated the age-related changes in microbiome and resulted in a microbial profile of old mice becoming similar to that of adult mice. For example, CR altered the microbial diversity in both cecum and colon, which has been associated with optimal health and has been shown to change with age [22]. In addition, healthy, elderly have been shown to have a diverse gut microbiome compared to elderly individuals with various comorbidities, e.g., dysbiosis and reduced microbial diversity [23]. When we analyzed the microbial flora, the two most prominent phyla identified were the gram positive Firmicutes and gram negative Bacteroidetes. Studies in animals and humans have shown that reduced levels of Bacteroidetes and increased Firmicutes are associated with obesity [24, 25]. Our data show that CR increased the Bacteroidetes/Firmicutes ratio in both the cecum and colon of C57BL/6JN mice and this observation tracks with the fact that CR reduces adiposity and improves lean body mass [26].

In summary, our data demonstrate that life-long CR has a dramatic effect on the microbiome in old mice, which was similar in two strains of mice. The changes in the microbiome that occur with age and CR are initiated in the cecum and modified as the fecal material progresses to the colon. Importantly, our study gives us the first insight into the role the microbiome and the physiological status of the gastrointestinal system play in aging and the anti-aging actions of CR. Our data lead us to propose that the primary impact of CR is on the physiological status of the host’s gastrointestinal system, maintaining it in a more youthful state, which in turn maintains a more diverse and ‘youthful’ microbiome.

Male C57BL/6JN and B6D2F1 mice fed either AL or CR were obtained from the aging colony maintained by NIA. After receiving the mice from NIA, animals were housed at the animal facility and maintained under SPF conditions and individually housed in a HEPA barrier environment at the University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center for at 4-8 weeks before being used in the following experiments. Mice fed ad libitum were fed irradiated NIH-31 mouse/rat diet (Teklad, Envigo), and the CR mice were fed the same diet fortified for micronutrients. CR was initiated by NIA at 14 weeks of age, at a level of 10% restriction, increased to 25% restriction at 15 weeks, and to 40% restriction at 16 weeks of age. Adult (9 months of age) fed AL or CR and old mice (24 months of age) fed AL or CR were fasted overnight, and samples were collected during sacrifice (n=8-10/group). Mice were euthanized by decapitation and fecal material from cecum and colon and colon mucosa were harvested, snap frozen, and stored at −80° C until analyzed. Microbiome, metabolome and transcriptome analysis were done in the same animals. All animal experiments were performed according to protocols approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.

Fecal DNA was extracted from luminal fecal samples of cecum and colon using PowerFecal kits (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, with the exception that, rather than performing the initial homogenization of samples using the vortex adapter described in the protocol, samples are homogenized in the provided bead tubes using a TissueLyser II (Qiagen, Venlo, Netherlands) for three minutes at 30/sec, before proceeding according to the protocol and eluting in 100 μL of elution buffer (Qiagen). DNA yields are quantified via fluorometry (Qubit 2.0, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) using quant-iT BR dsDNA reagent kits (Invitrogen).

Extracted fecal DNA was processed at the University of Missouri DNA Core Facility. Bacterial 16S rDNA amplicons are constructed via amplification of the V4 region of the 16S rRNA gene with universal primers (U515F/806R) previously developed against the V4 region, flanked by Illumina standard adapter sequences. Oligonucleotide sequences are available at proBase [54]. Dual-indexed forward and reverse primers were used in all reactions. PCR was performed in 50 μL reactions containing 100 ng metagenomic DNA, primers (0.2 μM each), dNTPs (200 μM each), and Phusion high-fidelity DNA polymerase (1U). Amplification parameters were 98° C(3:00) + [98° C(0:15) + 50° C(0:30) + 72° C(0:30)] × 25 cycles +72° C(7:00). Amplicon pools (5 μL/reaction) were combined, thoroughly mixed, and then purified by addition of Axygen Axyprep MagPCR clean-up beads to an equal volume of 50 μL of amplicons and incubated for 15 minutes at room temperature. Products were then washed multiple times with 80% ethanol, and the dried pellet was resuspended in 32.5 μL EB buffer, incubated for two minutes at room temperature, and then placed on the magnetic stand for five minutes. The final amplicon pool was evaluated using the Advanced Analytical Fragment Analyzer automated electrophoresis system, quantified using quant-iT HS dsDNA reagent kits, and diluted according to Illumina’s standard protocol for sequencing on the MiSeq instrument.

Read merging, clustering, and annotation of DNA sequences was performed at the University of Missouri Informatics Research Core Facility. Paired DNA sequences were merged using FLASH software, and removed if found to be far from the expected length of 292 bases after trimming for base quality of 31 [55]. Cutadapt (https://github.com/marcelm/cutadapt) was used to remove the primers at both ends of the contig and cull contigs that did not contain both primers. The usearch fastq_filter command (http://drive5.com/usearch/manual/cmd_fastq_filter.html) was used for quality trimming of contigs and rejecting those for which the expected number of errors is greater than 0.5 [56]. All contigs were trimmed to 248 bases and shorter contigs are removed. The Qiime 1.9 command split_libraries_fastq.py was used to demultiplex the samples [57]. The outputs for all samples were combined into a single file for clustering. The uparse method (http://www.drive5.com/uparse/) was used to both cluster contigs with 97% identity and remove chimeras. Taxonomy was assigned to selected OTUs using BLAST against the SILVA database v132 of 16S rRNA sequences and taxonomy [58, 59].

Relative abundances were performed through Qiime 1.9, and all the bar graphs were generated using Microsoft Excel software (Microsoft, Seattle, WA). Principal components analysis was performed using the scikit-learn Python package, and OLS regression was performed using the statsmodels package [60, 61].

Metabolomics analysis of the fecal pellets from the colon was performed in collaboration with the Nathan Shock Center of Excellent in Basic Biology of Aging at the University of Washington. The targeted liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) data were collected using a standard protocol developed by the Northwest Metabolomics Research Center (NW-MRC) that has been used in a number of studies [62–68]. Briefly, the LC-MS/MS experiments were performed on a Shimadzu Nexera LC-20ADXR (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) AB Sciex Triple Quad 6500+ MS (AB Sciex, Toronto, Canada) system equipped with a PAL HTC-xt autosampler (CTC Analytics, Zwingen, Switzerland). Each sample was injected twice, 10 μL for analysis using negative ionization mode and 5 μL for analysis using positive ionization mode. Both chromatographic separations were performed using hydrophilic interaction chromatography (HILIC) on a Waters XBridge BEH Amide column (150 x 2.1 mm, 2.5 μm particle size, Waters Corporation, Milford, MA). The flow rate was 0.3 mL/min. The mobile phase was composed of Solvents A (10 mM ammonium acetate in 95% H2O/ 3% acetonitrile/ 2% methanol + 0.2% acetic acid) and B (10 mM ammonium acetate in 93% acetonitrile/ 5% H2O / 2% methanol+ 0.2% acetic acid). After the initial 3 min isocratic elution of 95% B, the percentage of Solvent B was decreased linearly to 50% at t=8 min. The composition of Solvent B was maintained at 50% for 4 min (t=12 min), and then the percentage of B was gradually increased to 95%, to prepare for the next injection. The metabolite identities were confirmed by spiking the pooled serum sample used for method development with mixtures of standard compounds. Isotope labeled metabolite standards were spiked into the samples at different times during the sample preparation to monitor sample processing and sample injections. A laboratory quality control sample and pooled sample QC sample were measured once for every 10 biological samples to monitor data quality and provide consistent metabolite signals to normalize for any instrument drift. The extracted MRM peaks were integrated using MultiQuant 3.0.2 software (AB Sciex, Toronto, Canada).

Analysis of the targeted metabolomics data with 36 samples and 216 metabolites was performed using R (version 3.4.2). Metabolite abundance was log2-transformed and median normalized prior to imputation. All the metabolites with ≥ 5% missingness were excluded, and a total of 98 metabolites were included in the imputation step. We imputed the remaining missing values using the K-nearest neighbors imputation method implemented in the R impute package [69]. We fit a weighted linear model to the normalized and imputed metabolomic data using the Bioconductor limma package to test the group differences [70]. The limma package uses empirical Bayes moderated statistics, which improves power by 'borrowing strength' between metabolites to moderate the residual variance [71]. By using a weighted linear regression, we can smoothly up or down-weight individual samples, based on similarity to other similar sample types [72]. This allows us to keep all samples in the analysis, and it also minimizes the need to make decisions about removing possible outlier samples from consideration. We selected metabolites that have a significant difference with a 5% false discovery rate (FDR) using the Benjamini-Hochberg method [73].

Transcriptome analysis was done using strand-specific RNA-Seq technology for RNA isolated from the mucosa from the colon of adult and old mice fed AL or CR using the genomic sequencing facility at OMRF. RNA was isolated from the colon mucosa using the RNeasy kit from Qiagen (Germantown MD, USA). RNA integrity was checked using the Bioanalyzer (Agilent) and only samples with RNA integrity numbers >8 were used in the RNA-Seq. RNA was depleted of ribosomal RNA (Ribozero, Illumina) and used for generation of stranded RNA sequencing libraries, whereby the orientation and originating DNA strand of the RNA are maintained (Illumina Stranded RNA-Seq). Each library was uniquely indexed and then sized and quantified by capillary electrophoresis (TapeStation, Agilent). Libraries were sequenced in a paired-end 75 fashion on an Illumina HiSeq 2000 in rapid run mode. An average of 81.1±9.5 million reads were generated for each library.

Raw FASTQ files were imported into Strand NGS software (Strand Life Sciences, Version 3.4, Build 239479) for trimming and alignment. All the statistical analysis and figure generation on transcriptome data were performed using Strand NGS software. Reads with average base Q score of <30 were discarded, and 1 base from 3’ and 5’, and adaptor sequences were eliminated. Reads were then aligned to mouse, build mm10 (UCSC) in an orientation-specific fashion. Reads that aligned normally (in the appropriate direction) were retained. Reads were further filtered on read quality metrics using the following cut-offs: N’s allowed in read <=0, quality threshold >= 30, number of multiple matches allowed <= 1. Duplicate reads were also excluded. Data were then normalized to the AL group and quantification was performed with the DESeq algorithm [74]. Transcripts that had a raw read count value >20 in 100% of the samples and in at least one of the conditions were considered expressed at a level sufficient for quantitation and retained. Statistically significant differentially expressed genes with P (Corr) cut off < 0.05, FC cut off 2.0 were determined using One-way ANOVA (Multiple testing correction: Benjamini-Hochberg, Post hoc test: Student Newman Keuls).

Metagenome and Trancriptome data are accessible through NCBI BioProject. The accession numbers are PRJNA701657 (Metagenome) and PRJNA692441 (Transcriptome).

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS: KK performed the overall data analysis, statistical analysis and prepared the final figures. SM coordinated the experiments and helped with figure generation. CBG and JDW performed bioinformatics analysis. KJ helped with transcriptomic analysis. AE performed the microbiome analysis. DR, LW and DP did the metabolome analysis. AR and AU designed the study, interpreted the results and did the manuscript writing. All authors participated in reading and revising the manuscript. All authors approved the final manuscript.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST: The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.

FUNDING: The research was supported by the following NIH grants: R01AG045693 (AU and AR), R01AG049494 (DP), R21AG062894 (AR), KO1AG 056655-01A1 (AU), S10 OD021562-01 (DR) and the Nathan Shock Centers of Oklahoma, P30 AG050911 (AR and JW), 1T32AG052363-01A1 (CG) and University of Washington, P30 AG013280 (DP). DP was also supported in part by R01AG049494. Additional support came from the Oklahoma Center for Advancement of Science and Technology HR17-098 (AU), The Oklahoma Center for Adult Stem Cell Research (AR), the American Federation of Aging Research 17132 (AU), and a Senior Career Research Award (AR) from the Department of Veterans Affairs.

