Effect of long-term temperature stress on the intestinal microbiome of an invasive snail



The gut microbiome is vital to the physiological and biochemical functions of the host, and changes in the composition of these microbial communities may affect growth and adaptability to the environment. Pomacea canaliculata is an invasive freshwater snail which has become a serious agricultural pest. Temperature adaptation is considered an important reason for the widespread distribution of this species. To date, the contribution of the gut microbes to host fitness of P. canaliculata during long-term temperature stress is not well understood. In this study, the morphological changes and intestinal microbiome of P. canaliculata under long-term stress at low temperature (15°C) and high temperature (35°C) were investigated with laboratory experiments. Compared with control group (25°C), the alpha diversity increased and pathogenic bacteria enriched changed under high and low temperature stress. The effect of high temperature stress on the intestinal microbiome of P. canaliculata was more significant than that of low temperature stress. A sustained high temperature environment led to an increase in the abundance of pathogenic bacteria, such as Aeromonas and Enterobacter, and a decrease in the abundance of immune-related bacteria such as Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes, and Lactococcus. These intestine microbiome changes can increase the risk of diseases like intestinal inflammation, and lead to more deaths at high temperature environments. In addition, with the extension of stress time from 14 to 28 days, the beneficial bacteria such as Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes, and Lactococcus were significantly enriched, while potential pathogenic bacteria such as Pseudomonas, Acinetobacter, Shivalella, and Flavobacterium decreased, suggesting that intestinal microbiota may play an important role in host response to heat stress. These results are consistent with previously reported results that the survival rate of both male and female P. canaliculata no longer significantly reduced after 21 days of high temperature stress, suggesting that the surviving P. canaliculata had gradually adapted to high temperature environments under long-term high temperature stress.

Pomacea canaliculata (Caenogastropoda: Ampullariidae) is an invasive freshwater snail originating from South America that has been introduced outside its native range on occasion to other locations (Hayes et al., 2008), including Asia, Europe, and both North and South America, and it has become a serious agricultural pest that can damage crops and wetland ecosystems (Cowie, 2002; Hayes et al., 2015). During the invasion process of P. canaliculata, a variety of ecological adaptation mechanisms have occurred to cope with various environmental stresses, among which temperature adaptation is an important cause of the widespread distribution of this species (Yusa et al., 2006). Previous studies have shown that tolerance to low and high temperature environments is a key factor for the adaptation of P. canaliculata to harsh environments and successful expansion of its range of activities (Zheng et al., 2012; Yoshida et al., 2014).

In this study, we investigated the effects of high temperature and low temperature stress on the growth and development of P. canaliculata along with the response of the intestinal microbiome to the long-term temperature stress. We hope that revealing the ability of invasive snails to quickly adapt to environmental changes and the mechanism of successful invasion will provide new ideas and a scientific basis for the prevention and effective management of invasive organisms.

The eggs of P. canaliculata were collected from Taihu Wetland Park located in Kunshan (N 30.916°, E 120.403°), Jiangsu, China, in June, 2021. These eggs were brought back to the lab and hatched using a climate chamber (25°C with a cycle of 14 h-light: 10 h-dark; the humidity was 80%).

Species were identified based on the morphological characteristics of the egg mass combined with molecular experiments. Two to three eggs were randomly selected from each egg mass to extract genomic DNA, amplify the mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase subunit I (COI) gene fragment (Yang et al., 2018), and sequence the target PCR product. After the eggs were confirmed to be P. canaliculata, the eggs masses were placed in an incubator to hatch. The hatchlings used in the experiment were put into plastic boxes (36 × 25 × 12 cm) containing aerated water and kept at 25°C. During the course of the experiment, P. canaliculata were fed with lettuce leaves every day, the aerated water was changed every 2 days.

Pomacea canaliculata of the same age (three and half a month) with similar length (female: 26.47 ± 0.96 mm; male: 25.96 ± 1.16 mm) were selected for temperature stress experiments using different temperatures: high temperature stress (35°C), low temperature stress (15°C) and control (25°C). Female and male P. canaliculata were divided to create a total of six experimental groups including high temperature group (HF), low temperature group (LF), and control group (CF) for females, and high temperature group (HM), low temperature group (LM), and control group (CM) for males. Three parallel repetitions were performed in each group, with 20 snails were placed in each repetition. The temperature stress experiment was conducted in an artificial climate box with a 14 h-light: 10 h-dark photoperiod and an 80% humidity. During the experiment, aerated water was used and changed every 2 days, with replacement water placed into a corresponding climate box 1 day in advance to make temperature consistent until the end of the experiment. Fresh lettuce leaves were fed every day.

In the above formula, W1 and W2 are the wet weights of P. canaliculata at time t1 and t2, SL1 and SL2 are the shell lengths of P. canaliculata at time t1 and t2, respectively.

On the 14th day (14 days) and 28th day (28 days) after the start of the temperature stress experiment, five snails were randomly selected from the parallel replicates of the six temperature groups, for a total of 60 snails. The coiled gut content was extracted from the P. canaliculata according to Chen L. et al. (2021). The foot muscle of each of the sampling snails was isolated to further identify the P. canaliculata by amplifying COI gene using LCO1490/HCO2198 as described by Hayes et al. (2009). PCR amplification products were sequenced by Shanghai Sangon Biological Engineering Technology & Services Co., Ltd (Shanghai, China).

Total DNA was extracted from the intestinal contents of 60 snails in small tubes using the FastDNA® Kit (MP 149 Biomedicals, Santa Ana, CA, United States). The experiments were carried out using universal primers in the V3-4 region of the 16S rRNA gene. The specific primer sequences were as follows: 341F (5′-CCTAYGGGRBGCASCAG-3′), 806R (5′-GGACTACNNGGGTATCTAAT-3′) (Dao et al., 2021). PCR products were detected using 2% agarose gel. The TruSeq Nano DNA LT Library Prep Kit (Illumina, United States) was used to build the library according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Then the PCR products were quantified using the Agilent High Sensitivity DNA Kit (Beijing, China). After quality assessment and quantification, amplicons were pooled and sequenced according to standard protocols using the Illumina Novaseq platform by Novo-gene Co. Ltd. (Beijing, China).

Microbiome bioinformatics analysis was performed using QIIME2 (version 2019.4)1 (Bolyen et al., 2019). Qiime cutadapt trim-paired was used to excise the primer fragment of the sequence and remove the sequences that did not match the primer. DADA2 was selected based on the qiime dada2 denoise-paired for quality control, denoising, splicing, and removing chimeras in the sequence (Callahan et al., 2016). After denoising all the libraries, the amplicon sequence variants (ASVs) signature sequences and ASV tables were merged, and singleton ASVs were removed. The sequences were aligned and species were annotated against the SILVA SSU rRNA database (version 132)2 using RDP Native Bayesian Classifier (version 2.11) (Quast et al., 2013; Bokulich et al., 2018).

Morphological data were analyzed with the SPSS 25.0 statistical package, and Kolmogorov–Smirnov and Bartlett tests were used to test data normality and homogeneity respectively. Two-way repeated-measures ANOVA was used to analyze the effects of temperature and sex on the growth rate of snail length, weight gain rate and specific growth rate of P. canaliculata, with temperature treatments and sex as the fixed factors, and time as the within-subject factor. The relative abundances of important dominant bacterial phyla in the high temperature group, low temperature group and control group were compared based on one-way ANOVA. The differences between treatments in multiple samples were tested using Duncan’s multiple comparisons. All descriptive statistical values are expressed as mean ± standard error (SE), and the significance level was set at α = 0.05.

After 28 days of temperature stress, the survival rate of male and female P. canaliculata was highest in the control group and the lowest in the high-temperature group (Figure 1 and Supplementary Table 1) with one male high temperature groups experienced mass death of snails. Both 35 and 15°C caused the survival rate of snails to decrease, and the negative effect of high temperature on the survival rate of snails was more significant.

Two-way repeated-measures ANOVA showed that stress time had a significant effect on the growth rate of snail length (F1,114 = 26.907, P < 0.001) (Tables 1,
2). Specifically, the interaction of stress time and temperature had a significant effect on both the growth rates (F2,114 = 29.867, P < 0.001) and specific growth rates (F2,114 = 15.079, P < 0.001) of the snails of P. canaliculata (Tables 1,
2). The interaction of stress time and sex had a significant effect on the growth rates of snail length and weight gain (F1,114 = 29.677, P < 0.001) (Tables 1,
2), but no significant effect was observed on the specific growth rate. The interaction of stress time, temperature and sex had a significant effect on the growth rate of snail length (F2,114 = 30.085, P < 0.001) (Table 2), but no significant effect was observed on the weight gain rate or the specific growth rate.

F and P-values of two-way repeated measures ANOVA. Factors with significant difference are indicated in bold (P < 0.05).

After preliminary filtering, the deduplicated sequences were clustered at 97% similarity level, and 57,537 ASVs were then obtained. According to the species annotation results, bacteria were classified into 54 phyla, 182 classes, 366 orders, 619 families, and 1,370 genera. The rarefaction curves of each group tended to be flat, suggesting that the sequencing results could represent the real species composition in the samples (Supplementary Figure 1).

Both the richness index and diversity index had no significant difference after 14 and 28 days in control groups (Figure 3A). The Chao1 index of 28 days high and low temperature groups was significantly higher than that of the 14 days groups (P < 0.05), and no significant difference was observed in other indexes (Figures 3B,C). These results indicated that under the stress of low and high temperature, the abundance of intestinal microbiota of P. canaliculata increased significantly with the extension of time (P < 0.05).

At the phylum level, the intestinal microbiome of P. canaliculata in the high-temperature group was mainly composed of Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, and Fusobacteria, with a relative proportion of 32.96, 30.03, 23.68, and 10.80%, respectively. In the control group, the relatively high abundant microbiome included Proteobacteria (66.73%), Bacteroidetes (15.76%), Firmicutes (11.40%), Fusobacteria (1.35%), and Actinobacteria (1.06%). In the low temperature group, the relatively high abundant microbiome included Proteobacteria (54.31%), Bacteroidetes (24.84%), Firmicutes (14.11%), Actinobacteria (1.15%), Cyanobacteria (1.24%), and Spirochetes (1.18%) (Figure 4A).

At the genus level, the dominant genera in the intestinal microbiome of the snails in the high temperature group were Aeromonas, Lactococcus, and Cloacibacterium, accounting for 20.21, 8.24, and 20.24%, respectively. The intestinal microbiome in the control group was mainly composed of Lactococcus (27.42%), Cloacibacterium (14.00%), u114 (10.36%), and Aeromonas (5.58%). In the low temperature group, the intestinal microbiome of the snail was mainly composed of Lactococcus (22.22%), Cloacibacterium (7.44%), Cronobacter (5.05%), Aquitalea (4.71%), Uliginosibacterium (4.56%), and Aeromonas (2.82%) (Figure 4B).

According to the Bray-Curtis distance algorithm, all samples were clustered at the genus level. The results showed that the samples in the high temperature group were first placed into one cluster, while the low temperature and control groups were not divided into two clusters but confusingly classified. The cluster of the high temperature group was further divided into two clusters: the 14 days treatment groups and the 28 days treatment groups (Figure 5A). Because the clustering of the samples in control group and low temperature groups was relatively chaotic, to further study the effects of low temperature and stress time on the intestinal microbiome of P. canaliculata, NMDS and ANOSIM analyses were performed based on the Bray-Curtis distance algorithm. The samples were aggregated based on three temperatures and the two stress times, and the results showed that both temperature and stress time had a significant impact on the intestinal microbiome of P. canaliculata (R = 0.6052, P < 0.001) (Figure 5B).

The results of mantel test showed the similar trend that temperature and stress time were significantly correlated with the intestinal microbiome of P. canaliculata (P < 0.05). Temperature treatment was significantly correlated with intestine microbial communities of P. canaliculata in both sexes (P < 0.05) (Supplementary Tables 2–4).

Non-metric multidimensional scaling and ANOSIM analyses based on the Bray-Curtis distance showed that the structure of the gut microbiota of female snails was significantly different after 14 days stress at different temperatures (R = 0.868, P < 0.001) (Figure 6A). Similar phenomenon was observed for male snails (R = 0.644, P < 0.001) (Figure 6B). There were still significant differences in the intestinal community composition of female snails under different temperatures for 28 days (R = 0.876, P < 0.001) (Figure 6C) and again, similar phenomenon was observed for male snails (R = 0.892, P < 0.001) (Figure 6D). After both 14 and 28 days of temperature stress treatment, there were significant differences in the gut microbiota structure of P. canaliculata under different temperature treatments, indicating that temperature stress had a significant effect on the structure of the intestinal microbiome of P. canaliculata.

The NMDS and ANOSIM analysis based on the unweighted-UniFrac distance algorithm showed that the structure of the intestinal microbiome in female P. canaliculata varied significantly over time in both high and low temperature groups (P < 0.05) (Table 3 and Supplementary Figure 2), indicating that the duration of temperature stress had a significant effect on the intestinal bacteria in female P. canaliculata. This result was also supported by NMDS and ANOSIM analysis based on the weighted-UniFrac distance algorithm (Table 3 and Supplementary Figure 2). For males, the duration of temperature stress also had a significant effect on the structure of the gut microbiota (Table 3 and Supplementary Figure 2).

The ANOSIM analysis based on the Bray-Curtis distance algorithm also showed significant difference in the intestinal microbiome between female and male P. canaliculata. Significant difference was also observed between 14 and 28 days treatment groups and between high and low temperature groups (R > 0.5, P < 0.05) (Figure 6).

It can be seen from the Venn diagram that the high, low temperature and control groups had a total of 3,758 ASVs, of which the high temperature group had 18,233 ASVs (13.92%), the low temperature group had 17,580 ASVs (14.67%), and the control group had 11,433 ASVs (19.81%) (Figure 7A).

In the 28-days low temperature group (L28), Actinobacteria, Acidobacteria, and Comamonas were significantly enriched in the female samples, while Aeromonas, Cronobacter, and Enterobacter were significantly enriched in the male samples (Supplementary Figure 4A). In the 28-days high temperature group (H28), Bacteroidetes, Fusobacteria, and Bacteroides were significantly enriched in the female samples, while Proteobacteria, Enterobacteriaceae, and Sulfurospirillum were significantly enriched in the male samples (Supplementary Figure 4B). In the 28-days control group (C28), Bacteroidetes, Proteobacteria, Bacteroides, Enterobacter, and Aquitalea were significantly enriched in the female samples, while Fusobacteria and Lactococcus were significantly enriched in the male samples (Supplementary Figure 4C).

The intestinal microbiome is involved in various functions, such as immune regulation, gastrointestinal motility, and energy metabolism regulation (Paaijmans et al., 2013). In this study, we used the Illumina Novaseq sequencing technology of the 16S rRNA gene to investigate the response of the intestinal microbiome of P. canaliculata to temperature stress. The results showed that the alpha diversity and community structure of the intestinal microbiome of P. canaliculata changed significantly under high temperature (35°C) and low temperature (15°C) stress.

Previous studies have shown that the survival rate of P. canaliculata is negatively correlated with temperature, and the survival rate is the lowest at 35°C (Seuffert and Martín, 2013). In the high temperature range (25, 30, and 35°C), the survival rate of P. canaliculata decreased with increasing temperature, while in the low temperature range (0 and 15°C), the survival rate increased with decreasing temperature (Seuffert and Martín, 2013). The present study showed that the survival rate of P. canaliculata was the lowest in the high temperature group (54.35%), followed by low temperature group and control group (Figure 1 and Supplementary Table 1). In addition, after 21 days of high temperature stress, the survival rates of female and male P. canaliculata were no longer significantly reduced, indicating that P. canaliculata may have gradually adapted to the high temperature environment over a long-term treatment.

This study showed that the growth rate of snail length in the control group was significantly greater than that in the high and low temperature groups, and the growth rate and specific growth rate for snail weight in the high temperature group and control group were significantly greater than those in the low temperature group, (Tables 1,
2), consistent with previous studies (Seuffert et al., 2010). In addition, the increased growth rate of snail length of female P. canaliculata in the low temperature group was significantly greater than that of male P. canaliculata (Tables 1,
2), which may be closely related to the higher plant digestibility and foraging rate of female snails (Tamburi and Martín, 2009; Xu et al., 2011).

The structural composition of the gut microbiota of aquatic organisms is affected by ambient temperature (Hagi et al., 2004; Pierce et al., 2016). The survival rate of the mussel Mytilus galloprovincialis significantly decreased under high temperature stress at 27°C, while the diversity of its gut microbiota increased significantly (Li et al., 2019). In our study, both high and low temperature stress led to an increase in the diversity index of the intestinal microbiome of P. canaliculata (Figures 2A,B). It is important to note that the increased diversity of the intestinal microbiome is often beneficial for animals to cope with changes in the external environment and maintain the dynamic balance of the intestinal microenvironment (Sommer et al., 2017), indicating that the increase in the alpha diversity index may be related to the adaptation to the stress environment of P. canaliculata.

Temperature-induced changes in the gut microbiota may also lead to increase in pathogenic microbiota (Fontaine et al., 2018). Aeromonas is a gram-negative facultative anaerobic bacterium, most of which have been identified as pathogenic to some organisms, including fish (Dar et al., 2016) and shellfish (Chen J. S. et al., 2021; De Silva et al., 2021). The relative abundance of Aeromonas in the high temperature group was significantly higher than that in the low temperature and the control groups (Figure 7C). Enterobacter was also significantly enriched in the high temperature group. When the temperature changes sharply, the intestinal microbiota is disordered, and the abundance of pathogenic bacteria increases, which, to a certain extent, can explain the higher mortality rate of the snails in the high temperature group. Massive proliferation of opportunistic pathogens such as Vibrio and Arcobacter under heat stress conditions could increase the susceptibility of the host to disease and result in the mass death of mussels (Li et al., 2019).

The plasticity of gut microbial communities further helps species respond to new ecological challenges and adapt to new environments (Alberdi et al., 2016). Studies have shown that the gut microbiota of the invasive bullfrog (Lithobates catesbeianus) is more plastic than that of the green frog (Lithobates clamitans). Bullfrogs gut microbiota changes after only hours of warmer temperatures, whereas in green frogs this change occurs significantly after days (Fontaine and Kohl, 2020).

After 28-days of temperature stress, the number of pathogenic bacteria decreased, and many beneficial bacteria were enriched, such as Lactococcus, Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes, etc. As common probiotics, they were significantly enriched in the later stages of the high and low temperature stress groups (H28 and L28) (Supplementary Figures 3A,B). Bacteroidetes are mainly involved in the degradation of carbohydrates, metabolism of sugars, and metabolism of substances such as bile acids, which are closely related to host health (Ghanbari et al., 2015). Firmicutes contribute to the maintenance of intestinal homeostasis and the development of host immunity (Colston and Jackson, 2016), and are more efficient than Bacteroidetes as an energy source, promoting caloric absorption and nutrient transport, thereby leading to weight gain (Zhu et al., 2021). The decrease of pathogenic bacteria and enrichment of a large number of probiotics in the later stage of temperature stress were highly consistent with the significant increase in the abundance of the intestinal microbiota of P. canaliculata over time. This finding indicates that the intestinal microbiome may have begun to adapt to the stress environment at the later stage of temperature stress. A similar trend was observed in the morphological analysis of P. canaliculata. After 21 days of high temperature stress, the survival rates of both female and male P. canaliculata were no longer significantly reduced, indicating that the surviving P. canaliculata may have gradually adapted to the high temperature environment under long-term treatment. Whether this is due to changes in the host’s physiological growth state caused by changes in the gut microbiota or the effect of the gut microbiota response to temperature on the health of the host remains unclear. Further studies are needed to clarify the relationship between the host and gut microbiome as it pertains to temperature stress response.

Previous studies have shown that sex is also one of the important factors affecting the gut microbiome of animals. The gut microbiota diversity of the male large-finned mudskipper (Periophthalmus magnuspinnatus) was significantly higher than that of females (Ma et al., 2018). Also, the microbial communities of male and female blackhead minnows (Pimephales promelas) were significantly segregated according to beta diversity metrics (Debofsky et al., 2020). When comparing with the effects of temperature and stress time on the intestinal microbiome of P. canaliculata, the differences in the intestinal microbiota between male and female P. canaliculata were smaller, but still significant. There was no significant difference in the alpha diversity index of the intestinal microbiota between female and male P. canaliculata (P > 0.05), but the ANOSIM analysis results based on the Bray-Curtis distance algorithm still showed significant differences between females and males in the high, low temperature and control groups.

According to the LEfSe analysis results, Enterobacter and Aeromonas were significantly enriched in male P. canaliculata after 28 days of low temperature stress (Supplementary Figure 4A). Proteobacteria and Enterobacteriaceae were also significantly enriched in male P. canaliculata after 28 days of high temperature stress (Supplementary Figure 4B). Proteobacteria, Enterobacteriaceae, Enterobacter, and Aeromonas are all opportunistic pathogens. The increased numbers of these opportunistic pathogens greatly increase the risk of bacterial infection in male P. canaliculata, which may be a reason why male snails are more susceptible to heat stress (Song et al., 2014). In addition, Bacteroidetes, Fusobacterium, Bacteroides and other species closely related to cellulose decomposition bacteria were significantly enriched in female P. canaliculata in high temperature and control groups, which may be closely related to the higher plant digestion ability and foraging rate of female P. canaliculata (Tamburi and Martín, 2009; Xu et al., 2011).

In this study, 16S rRNA high-throughput sequencing technology was used to study the growth, development and intestinal microbiome of P. canaliculata. The results showed that long-term high and low temperature stress had negative effects on the health status of P. canaliculata. Both high and low temperature stress had a significant impact on the intestinal microbiome of P. canaliculata, resulting in a significant increase in diversity and enrichment of pathogenic bacteria. The NMDS analysis showed that after 14 days of temperature stress, the intestinal microbiome structure of P. canaliculata was significantly changed to adapt to adverse environments including prolonged stress time, increased abundance of beneficial bacteria increased, and decreased opportunistic pathogens.

The datasets presented in this study can be found in online repositories. The names of the repository/repositories and accession number(s) can be found in NCBI BioProject PRJNA843708.

The animal study was reviewed and approved by the Animal Research Ethics Committee of Nanjing Normal University (Permit No. IACUC-20220267).

LC conceived the study. SL, ZQ, SG, and WS performed the experiments. SL and ZQ analyzed the data and drafted the manuscript under guidance of LC and HL. XL, HL, and LC revised the manuscript. All authors reviewed the manuscript.

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.32170434), Postgraduate Research and Practice Innovation Program of Jiangsu Province (No. KYCX22_1613), and the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (PAPD).

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fmicb.2022.961502/full#supplementary-material

