A psychology of the human brain–gut–microbiome axis

In recent years, we have seen increasing research within neuroscience and biopsychology on the interactions between the brain, the gastrointestinal tract, the bacteria within the gastrointestinal tract, and the bidirectional relationship between these systems: the brain–gut–microbiome axis. Although research has demonstrated that the gut microbiota can impact upon cognition and a variety of stress‐related behaviours, including those relevant to anxiety and depression, we still do not know how this occurs. A deeper understanding of how psychological development as well as social and cultural factors impact upon the brain–gut–microbiome axis will contextualise the role of the axis in humans and inform psychological interventions that improve health within the brain–gut–microbiome axis. Interventions ostensibly aimed at ameliorating disorders in one part of the brain–gut–microbiome axis (e.g., psychotherapy for depression) may nonetheless impact upon other parts of the axis (e.g., microbiome composition and function), and functional gastrointestinal disorders such as irritable bowel syndrome represent a disorder of the axis, rather than an isolated problem either of psychology or of gastrointestinal function. The discipline of psychology needs to be cognisant of these interactions and can help to inform the future research agenda in this emerging field of research. In this review, we outline the role psychology has to play in understanding the brain–gut–microbiome axis, with a focus on human psychology and the use of research in laboratory animals to model human psychology.



In this review, we outline the brain–gut–microbiome axis and its relevance to numerous aspects of psychology. We discuss changes in the gut microbiome across development and its relevance for psychological development. We also place the brain–gut–microbiome axis within a broader social and cultural milieu, highlighting the potential role of this axis in interpersonal social psychology, as well as how culture can moderate factors such as treatment of brain–gut–microbiome axis disorder. Irritable bowel syndrome is discussed as a condition of particular interest, and we discuss more broadly the potential for interventions to improve psychological health and ameliorate disorders of the brain–gut–microbiome axis. We raise some factors for psychologists in clinical practice to consider, and, given the novelty of this field, we suggest potential future directions for research in this area. Finally, we discuss the potential for an increased emphasis on the brain–gut–microbiome axis to disrupt a number of biases within psychology as a discipline.

The gastrointestinal system contains a vast array of microorganisms, and the intestines in particular are home to a rich diversity of bacteria. These bacteria serve a wide range of physiological functions, including digestion and preservation of the integrity of the intestinal barrier (Grenham, Clarke, Cryan, & Dinan, 2011). The gastrointestinal tract also contains an enteric nervous system comprising an interconnected network of neurons, similar in number to the neurons in the spinal cord (Sasselli, Pachnis, & Burns, 2012). The brain sends signals to the gut, which impacts upon its sensory and secretory function, and in return receives visceral information from the gut (Grenham et al., 2011; Montiel‐Castro, González‐Cervantes, Bravo‐Ruiseco, & Pacheco‐López, 2013). A great volume of interoceptive information is sent from the gut to the brain, and much of this will not be processed consciously (Mayer, 2011), joining a broader system of interoceptive information coming from the body as a whole (Craig, 2003). By relaying this information to the central nervous system, the gut can thus play a key role in generating somatic markers (cf. Damasio, Everitt, & Bishop, 1996; Reimann & Bechara, 2010). Bidirectional communication between the gut microbiome and the brain can occur across numerous physiological channels, including neuroendocrine and neuroimmune pathways and the autonomic nervous system (Cryan & Dinan, 2012; cf. Clarke, Stilling et al., 2014, for a review of endocrine effects of the gut microbiota), and bacteria found within the gut can produce neurotransmitters that can also be found within the central nervous system (Wall et al., 2014). For example, evidence suggests that a strain of Lactobacillus brevis can produce GABA (Barrett, Ross, O'Toole, Fitzgerald, & Stanton, 2012). Monoamines play a key role in brain–gut–microbiome axis signalling (Lyte, 2013); this includes serotonin (as well as its precursor tryptophan; O'Mahony, Clarke, Borre, Dinan, & Cryan, 2015), a key target in the treatment of major depression. Strikingly, initial evidence suggests that that the diversity of the gut microbiota may be related to brain structure as well (Fernandez‐Real et al., 2015). This bidirectional communication between the brain and the gut microbiota can impact upon stress (De Palma, Collins, Bercik, & Verdu, 2014), as well as cognition (Gareau, 2014); issues which we discuss further in the next two sections.

Stress has been conceptualised as a challenge or threat which can disrupt the homeostasis of an organism (for recent discussion, see Romero, Dickens, & Cyr, 2009). Disruption to homeostatic physiological states is likely to include the ecosystem within the gastrointestinal tract. Stress can alter the composition and function of the gut microbiota (e.g., Bailey et al., 2011); there is even evidence from laboratory animal models that stress in mothers during prenatal development can impact upon the gut microbiota as well as other major physiological systems in their offspring (Golubeva et al., 2015). Further dysregulation can occur due to chronic stress in early life and into adulthood. Much emphasis has been placed on social/emotional contagion via parents in transmitting anxiety to children, such as the psychoanalytic work of Harry Stack Sullivan (1953), as well as theories emphasising modelling of behaviour and parental acceptance and control (cf. Wood, McLeod, Sigman, Hwang, & Chu, 2003). Nonetheless, a propensity to heightened anxiety may also be transmitted biologically, not only through human genes, but also via the microbiota via vaginal delivery (see section on psychological development below).

Given the strong evidence from laboratory animal models that stress impacts upon the brain–gut–microbiome axis, this area requires more research in humans. Such an endeavour will be guided by psychological models of stress that capture factors such as individual differences (e.g., Mark & Smith, 2008) as well as dynamic processes such as coping mechanisms employed in response to stress (e.g., Skinner, Edge, Altman, & Sherwood, 2003). Evidence from laboratory animal models has also provided a rationale for examining the role of the gut microbiota in stress‐related disorders in humans, both in terms of differences between clinical groups and healthy controls, as well as whether changes within the gut may mediate amelioration of psychological disorder (e.g., Nowakowski et al., 2016). For example, evidence indicates that the gut microbiota is altered in patients with major depression (Jiang et al., 2015; Kelly, Borre, et al., 2016; Naseribafrouei et al., 2014), as well as IBS (see section below). Despite these promising initial findings on the microbiota and stress‐related disorders, there has been a relative lack of research within healthy individuals linking the composition and function of the human gut microbiota to levels of chronic stress, or to susceptibility to acute stress. Such evidence, particularly if done in a longitudinal design, would have the potential to inform us on the mediating role of the gut microbiota in the progression from chronic stress to stress‐related disorders.

The gut microbiota has been shown to interact with host cognition in numerous laboratory animal model studies. Germ‐free animals have shown reduced anxiety‐like behaviour as well as changes in NMDA receptor subunits in the amygdala and increased hippocampal brain‐derived neurotrophic factor (a protein associated with neurogenesis; Neufeld, Kang, Bienenstock, & Foster, 2011) and antimicrobial administration increased hippocampal expression of brain‐derived neurotrophic factor (Bercik et al., 2011). Consistent with this impact upon the hippocampus, germ‐free rodents have been shown to have impaired short‐term recognition and working memory (Gareau et al., 2010). Germ‐fee animals have also displayed altered social behaviour (Arentsen, Raith, Qian, Forssberg, & Diaz‐Heijtz, 2015; Desbonnet, Clarke, Shanahan, Dinan, & Cryan, 2014), and intriguingly, Desbonnet et al. found that recolonisation restored social preference but not social cognition. Furthermore, maternal high‐fat diet had a negative impact on mice offspring's social behaviour that was reversed by treatment with Lactobacillus reuteri (Buffington et al., 2016). Such changes could be attributable to neurological changes such as increased myelination in the prefrontal cortex in germ‐free mice, a change which could be reversed by the restoration of the microbiota (Hoban et al., 2016).

Given the mounting preclinical evidence for its impact upon psychological function, the gut microbiota has been provocatively described as part of the unconscious system(s) influencing behaviour (Dinan, Stilling, Stanton, & Cryan, 2015), along with other physiological processes upon which a person may lack insight into, but nonetheless impact upon human psychology. We may further speculate that changes in the gut microbiota (e.g., due to antibiotic use), which are sufficient to alter consciously tangible factors such as bowel habit or gastrointestinal discomfort, may in turn alter interpretations of thoughts or emotions, consistent with the view that visceral factors impact upon human psychology (e.g. Loewenstein, 1996). The gut may thus have both conscious as well as unconscious effects upon psychological processes. These conscious effects are more likely to impact as an affect heuristic (Slovic, Finucane, Peters, & MacGregor, 2007); visceral factors act as a heuristic or mental shortcut (a Type 1 process), rather than as formal or logical information processing (Type 2 processes). They may nevertheless impact upon Type 2 processes; for example, by disrupting them. Models surrounding the interaction between Type 1 and Type 2 processes in thinking (e.g., Evans, 2007; Pennycook, Fugelsang, & Koehler, 2015) will be informative with regard to how the Type 1 factors stemming from the gut may impact upon Type 2 processing.

There may be critical windows or sensitive periods for development of the gut microbiota (Borre et al., 2014), similar to the development of psychological functions such as language (e.g. Kuhl, Conboy, Padden, Nelson, & Pruitt, 2005; Werker & Tees, 2005). Human psychological and microbial development may be impacted by perinatal factors. The microbiota in rectal swabs of vaginally‐delivered infants differ from those delivered by caesarean section (Adlerberth et al., 2006), although infants born by caesarean section progressed to having a microbiota similar to their vaginally delivered counterparts by 8 weeks after birth (Hill et al., 2017). This is presumably due to a lack of microbial exposure in the womb; initial exposure to the vaginal microbiome on birth may lead to a substantially different population of microbes colonising the gut compared to C‐section delivery, which does not deliver this exposure. Such changes may have implication for public health, given the high prevalence of unnecessary caesarean sections being performed in many countries worldwide (Gibbons et al., 2010). Other factors shortly after birth could also affect the microbiota, such as the use of antibiotics in neonatal intensive care, and feeding pattern, which may in turn impact upon neurobiological development (cf. reviews by Adlerberth & Wold, 2009; Clarke, O'Mahony, Dinan, & Cryan, 2014).

Research indicates that the gut microbiota is associated with health in the elderly, with those in long‐term care having a less diverse microbiota than those living in the community (Claesson et al., 2012), although there is substantial distinctiveness at an interindividual level (Claesson et al., 2011). Even under conditions of healthy ageing, there can be a decline in some aspects of cognition (e.g., Koen & Yonelinas, 2014), but given the rising global health burden of dementia (Prince et al., 2015), as well as the psychological and physiological toll this can take upon caregivers (e.g., Allen, Curran et al., 2017; Etters, Goodall, & Harrison, 2008; Kiecolt‐Glaser, Dura, Speicher, Trask, & Glaser, 1991) a greater understanding of how gut health may impact upon the psychological health in ageing is critical. Despite this initial interest in gut microbiota changes with advancing age, there has been a relative lack of long‐term longitudinal research examining changes in the human gut microbiota. This is unfortunate given the high interindividual variation in the gut microbiota. Such research efforts would occur in the context of rapid acceleration of genetic sequencing technologies used to better characterise the gut microbiota (e.g., Mardis, 2008; Reuter, Spacek, & Snyder, 2015).



A “bottom‐up” approach to the brain–gut–microbiome axis will offer greater insight into the mechanisms whereby molecular factors drive interactions between the gut microbiome, brain function and human psychology. Although this will indicate directions for intervention within this axis, rapid changes in public health will also result from a macroscopic understanding of how broader trends at an interpersonal, societal, and cultural level impact upon the brain–gut–microbiome axis.

Emerging research suggests that the gut microbiota impact upon social behaviour; evidence of altered social behaviour in germ‐free animals (Desbonnet et al., 2014) is complemented by evidence indicating that children with autistic spectrum disorder (ASD) have a gut microbial profile that differs from that of controls (Finegold et al., 2010; Wang et al., 2011). A double‐blind, placebo‐controlled trial of probiotic supplementation on children with ASD did not find an impact upon behavioural symptoms, although the study suffered from a low sample size (Parracho et al., 2010). It should be noted that this is an area prone to controversy, due not only to the question of the microbiota in ASD, but to the underlying debate around how ASD is defined as a disorder (e.g., Jaarsma & Welin, 2012). The immune pathway within the brain–gut–microbiome axis may be a plausible mediator of the effects of this axis on social behaviour, as cytokine‐induced sickness behaviour is associated with social withdrawal (e.g., Dantzer, O'Connor, Freund, Johnson, & Kelley, 2008). Conversely, social threat may lead to a proinflammatory immune response (Slavich & Irwin, 2014).

The brain‐gut‐microbiome axis may not only affect interindividual social psychology, but can also be placed in a broader social and cultural context. Globalisation may impact on the global homogeneity of diet (e.g., World Health Organization, 2002). A “Western” diet (high in carbohydrates and processed foods) may have a broad impact upon the gut microbiota. An increasing evidence base suggests differing (often more diverse) microbiota in populations with diets that differ substantially from Western populations, including hunter‐gatherers in the Chihuahuan Desert (Leach & Sobolik, 2010) the Hazda of Tanzania (Schnorr et al., 2014), the Asaro and Suasi people of Papua New Guinea (Martínez et al., 2015), and children from a rural village in Burkina Faso, where the diet is similar to when agriculture and animal husbandry were introduced c. 10,000 years ago (De Filippo et al., 2010). The increased international prevalence of the Western diet (e.g., Pingali, 2007) may have implications for public psychological health, and this may be mediated via the brain–gut–microbiome axis.

In sum, a psychology of the brain–gut–microbiome axis should utilise multiple levels of analysis to understand this axis, not only at a physiological and intrapersonal level but also at a social and cultural level (See Figure 1).



As highlighted above, different diets will impact upon the composition of the gut. A vegan diet has been found to be associated with a reduction in potentially pathological microbiota (Glick‐Bauer & Yeh, 2014), while in contrast, a high‐fat diet may be associated with alterations in the microbiota that could lead to an increased risk of inflammation (Murphy, Velazquez, & Herbert, 2015). Furthermore, certain bacteria may flourish when certain nutrients are consumed in higher quantities; this is likely to have implications for the brain–gut–microbiome axis (Oriach, Robertson, Stanton, Cryan, & Dinan, 2016), and this may in turn impact upon health. Given the need for a diversity of microorganisms to utilise dietary macronutrients (e.g., Cantarel, Lombard, & Henrissat, 2012; Pokusaeva, Fitzgerald, & van Sinderen, 2011), diversity of microbiota is likely to mediate the impact of diet on host health (Conlon & Bird, 2015). Behavioural interventions targeted towards maintaining a healthy diet may thus lead to positive psychological effects that are mediated through gut microbiome effects. Indeed, the discipline of psychiatry is increasingly recognising that nutrition is a key factor in improving mental as well as physical health (Sandhu et al., 2017; Sarris et al., 2015).

In addition to broader dietary trends, there has been an increasing research interest in the role of polyunsaturated fatty acids; they have been shown in laboratory animal models to alter microbial composition as well as improving cognition and dampening HPA axis activity (Robertson et al., 2017; Yu et al., 2014) and to enhance adherence of probiotic bacteria to the gastrointestinal tract (Bomba et al., 2002). Research in humans indicates that docosahexaenoic acid, eicosapentaenoic acid, and total omega‐3 polyunsaturated fatty acids are lower in people with major depression compared to controls (Lin, Huang, & Su, 2010), and omega‐3 fatty acids have been shown to have a positive impact upon depression compared to placebo (Su, Huang, Chiu, & Shen, 2003). Further research is required on whether changes in the microbiota may mediate any impact of polyunsaturated fatty acids on psychological well‐being.

A probiotic is a living microorganism that when ingested in sufficient quantities can ameliorate the health of the host; a psychobiotic was originally defined as a probiotic with a positive impact upon mental health (Dinan, Stanton, & Cryan, 2013) but has been broadened to encompass any microbiome‐mediated strategy that can modify mental health and psychological performance (Sarkar et al., 2016). Trials of putative psychobiotics have sought to demonstrate an impact of supplementation on stress, mood, and cognition. In healthy volunteers, probiotic consumption has been shown to improve mood, but only in those who have poorer mood at baseline (Benton, Williams, & Brown, 2007) and reduce depression and urinary free cortisol (Messaoudi et al., 2011). A single probiotic strain has been shown to reduce cortisol output in response to an acute stressor (Allen, Hutch, et al., 2016). A probiotic fermented milk drink has been shown to alter brain activity when processing information related to emotional facial expressions (Tillisch et al., 2013). Unfortunately, the latter study did not report on performance on the test, although another study indicated that fermented milk of a Lactobaccillus helveticus led to improvement in sustained attention in healthy older adults (Chung et al., 2014), and a recent study has indicated changes in frontal EEG mobility and associated changes in paired associate learning memory performance (Allen, Hutch, et al., 2016). It will be of interest for future research to examine potential mechanisms for these effects, although it should be noted that multiple mechanisms of probiotic bacteria are likely (e.g., Cryan & Dinan, 2012), including immune system effects, vagus nerve activation, tryptophan metabolism, and microbial metabolites. Probiotic bacteria can promote the production of neuroactive substances such as serotonin (Yano et al., 2015) and GABA (Barrett et al., 2012), which can impact upon psychological health, although these are unlikely to cross the blood–brain barrier and affect the brain directly.

Probiotic trials generally only administer a certain number of species in a certain concentration. Although a probiotic or antibiotic may impact upon the psychology of the host, it is difficult to tell how a probiotic is interacting with the other microbial species within the host, and although antibiotics may lead to more sweeping but transient effects on the human gut microbiota, they are not likely to ablate the microbiota completely. Caution is therefore necessary in drawing comparisons between extreme animal models in the laboratory, such as germ‐free rodents, and probiotic trials in humans.

A more drastic means of altering the microbiota than administering a probiotic is transplanting the fecal microbiota of a donor. Such a method has shown success in treating patients with Clostridium difficile infection (Kassam, Lee, Yuan, & Hunt, 2013). If such a method can be used to produce desirable changes in the microbiota, one may speculate that it could do the same for the brain–gut–microbiome axis. Indeed, evidence indicates that symptoms of IBS may be ameliorated by fecal microbiota transplantation (cf. review by Smits, Bouter, de Vos, Borody, & Nieuwdorp, 2013). Germ‐free or antibiotic‐treated rodents can be colonised with stool from human conditions. For example, rodents colonised with microbiota from people suffering from depression and healthy controls exhibited differences in depression‐like and anxiety‐like behaviours (Kelly, Borre, et al., 2016; Zheng et al., 2016). By directly manipulating the microbiota in this manner, this approach allows for a more causal and mechanistic examination of the impact of the microbiota than would be possible in a human trial.

Conversely, we may pose the question of whether psychological or behavioural interventions may impact upon gut physiology and the gut microbiota, a key role for top‐down processes regulating the gut microbiota in the brain–gut–microbiome axis. Although the symptoms of IBS are gastrointestinal (see section on IBS below), cognitive behavioural therapy as well as hypnotherapy (Miller et al., 2015) have been successfully employed as an intervention for reducing IBS symptoms. There is currently limited evidence that psychological interventions may impact upon the composition of the gut microbiota to “normalise” it. However, mindfulness‐based stress reduction represents a promising psychological intervention for tackling chronic stress, for example in carers for persons with dementia (Whitebird et al., 2013). Comprehensive interventions that simultaneously target diet and other lifestyle factors such as exercise, in addition to cognition, behaviour, and psychological well‐being are likely to have the clearest impact upon the gut microbiota, although the specific effects of each aspect of treatment are challenging to untangle. Behavioural interventions that target diet in particular are likely to have major inroads into ameliorating dysfunction within the brain–gut–microbiome axis.



The cognitive–behavioural model of IBS suggests that cognitions relating to both gastrointestinal symptoms and psychological events are interpreted in a manner that may exacerbate their impact (Toner et al., 1998). IBS is associated with changes in psychological processes such as catastrophizing and hypervigilance to negative stimuli that may lead to maintenance of the disorder (see review by Kennedy et al., 2012). Consistent with this model of IBS, cognitive behavioural therapy has been shown to alleviate IBS symptoms and improve quality of life (Li, Xiong, Zhang, Yu, & Chen, 2014). It is likely that a greater understanding of the psychological processes underlying IBS will help in treatment of this psychological and gastrointestinal condition.

Progress in the area of the brain–gut–microbiota axis requires multidisciplinary work that can elaborate on host–microbe interactions, further developing our knowledge of how this axis affects emotion and information processing, as well as how it interacts with the broader cultural context. See Table 1 for a description of key questions in this area.

If acknowledgement of the role of the brain–gut–microbiome axis can disrupt biases such as anthropocentrism and disembodiment within some branches of psychology (see section below), this will have implications not just for research and clinical practice, but also for the teaching of psychology and cognate disciplines such as neuroscience. Curricula will thus faces new challenges, and one of the implications of microbiome research is that such programs may need to place an increased emphasis on multidisciplinary approaches (e.g., a renewed focus on systems biology) and breaking down barriers between heretofore siloed disciplines.

Another clear objective of this review is to reframe the narrative within psychology as a discipline to challenge three biases:

The human brain has long been described as one of the most complex structures in the known universe; sequencing the genome of the gut microbiota has revealed that the ecosystem of the gastrointestinal tract may be a close rival. Understanding how the brain and the gut microbiota interact at a functional level is likely to remain one of the great scientific challenges of the 21st century. The implications of this new endeavour need to be considered in the discipline of psychology as these findings are relevant across multiple areas. In parallel, a psychological perspective will help to take this research endeavour into new and exciting areas, and to apply the relevant findings in a more targeted manner, in clinical and research practice as well as in more general applications.

Andrew P. Allen's research focuses on stress and cognition, particularly in the context of the brain–gut–microbiome axis. He has published on this area in Translational Psychiatry, Psychopharmacology, and Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews. His current research examines the psychology and biology of stress in informal dementia caregivers. He is currently senior postdoctoral researcher at University College Cork, Ireland. He holds a PhD in Psychology from Cardiff University, Wales, an MSc in Psychology and a BA in Psychology and Economics from Trinity College Dublin, Ireland.

Timothy Dinan is Professor of Psychiatry & Neurobehavioural Science and a Principal Investigator in the APC Microbiome Institute at University College Cork. He was previously Chair of Clinical Neurosciences and Professor of Psychological Medicine at St. Bartholomew's Hospital, London. Prior to that, he was a Senior Lecturer in Psychiatry at Trinity College Dublin, Ireland. He has worked in research laboratories on both sides of the Atlantic and has a PhD in Pharmacology from the University of London. He is a Fellow of the Royal Colleges of Physicians and Psychiatrists and a Fellow of the American College of Physicians. He has published over 400 papers and numerous books on the pharmacology and neurobiology of affective disorders. His primary research focus is on immune and endocrine aspects of depression and irritable bowel syndrome (IBS).

Dr Gerard Clarke is a lecturer in the Department of Psychiatry & Neurobehavioural Science. Gerard graduated with a B.Sc (Hons) in Chemistry from NUI, Galway followed by a MSc in Neuropharmacology from the same institution. He subsequently received a PhD (Department of Psychiatry) from University College Cork (UCC). Gerard was a visiting scientist in the University of Mississippi Medical Centre in Jackson prior to working for a number of major multinational pharmaceutical companies in both Ireland and Australia, including Wyeth, Pfizer, and 3M. This was followed by periods working as a postdoctoral researcher in the APC Microbiome Institute, as a Research Fellow in the Department of Psychiatry & Neurobehavioural Science and as a lecturer in the Department of Pharmacology/School of Pharmacy in UCC before taking up his current position as a Lecturer in Psychiatry & Neurobehavioural Science. Gerard's current research focus takes a translational approach to the assessment of neurpharmacological indices of stress‐related disorders such as depression and IBS. He is particularly interested in advancing our understanding of how tryptophan degradation along the kynurenine pathway influences psychopathology and in evaluating novel therapeutic interventions that can reverse such deficits. His research also interrogates the impact of microbiota manipulation on the central nervous system.

John F. Cryan is Professor & Chair, Department of Anatomy & Neuroscience, University College Cork. He received a BSc (Hons) and PhD from the National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland. He was a visiting fellow at the Department of Psychiatry, University of Melbourne, Australia (1997‐1998), which was followed by postdoctoral fellowships at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA, and The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California. He spent 4 years at the Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research in Basel Switzerland prior to joining UCC in 2005, where he was a Senior Lecturer in Pharmacology in the School of Pharmacy and in the Department of Pharmacology & Therapeutics UCC. Currently, he is also a Principal Investigator in the APC Microbiome Institute. Prof. Cryan has published over 350 peer‐reviewed articles and book chapters including articles in high‐impact journals such as PNAS, Neuron, Nature Reviews Neuroscience, Molecular Psychiatry, Biological Psychiatry, Progress in Neurobiology, Nature Reviews Drug Discovery, Gastroenterology, Gut, and Journal of Neuroscience. He has edited books on “Behavioural Neurogenetics” (Springer Press, 2012) on “Depression: From Psychopathology to Pharmacotherapy” (Karger Press, 2010) and “Microbial Endocrinology: The Microbiota‐Gut‐Brain Axis in Health and Disease”(Springer Press, 2014).

