The effect of the timing of exposure to Campylobacter jejuni on the gut microbiome and inflammatory responses of broiler chickens



Campylobacters are an unwelcome member of the poultry gut microbiota in terms of food safety. The objective of this study was to compare the microbiota, inflammatory responses, and zootechnical parameters of broiler chickens not exposed to Campylobacter jejuni with those exposed either early at 6 days old or at the age commercial broiler chicken flocks are frequently observed to become colonized at 20 days old.

Birds infected with Campylobacter at 20 days became cecal colonized within 2 days of exposure, whereas birds infected at 6 days of age did not show complete colonization of the sample cohort until 9 days post-infection. All birds sampled thereafter were colonized until the end of the study at 35 days (mean 6.1 log10 CFU per g of cecal contents). The cecal microbiota of birds infected with Campylobacter were significantly different to age-matched non-infected controls at 2 days post-infection, but generally, the composition of the cecal microbiota were more affected by bird age as the time post infection increased. The effects of Campylobacter colonization on the cecal microbiota were associated with reductions in the relative abundance of OTUs within the taxonomic family Lactobacillaceae and the Clostridium cluster XIVa. Specific members of the Lachnospiraceae and Ruminococcaceae families exhibit transient shifts in microbial community populations dependent upon the age at which the birds become colonized by C. jejuni. Analysis of ileal and cecal chemokine/cytokine gene expression revealed increases in IL-6, IL-17A, and Il-17F consistent with a Th17 response, but the persistence of the response was dependent on the stage/time of C. jejuni colonization that coincide with significant reductions in the abundance of Clostridium cluster XIVa.

This study combines microbiome data, cytokine/chemokine gene expression with intestinal villus, and crypt measurements to compare chickens colonized early or late in the rearing cycle to provide insights into the process and outcomes of Campylobacter colonization. Early colonization results in a transient growth rate reduction and pro-inflammatory response but persistent modification of the cecal microbiota. Late colonization produces pro-inflammatory responses with changes in the cecal microbiota that will endure in market-ready chickens.

The online version of this article (10.1186/s40168-018-0477-5) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

The production of poultry for both meat and eggs has been increasing rapidly throughout the world [1]. Feed conversion efficiency is of foremost importance in the economic profitability of poultry meat production, and selective breeding has resulted in fast-growing birds with reduced feed conversion ratios. The relationship between the gut microbiota and the feed conversion performance of broiler chickens has been a focus of research in recent years, with the prospect of modifying the microbiota to improve production efficiency and bird health [2, 3].

Recent research has reported changes in the chicken microbiota in response to Campylobacter colonization [4, 24] with evidence of modification of the β-diversity of the cecal microbiota [25]. The objective of this study was to compare the microbiota of chickens that were not exposed to Campylobacter, with those exposed either at a young age (6 days of age) or at the age at which birds often become positive in commercial production (20 days of age), with a view to gain a better understanding of how the timing of Campylobacter colonization affects the microbiome and the innate and adaptive immune response.

The first trial (referred to as trial L; late infection) monitored the development of the chicken gut microbiota and innate immune responses post-lag period colonization of broiler chickens by Campylobacter jejuni HPC5 [26, 27], at 20 days of age. Two groups of 35 birds were kept in pens until day 20 when trial L group 1 (TLG1) birds were administered with a placebo and trial L group 2 (TLG2) birds with C. jejuni, before being caged independently until the end of the study at day 35. Six birds from the TLG1 were euthanized for sampling at 22 days of age (da) and three at 28 and 35 da. Seven birds from the TLG2 group were euthanized for sampling at 22, 28, and 35 da. The second trial (referred to as trial E; early infection) monitored the development of the gut microbiota and innate immune responses of broiler chickens colonized early at 6 da by C. jejuni. Two groups of 35 birds were co-housed in pens until 6 da when trial E group 1 (TEG1) birds were administered with a placebo and trial E group 2 (TEG2) birds were administered with C. jejuni, before being caged independently until the end of the study at day 35. Seven birds from each group were euthanized for sampling at days 8, 15, 22, 28, and 35.

Day-of-hatch male Ross 308 broiler chicks were purchased from a local hatchery and brooded in floor pens on wood shavings until the day of Campylobacter colonization when they were randomly assigned on the basis of weight to one of two groups and held in two separate rooms under similar environmental conditions with category two biosecurity. Welfare monitoring of the chickens was undertaken either twice every 24 h or three times post Campylobacter colonization. Chickens had access to feed and water ad-libitum throughout the study. Chickens were fed on a wheat-based diet provided as a starter crumb 0–10 days, grower pellets 11–24 days, and finisher pellets 23–35 days. The starter diet contained wheat 59.9% (w/w), soybean meal 32.5% (w/w), soybean oil 3.65% (w/w), limestone 0.60%(w/w), calcium phosphate 1.59% (w/w), sodium bicarbonate 0.27% (w/w), salt 0.15% (w/w), lysine HCl 0.296% (w/w), DL-methionine 0.362% (w/w), threonine 0.134% (w/w), and the enzymes phytase and xylanase (dosed according to the instructions of the manufacturers DSM Nutritional Products Ltd. PO Box 2676 CH-4002 Basel, Switzerland). The grower and finisher diets increased the wheat content at the expense of soya meal by 2 and 5% respectively. The feed and paper liners on which the chicks were delivered were tested for Salmonella using standard enrichment procedures and found to be negative.

Chickens were euthanized by either exposure to carbon dioxide gas or parenteral barbiturate overdose followed by cervical dislocation according to Schedule 1 of the UK Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986. The birds were weighed before tissue and intestinal content samples were collected post-mortem. Ileal tissues were collected from approximately 3 cm distal to Meckel’s diverticulum and cecal tissues collected from the distal tips of the ceca. Intestinal tissues were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen for subsequent RNA isolation or preserved in 10% (w/v) neutral buffered formalin (Fisher Scientific; Loughborough, UK) for histological assessment. Intestinal contents were collected and samples used either to acquire bacterial count data or for total genomic DNA extraction.

Approximately 1 g of material was collected from both ceca and combined in pre-weighed universals before a 10% w/v suspension was prepared in MRD (Oxoid). Campylobacter were enumerated in triplicate from decimal dilutions prepared in MRD to 1 × 10−7 using a modification of the Miles and Misera technique. For each triplicate dilution set, five aliquots were dispensed onto CCDA agar (PO0119; Oxoid) prepared with the addition of agar to 2% (to prevent swarming) and with addition of CCDA Selective Supplement SR0155 (Oxoid). Plates were incubated at 42 °C in a microaerobic atmosphere (2% H2, 5% CO2, 5% O2, 88% N2) for 48 h (Don Whitley Scientific modified atmospheric cabinet, Shipley, UK). Coliforms were enumerated by application of aliquots of 100 μl from decimal dilutions of the cecal suspension to MacConkey No 3 agar (CM115; Oxoid) and incubation at 37 °C for 24 h. Lactic acid bacteria were enumerated by application of aliquots of 100 μl from decimal dilutions of the cecal suspension to MRS agar (CM0361; Oxoid) and incubation under anaerobic conditions at 30 °C for 48 h (Don Whitley Scientific anaerobic workstation). Between 30 and 300 colonies were counted on MacConkey No 3 and MRS agars, and the count per gram of cecal material was calculated by multiplying by the dilution factor.

Samples of ileum for histological assessment were examined from each bird from both trials. The fixed tissue samples were dehydrated through a series of alcohol solutions, cleared in xylene, and finally embedded in paraffin wax (Microtechnical Services Ltd., Exeter, UK). Sections (3 to 5 μm thick) were prepared and stained with modified hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) using standard protocols. After staining, the slides were scanned by NanoZoomer Digital Pathology System (Hamamatsu, Welwyn Garden City, UK). Measurements of villus height and crypt depth were made using the NanoZoomer Digital Pathology Image Program (Hamamatsu) of 10 well-oriented villi scanned at × 40 magnification. The average of the 10 measurements was calculated per bird, from three or four birds per group, per time point. Villus height was measured from the tip of the villus to the crypt opening, and the associate crypt depth was measured from the base of the crypt to the level of the crypt opening. The ratio of villus height to relative crypt depth (V:C ratio) was calculated from these measurements. Heterophils were enumerated and any histopathological features recorded in a blind assessment of five random fields from each tissue section.

RNA was isolated from cecal and ileal tissue biopsies using NucleoSpin RNA isolation kit (Macherey-Nagel, GmbH & co. KG, Düran DE) according to the manufacturer’s protocol with the following modifications. Tissue samples were homogenized in a lysis buffer with 2.8-mm ceramic beads (MO BIO Laboratories Inc., Carlsbad, USA) using TissueLyser II (Qiagen, Hilden, DE) prior to subsequent purification as described in the protocol. RNA was eluted in DEPC-treated water (Ambion ThermoFisher Scientific, UK) and stored at − 80 °C. RNA quality and concentration were assessed using Nanodrop ND-1000 Spectrophotometer (Labtech International Ltd., Uckfield, UK). The ratio 260/280 nm was in the range of 1.79 to 2.17 with the mean of 2.12 ± 0.01 for all RNA samples used.

Reverse transcription was performed with 1 μg of RNA using SuperScript II (Invitrogen Life Technologies, Carlsbad, USA) and random hexamers. Quantitative PCR reaction was performed with cDNA template derived from 4 ng of total RNA in triplicate using SYBR Green Master mix (Applied Biosystems, ThermoFisher Scientific). Cytokines and chemokines fold change were calculated using the comparative cycle threshold (Ct) method established by the manufacturer [28]. The average of the triplicate Ct values was used for analysis, and the target genes Ct values were normalized to those of the housekeeping gene encoding glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH). Significance tests were calculated using ANOVA of the replicate the 2−ΔCt values for each gene in the control and Campylobacter-colonized groups. The RNA levels of expression were determined by qPCR using the Roche Diagnostics LightCycler 480 (Hoffmann La Roche AG, CH). The primers used for qPCR of GAPDH, IFN-γ, IL-1β, IL-4, IL-6, IL-10, IL-17A, IL-17F, CXCLi1, and CXCLi2 [29–32] are presented in Table 1.

Bacterial DNA was isolated from 0.25 g cecal content using the PowerSoil DNA Isolation Kit (MO Bio Laboratories) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Using the isolated DNA as a template, the V4 region of the bacterial 16S rRNA gene was PCR amplified using primers 515f (5′ GTGCCAGCMGCCGCGGTAA 3′) and 806r (5′ GGACTACHVGGGTWTCTAAT 3′) [33]. Amplicons were then sequenced on the Illumina MiSeq platform using 2 × 250 bp cycles. These sequence data are deposited in the NCBI database within the Bioproject PRJNA380214 under the SRA study SRP133552.

Prior to metagenomic analysis, sequence reads with a quality score mean below 30 were removed using Prinseq [34]. The 16S rRNA sequence analysis was performed using Mothur v. 1.39 [35]. Analysis was performed as according to the MiSeq SOP (accessed online 28/06/2017; [36]). The 16S rRNA gene sequences were aligned against a reference alignment based on the SILVA rRNA database [37] for use in Mothur (available at: https://www.mothur.org/wiki/Silva_reference_files), and clustered into operational taxonomic units (OTUs) using the opticlust clustering algorithm [38]. The nearest 16S rRNA gene sequence identities to the OTUs are reported on the basis of BLASTn searches if data matches are from type cultures with a BLAST identity ≥ 99%. If not, the consensus taxonomy of the OTUs is reported as generated using the classify.otu command in Mothur with reference data from the Ribosomal Database Project (version 14) [39, 40] adapted for use in Mothur (available at: https://www.mothur.org/wiki/RDP_reference_files).

For the microbiota beta diversity analysis, Bray-Curtis distances were tested for significance using analysis of molecular variance (AMOVA) implemented within Mothur [38]. For alpha diversity, inverse Simpsons indices and species abundance were tested using Kruskal-Wallis test followed by Dunn’s multiple comparison test with Benjamini-Hochberg p value correction within R [41, 42] using Dunn.test 1.3.4 package [43]. The Shapiro-Wilk normality test for data distribution analysis was used from within GraphPad Prism version 7.00 for Windows (GraphPad Software, La Jolla, USA, http://www.graphpad.com). Data processing and ordination were performed using R project. Statistical differences between Campylobacter and non-Campylobacter-colonized groups with respect to the zootechnical parameters were determined using repeated measures ANOVA implemented in Genstat release 19.1 (VSN International, UK). Campylobacter viable counts exhibiting a normal distribution, heterophil counts, and the villus and crypt measurements were made using single-factor ANOVA with < 0.05 used as the level significance. For microbiota data sets, non-parametric Mann-Whitney tests were performed. Linear discriminant analysis effect size (LEfSe) was used to identify differentially abundant OTUs (available at https://bitbucket.org/nsegata/lefse/overview) using a minimum cutoff of 0.05% [44]. Analysis of similarity (ANOSIM) with the Benjamini-Hochberg correction for multiple comparisons with analysis of similarity percentages (SIMPER) [45] was used to determine the contribution of each taxonomic unit to the Bray-Curtis dissimilarity of pairs of distinct sample groups using the vegan package [46] in R using a script by Andrew Steinberger (https://github.com/asteinberger9/seq_scripts) as previously reported for the interrogation of 16S rDNA OTUs [47].

Each bird was weighed regularly throughout the experimental period to compare the growth of birds infected with C. jejuni HPC5 and uninfected control birds. There were significant differences between the weights of the control and experimental birds infected at 6 da (TEG; p < 0.01). Notably, these differences were evident at 2 and 9 days post-infection (dpi), when the control birds in TEG1 were significantly heavier (p < 0.01) than infected birds (TEG2). The reduced weights of the TEG2 birds at 2 dpi coincided with the observation of temporary diarrhea that resolved within 72 h. However, by the end of the rearing cycle (35 da), there was no significant difference (p > 0.05) in the weights of the birds infected with Campylobacter compared to uninfected controls (Additional file 1). In contrast, the weights of birds in TLG1 were not significantly different to those in TLG2. The cumulative FCR up to 35 days for TLG1 (n = 8) and TLG2 (n = 7) were 1.52 and 1.56 respectively while the FCR for TEG1 (n = 10) and TEG2 (n = 7) were 1.48 and 1.45 respectively. Breed performance targets for commercial broiler chickens suggest an FCR of 1.54 at 35 da.

All birds were culture negative for Campylobacter spp. until experimental infection with C. jejuni and control birds remained culture negative for Campylobacter spp. throughout the study. Campylobacter viable counts of the cecal contents recovered at the end of the rearing cycle were high independent of age at infection (mean Campylobacter density = 6.1 log10 CFU g−1; Fig. 1a,
b). The dynamics of colonization were however affected by the age at which birds were infected with Campylobacter. Birds from TLG2, infected at 20 da all exhibited cecal colonization with C. jejuni (mean 5.1 log10 CFU g−1) at 2 dpi, with all the birds sampled at each time point thereafter (n = 7) showing colonization until the end of the rearing cycle at 35 da (15 dpi; Fig. 1a). Only two of seven birds sampled from TEG2 at 2 dpi had levels of Campylobacter in their ceca above the limit of detection, but by the next sample point at 9 dpi, all birds showed colonization to levels that remained similar after this stage (p > 0.05; Fig. 1b).

Heterophil infiltration counts were determined in a blind assessment of formalin-fixed H&E-stained ileum sections (Additional file 2 contains typical examples) to reveal significant differences using ANOVA at 2 (p = 0.02) and 9 dpi (p = 0.01) for birds infected with C. jejuni at 6 da (TEG2) compared to uninfected birds but were not significant thereafter (p > 0.05). Heterophil infiltration at 2 and 9 dpi was accompanied by mild multi-focal villous blunting, with evidence of mild edema and villous fusion. For the birds infected at 20 da, significant increases in the heterophil counts were observed in the ileum sections of the infected birds (TLG2) at 2 (p = 0.04) and 8 dpi (p = 0.01). However, villus crypt ratios obtained from measurements taken from H&E-stained sections of the ileum, comparing uninfected TLG1 to infected TLG2 from 3 to 4 birds from each group, at each sample time point, revealed no significant difference (p > 0.05) between the two groups at any age. The same comparison, made with H&E-stained sections of the ileum from uninfected TEG1 and infected TEG2, showed no significant difference between uninfected and infected birds. However, when comparing the villus height and the crypt depth measurements separately, significant differences using ANOVA were noted between the infected and uninfected birds (Fig. 2). Villus length and crypt depth were reduced immediately after infection but both measurements were increased at the end of the rearing period. TLG2 birds show a significant reduction (p = 0.0005) in crypt depth, 2 dpi, combined with an observable, but not statistically significant (p = 0.13), reduction in the villus height compared to uninfected TLG1 birds. The measurements of the villi and crypts of birds in TLG1 and TLG2 were similar (p > 0.05) at 8 dpi, but at the final sampling point (15 dpi), the villus height from the Campylobacter-infected TLG2 birds was increased compared to the uninfected TLG1 birds at the same age (p = 0.0004) although the crypt depths were not significantly different (p = 0.7). The birds in TEG2 showed a similar pattern. Immediately following infection (2 dpi), the villi were significantly reduced in height (p = 0.003) and the crypts reduced in depth (p = 0.02) compared to the control birds (TEG1). However, by the next sample point (9 dpi), there was no significant difference in villus height or in the crypt depth for birds in TEG1 compared to TEG2 (p > 0.05). No significant differences were observed thereafter until the final sample point (29 dpi), where the villi were significantly longer (p = 0.004) and the crypts significantly deeper (p = 0.008) in the infected TEG2 birds compared to the uninfected TEG1 birds.

The inflammatory effect of C. jejuni colonization was assessed by quantification of the relative expression of cytokines and chemokine gene transcripts in ileal and cecal tissue biopsies (Figs. 3 and
4) representing major inflammatory pathways in chickens [30]. The cytokines IL-17F, IL-17A, IL-6, and IL-1β and chemokines CXCLi1 and CXCLi2, also known as ChIL-8, have previously been described as markers of the Th17 pathway. Whereas IFN-γ is related to the Th1 pathway, IL-4 is connected to the Th2 pathway and IL-10 is produced by regulatory T cells (Treg) to control the inflammatory effects of the Th cell responses. There was no significant change in the cytokine and chemokine expression in ileum tissues (Fig. 3) at 2 dpi following infection at 6 da in TEG2 birds. However, at 9 dpi, most cytokines showed a significant (p < 0.05) increase in expression compared to controls corresponding to the increasing levels of colonization observed in Fig. 1b. Notably, increases in IFN-γ, IL-4, and IL-17A provided evidence for activation of Th1, Th2, and Th17 pathways but these were also accompanied by an increase in IL-10. Levels of expression remained higher than controls for the majority of the Campylobacter-colonized birds until 29 dpi when they were reduced to similar or lower levels than control birds. Changes in cytokine expression in response to infection by Campylobacter at 20 da in TLG2 birds was characterized in the ileum tissues (Fig. 3) by a significant (p < 0.05) increase in most of the cytokine expression at 15 dpi compared to uninfected TLG1 birds, with the exception of IFN-γ and IL-1β. Prior to that time point, the level of cytokine expression was not significantly different to the non-infected birds (TLG1) at 2 dpi and 8 dpi despite a high level of Campylobacter colonization detected as early as 2 dpi, although the cytokine IL-17A showed a significant increase in expression from 2 dpi onwards in the TLG2 birds. Interestingly, most of the immune response markers were upregulated at an earlier stage during the infection in TEG2 birds (at 9 dpi) rather than in TLG2 birds (at 15 dpi) despite the high level of Campylobacter detected at 2 dpi in the TLG2 birds.

Changes in cytokine and chemokine expression in cecal tissues in response to colonization by Campylobacter (Fig. 4) at 6 da were characterized by significant increases in IFN-γ, IL-1β, IL-4, and CXCLi1 and a decrease in IL-6 and IL-10 at 2 dpi in TEG2 birds. A week later at 9 dpi, the expression of IL-6 was increased along with IL-17A, IL-17F, IL-10, and IL-4. By 16 dpi, their level of expression was not significantly different to the uninfected TEG1 birds, and at 22 dpi, the majority of the cytokines showed a significant (p < 0.05) reduction in expression compared to control birds TEG1, with the exception of IL-17F and CXCLi1. Finally, at the last time point 29 dpi, the cytokine and chemokine levels had recovered to levels not significantly different to the non-infected control (TEG1). Cecal tissues of birds infected at 20 da did not show the concerted Th1 and Th2 immune responses relative to the non-infected control birds at 2 dpi that the birds colonized at 6 da experienced. However, IL-6 showed a significant increase of 35-fold, followed by increases in the levels of IL-17A and IL-17F at 8 dpi and ultimately increased CXCLi1, CXCLi2, and IL-17A at 15 dpi. Following infection with Campylobacter, the immune response in the cecal tissues appears to be more focused on the Th17 pathway featuring IL-6 induction with IL-17A and IL-17F responses, as compared to that observed in the ileum tissues.

DNA sequencing of the V4 regions of 16S rRNA genes was used to estimate the diversity and abundance of the cecal luminal microbiota of birds from the TEG and TLG experiments. A total of 6,947,272 quality-controlled sequence reads from 107 samples were resolved in to 7646 OTUs (distance 0.03) that fall into 23 phyla. As described previously for chicken cecal microbiota, Firmicutes dominate with a mean abundance of 87.57% (83.89–93.91%) over all samples from 8 days of age onwards and followed by Proteobacteria at 6.43% (3.47–8.77%) [8, 48]. The relative abundances of these phyla for all samples are presented in Additional file 3. The sequence reads were subsampled at 16,319 reads per sample for subsequent analysis.

LEfSe analysis of the TLG differentially abundant OTUs between C. jejuni-colonized and non-colonized birds are presented in Fig. 7a with the corresponding phylogenetic relationships in Fig. 7b. Notably, three of the OTUs identified with increased abundance in the C. jejuni-colonized TLG birds coincided with those from the TEG comparison: Lachnospiraceae ssp. OTU0022, Blautia ssp. OTU0023, and unclassified Clostridiales OTU0089. In the non-colonized birds, LEfSe identified greater differential abundance of Eggerthella OTU0028, Clostridium XIVa OTU0041, unclassified Clostridiales OTU0050, Ruminococcaceae OTU0070 and OTU0081, and Lachnospiraceae spp. OTU0162. Figure 7c shows box-whisker plots of the relative OTU abundances between C. jejuni-colonized and non-colonized birds for three OTUs identified using SIMPER (p adj < 0.05). The increased abundances corresponding to Eggerthella OTU0028 in the colonized birds and Clostridium IV OTU0056 in the non-colonized birds also feature in those identified as those responsible for the differential abundance by LEfSe for TLG. The taxon Clostridium XIVa (OTU0011 and OTU0041) shows differential increases in abundance in the non-colonized birds that contributes to the dissimilarity between the C. jejuni-colonized and non-colonized groups for TEG and TLG.

Recent reports have linked Campylobacter colonization of broiler chickens with reduced economic performance in terms of an increase in cumulative FCR. Evidence for this comes from correlating poor economically performing farms with high Campylobacter prevalence [49] and from smaller scale experimental trials [50]. There were distinct differences in zootechnical performance between the two independent trials reported here despite similar diets and controlled housing, but these were independent of Campylobacter colonization. The TLG trial showed FCRs of 1.52 and 1.56 respectively for TLG1 and TLG2, whereas the TEG trial had FCRs of 1.48 and 1.45 respectively for TEG1 and TEG2. The between trial differences could not be explained by either an increase in the α-diversity or richness of the cecal microbiota.

Microbial communities from fecal samples of C. jejuni-colonized commercial chickens at slaughter are reported to show increases in the abundance of Streptococcus and Ruminococcaceae and decreases in the abundance of Lactobacillus and Corynebacterium [55]. Notwithstanding that Lactobacillus are reported to be significantly over-represented in fecal samples compared with cecal content [57], we also found a relative decrease in the abundance of Lactobacillus spp. OTU0008 in the ceca of TEG2 C. jejuni-colonized birds. Lactobacillus spp. OTU0008 becomes significantly reduced at 16 dpi in the early colonized birds. This specific shift in the microbiota occurs after Th17 pro-inflammatory response in TEG2 when relative IL-6 expression is reduced and appears to represent a change in the microbiota driven by C. jejuni populations becoming established and tolerated (summarized in Fig. 8). In the late challenge where the Th17 response persists until the end of the study, the abundance of Lactobacillus spp. OTU0008 is not significantly changed. Lactobacillus spp. are established probiotics and have been proposed as feed additives to reduce the C. jejuni colonization of chickens [58–61]. If C. jejuni and Lactobacillus spp. OTU0008 compete for a similar niche and/or resource, then our observations could provide a basis for the inclusion of similar or better competing Lactobacillus ssp. in feed post programmed pro-inflammatory challenges such as those posed by vaccination. Inclusion would also have to minimize any potential negative impact on performance observed previously [2, 3], although it should be noted that at least one species of Lactobacillus spp. has been proposed to enhance the performance of broiler chickens [62].

We have demonstrated specific increases in cytokine/chemokine expression that are consistent with a Th17 response to C. jejuni colonization for early and late infection experiments. However, the outcomes for the cytokine/chemokine responses differ with respect to the age of infection in that the early colonized birds return to levels not distinguishable from age-matched non-infected birds, whereas the later infection continues the show elevated IL-17A responses until the end of the study (summarized in Fig. 8). These differences do not result in lower Campylobacter colonization levels at the end of the study. It is evident that a sudden shift in microbiota, caused by the introduction and colonization of a highly successful enteric bacteria, would elicit an immune response but the response in itself is not necessarily an indication of pathogenic behavior. It has been suggested that the complex relationship that permits persistent, high-level cecal colonization of C. jejuni in its avian host without obvious pathology is a result of inefficiency within the chicken immune system combined with mechanisms that redirect the response toward tolerance [16]. Our data would suggest there are a range of age-dependent chemokine/cytokine responses that are targeted to the levels of colonization, which collectively drive shifts in the resident microbial communities.



The authors acknowledge research funding from Dairy Crest Ltd.

All data generated or analyzed during this study are included in this manuscript and its additional information files. Sequence data are deposited in the NCBI database within the Bioproject PRJNA380214.

This study was carried out under license and in accordance with UK Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986. All procedures were approved by the Local Ethics Committee of the University of Nottingham.

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (10.1186/s40168-018-0477-5) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

