Progressive Shifts in the Gut Microbiome Reflect Prediabetes and Diabetes Development in a Treatment-Naive Mexican Cohort



Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is a global epidemic that affects more than 8% of the world’s population and is a leading cause of death in Mexico. Diet and lifestyle are known to contribute to the onset of T2D. However, the role of the gut microbiome in T2D progression remains uncertain. Associations between microbiome composition and diabetes are confounded by medication use, diet, and obesity.

Here we present data on a treatment-naive cohort of 405 Mexican individuals across varying stages of T2D severity. Associations between gut bacteria and more than 200 clinical variables revealed a defined set of bacterial genera that were consistent biomarkers of T2D prevalence and risk. Specifically, gradual increases in blood glucose levels, beta cell dysfunction, and the accumulation of measured T2D risk factors were correlated with the relative abundances of four bacterial genera. In a cohort of 25 individuals, T2D treatment—predominantly metformin—reliably returned the microbiome to the normoglycemic community state. Deep clinical characterization allowed us to broadly control for confounding variables, indicating that these microbiome patterns were independent of common T2D comorbidities, like obesity or cardiovascular disease. Our work provides the first solid evidence for a direct link between the gut microbiome and T2D in a critically high-risk population. In particular, we show that increased T2D risk is reflected in gradual changes in the gut microbiome. Whether or not these T2D-associated changes in the gut contribute to the etiology of T2D or its comorbidities remains to be seen.

Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is an acquired multifactorial disease that affects more than 8% of the worldwide population and leads to insulin resistance and insufficient insulin production by pancreatic islet cells (1–3). Disease onset is driven or modulated by a variety of factors such as lifestyle, diet, and genetics (4–7). T2D incidence is progressively increasing in the Mexican population and has become a major burden for the national health system and one of the leading causes of death in Mexico (8–10). The particular vulnerability of the Mexican population to this disease is driven by general factors such as a sedentary lifestyle and diet but is also influenced by genetic risk factors that are enriched in the Mexican population (11). For instance, it has been shown that about half of all native Mexicans carry an SLC16A11 variant that increases T2D risk by 20% for each haplotype (12–14). Consequently, there is an urgent need for diagnosis and treatment strategies to limit the progression of T2D in the Mexican high-risk population.

To address these concerns and explore the relationship between the microbiome and T2D in an understudied population, we present a controlled study in a Mexican cohort from a distinct geographical region that was specifically designed to avoid those shortcomings. Except for a small control group, all participants in the study were treatment-naive and had never received prior prediabetes or diabetes diagnosis. We also combined a large array of clinical variables related to diabetes with additional phenotype measurements characterizing the lifestyle, diet, obesity prevalence, and cardiovascular health of each individual. This strategy provided a set of more than 200 clinical variables for each individual, allowing us to control for lifestyle and comorbidities and tease out associations specific to different stages of T2D progression. As a result, we identified a set of four bacterial genera that were associated consistently with T2D development. Our work establishes a set of gut microbiome markers for type 2 disease progression in a Mexican population independent of treatment effects or secondary phenotypes.

A cross-sectional analysis was performed in patients from Guanajuato, México, from January 2015 to December 2016, as part of the University Cohort Project CARE-In-DEEP Study (Cardiometabolic Risk Evaluation and Interdisciplinary Diabetes Education and Early Prevention). For this particular study, 470 participants who had an anthropometric, nutritional, biochemical, and metabolic evaluation, as well as a stool sample collection, were included; at the end, we had complete data and microbiome composition only for 427. Based on the oral glucose tolerance test, individuals were stratified into normal glucose metabolism (NG, fasting glucose less than 100 mg/dl and 2 h post-OGTT glucose less than 140 mg/dl), isolated impaired fasting glucose (iIFG, fasting glucose 100–125 mg/dl and 2 h post-OGTT glucose less than 140 mg/dl), isolated impaired glucose tolerance (iIGT, fasting glucose less than 100 mg/dl and 2 h post-OGTT glucose between 140–199 mg/dl), impaired fasting glucose plus impaired glucose tolerance (IFG+IGT, fasting glucose between 100–125 mg/dl and 2 h post-OGTT glucose between 140–199 mg/dl), and T2D (T2D, fasting glucose more than 125 mg/dl and/or 2 h post-OGTT glucose higher than 199 mg/dl). A survey was applied to collect general information about the use of medications, family history, risk factors, and previous diseases. The University Research Council evaluated and approved the study protocol. All participants signed informed consent.

Weight was measured while participants were barefoot and wearing minimal clothing with a Tanita Scale SC-240 (Tanita Corporation of America, USA). Height was obtained while the participants were standing barefoot with their shoulders in a normal position with a Tanita stadiometer (Tanita Corporation of America, USA). BMI (kg/m2) was obtained from standardized measurements of weight and height and was computed as the ratio of weight (kg) over height squared (m²), defining normal weight when BMI was between 18.5–24.9 kg/m², overweight when BMI was between 25–29.9 kg/m2, and obesity when BMI was ≥30 kg/m². Waist circumference was measured at the high point of the iliac crest at the end of normal expiration to the nearest 0.1 cm. Body composition was assessed with electrical bioimpedance through a Tanita Scale SC-240. All measurements were performed by personnel trained to use standardized procedures and reproducibility was evaluated, resulting in concordance coefficients between 0.88 and 0.94.

A validated semi-quantitative food frequency questionnaire (FFQ) was applied to evaluate dietary intake (30). This questionnaire included data regarding the consumption of 116 food items. For each food, a commonly used portion size (e.g. one slice of bread or one cup of coffee) was specified on the FFQ and participants reported their frequency of consumption of each specific food over the previous year. Energy (kcal/day), carbohydrates (g/day), proteins (g/day), fatty acids (g/day), sucrose (g/day), and fructose (g/day) intake during the last year were obtained from this FFQ. The PA level of participants was assessed using a self-administered questionnaire that was verified when the patient assisted for the metabolic evaluation. The questionnaire has a validated Spanish translation (31), which has been adapted for use in the Mexican population. The questionnaire is self-administered and estimates the minutes devoted to the practice of different recreational physical activities during a typical week in the last year (including walking, running, cycling, aerobics, dancing, and swimming as well as playing football, volleyball, basketball, tennis, fronton, baseball, softball, and squash, among other activities). Each item includes time intervals that allow participants to detail the exact number of minutes or hours they dedicate to each form of recreational PA, as well as the intensity of each PA (light, moderate, vigorous). The total duration of each recreational PA was expressed in minutes per day. We calculated the number of hours per week devoted to each activity, which were then multiplied by the intensity of each activity, defined as multiples of the metabolic equivalent (MET) of sitting quietly. We used the Compendium of Physical Activities to assign METs to each activity (32).

All subjects were admitted to the Metabolic Research Laboratory of the Department of Medicine and Nutrition, Division of Health Sciences at the University of Guanajuato the day of the study between 7 and 8 AM, and a catheter was placed into an antecubital vein for all blood withdrawal. Subjects will not be allowed to eat or drink anything after 10 PM on the night before until the study is completed. After the intravenous catheter was placed and the first blood sample was drawn, the patients ingested 75 grams of glucose. Plasma samples for glucose measurement were drawn at -15, and 0 min and every 30 min thereafter for 2 h, glucose was measured by colorimetric glucose oxidase. Lipid levels were measured by dry chemistry with a colorimetric method (Vitros 5600; Ortho Clinical Diagnostics). According to the glucose levels at fasting and at 2 h during the OGTT, patients were classified as following: NG = fasting glucose <100 mg/dl and 2 h glucose <140 mg/dl, IFG = fasting glucose between 100–125mg/dl and a 2 h glucose <140 mg/dl, IGT = fasting glucose <100 mg/dl and 2 h glucose between 140–199 mg/dl, IFG+ITG = fasting glucose between 100–125 mg/dl and 2 h glucose between 140–199 mg/dl, T2D = fasting glucose >125 mg/dl and/or 2 h glucose >200 mg/dl, and treated T2D = previous diagnose of T2D confirmed by the medical record of the patients, consumption of hypoglycemic drugs and fasting glucose >125 mg/dl and/or 2 h glucose >200 mg/dl. HbA1c was measured according to the international guidelines by HPLC in a subset of 182 patients.

Insulin resistance was calculated by the homeostasis model assessment (HOMA_IR) and insulin sensitivity (Matsuda Index) was derived from the insulin and glucose measurements from the OGTT as previously described (33). Insulin secretion was calculated dividing AUCinsulin_OGTT by the AUCglucose_OGTT, acute insulin response (AIR) was calculated dividing the insulin change from 0 to 30 min by the glucose change from 0 to 30 min during the OGTT; pancreatic beta cell function was estimated by the disposition index derived from the OGTT (34).

Fecal samples were collected from volunteers in a sterile container, each sample was homogenized and three aliquotes placed in sterile 1 ml screw-cap tubes which were stored at -80°C before DNA extraction.

DNA extraction was performed using MoBio PowerSoil DNA Isolation kit (Mo Bio Laboratories, Inc. Carlsbad, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions with the following modifications. After adding the C1 solution and mix, 25 µl of proteinase K solution was added and mixed by vortexing. Samples were incubated at 65°C for 10 min, during the incubation tubes were mixed by inversion every 3 min. Tubes were secured horizontally in a vortex adapter tube holder, and vortexed at 3,000 rpm for 15 min. Samples were incubated at 95°C for 10 min, during this time samples were mixed as mentioned above. Total DNA was eluted in 100 µl of sterile water. DNA concentration was quantified spectrophotometrically with a Qubit (Thermo Scientific, USA) and validated by Nanodrop (ND 2000, Thermo Scientific, USA).

DNA templates were used in a two-step PCR method to sequence the V4 hypervariable region of the bacterial 16S rRNA gene. Fusion primers contained a sequence complementary to the v4 region, as well as Nextera Illumina adapter sequences to allow multiplexing of pooled libraries.

Pools were diluted to a concentration of 9 pM for sequencing using 2x250 bp paired-end sequencing chemistry v2 on an Illumina MiSeq platform. All samples were distributed according to the consecutive number assigned by the experimental laboratory in similar proportions in five pools and then mixed in equal amounts (to 10 nM). The final concentration of each pool was again determined using a Qubit® 2.0. Amplicons were denatured with 0.2 N NaOH and further diluted according to the MiSeq user guide, then combined with denatured PhiX control library. PhiX was spiked into the amplicon pool at 10% relative concentration. Image processing and base calling was performed on the BaseSpace cloud from Illumina (http://basespace.illumina.com).

Demultiplexed MiSeq FASTQ files were analyzed using the DADA2 workflow (36). High read quality was ensured by filtering and trimming reads before further processing. In brief, the first 5’ 10 bp of all reads were trimmed and reads were truncated on 3’ to a maximum length of 240 and 200 bp for forward and reverse reads respectively as a dip in sequence quality was observed after that length. Furthermore, all reads with more than two expected errors under the Illumina base model were removed as well. The filtered and trimmed reads were grouped by sequencing run and the error model was fit for each run separately using the DADA2 default parameters. Sequence variants were obtained for each run separately using the previously calculated error models and the dereplicated input sequences. The sequence variants and counts were then joined across all runs in a complete sequence table and de novo bimera removal was run on the entire table.

In order to identify additional biases or batch effects. We checked whether particular sequence variant read counts were associated with DNA extraction order, DNA extraction date or the scientist that extracted the sample. We could not identify any bias visually and the distribution of correlations between the extraction date and individual sequence variant abundances was similar to one obtained from a random Poisson model. Finally, we also verified that there were no run batch effects by PCoA plots where we observed no particular separation of samples by sequencing run. a notebook for those quality control steps can be found in the study repository as described in “Data availability”.

Association tests were run using DESeq2 with some custom adjustments (39). First, the input count matrix was filtered by a “rule of 10” where we only tested those taxa with an average count of at least 10 reads and which appeared in at least 10% of all samples. This was necessary to avoid bimodal p-value distributions during multiple testing. The count matrix was normalized across samples using the DESeq2 size factors and the “poscounts” correction for zero read counts. This ensured that associations were not driven by library size and was also expected to counteract the compositionality of the data since that normalization scheme is similar to the centered log-ratio transform (40). All continuous clinical variables were standardized (subtraction of mean and division by standard deviation). All tests used sex as a confounding variable. Age did not show major associations with any clinical variables in this study and including it as a confounder did not have any effect. Consequently, we did not include age as a default confounder in our analysis.

Association tests were then run for all combinations between taxa and clinical variables and only for those individuals with non-missing measurements. Here, significance was evaluated based on a chi-squared likelihood-ratio test testing for a difference of deviance between the model containing only the confounder variables and a model containing the confounder variables and the tested clinical variable (39). All associations discussed in detail in this manuscript were validated manually to confirm the lack of extreme outliers in the scatter plots. P-values were adjusted for false discovery rate using independent hypothesis weighting to avoid biases for tests with low abundance taxa (41).

We recruited a cohort of treatment-naive subjects from the Guanajuato region of Mexico as part of the CARE-In-DEEP Study (Cardiometabolic Risk Evaluation and Interdisciplinary Diabetes Education and Early Prevention) of the University of Guanajuato. This cohort consisted of 405 individuals with no previous diabetes diagnosis and a control group of 25 subjects with previously diagnosed T2D or a history of metformin treatment (see Figure 1A ). Each of the participants in the study underwent extensive clinical characterization consisting of direct measurements as well as a set of validated questionnaires, forming a data set of 226 clinical variables spanning the areas of diabetes, obesity, general health, lifestyle, and diet ( Figure 1B ). Based on an oral-glucose tolerance test, subjects were stratified into five metabolic groups ranging from normoglycemia and normal glucose tolerance (NG, n = 214), to different types of prediabetes (impaired fasting glucose, IFG n = 52, impaired glucose tolerance IGT n = 42, and IFG+IGT n = 57), and T2D (new T2D n = 48, and treated previous T2D n = 17) (see Methods and Figure 1C ). As shown in Table 1 , clinical phenotype varied widely between metabolic groups, with a progressive increase in weight, body fat, glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c), glucose levels, and deteriorating insulin sensitivity and pancreatic beta cell function from the NG group to the T2D group (see Figures S1A–C ). Table 2 also shows the frequency of T2D risk factors between the study groups. As shown, only age >45 years, overweight, dyslipidemia, and high blood pressure were significantly different between groups.

P value column denotes p values of ANOVA with Bonferroni correction. Superscript letters denote the following: (a) p < 0.01 vs NG (b) p < 0.01 vs IFG (c) p < 0.01 vs IGT (d) p < 0.01 vs IFG+IGT (e) p < 0.01 vs treatment-naive T2D.

HBP, high blood pressure.

The gut microbiome of the treatment-naive cohort was associated widely with T2D-related clinical variables. A set of 14 bacterial genera associated at least weakly with 25 of the 31 diabetes-related measures (FDR-corrected LRT p-value < 0.05). However, we observed large differences in how those associations distributed across genera ( Figure 3A ). Whereas some genera associated with a wide array of T2D measures (for instance Escherichia) other associated only with a single measure (e. g. Ezakiella with T2D family history), or exclusively with glucose-related measures, but not insulin-related measures (e. g. Romboutsia, Figure 3A ). In general, we observed more associations with glucose metabolism than insulin levels. Escherichia showed by far the most associations with T2D measures and notably associated with all glucose measures included in the study. Given the observed genus-specific patterns of association with T2D, this raised the question of how one could identify a subset of genera that were consistent markers of overall disease progression.

To identify bacterial genera that were strong markers for disease progression, we asked whether some of the 18 genera associating with diabetes measures would do so in a gradual manner across disease progression and risk. Disease progression was quantified by ordering the metabolic groups by severity ranging from normoglycemic (NG) to fully developed T2D. Disease risk was assessed by a set of manually chosen binary indicators (absent/present) for known risk factors and counting their occurrences for each individual (see Materials and Figure S2 ). Thus, an individual with 8 risk factors would be considered at higher general risk for developing T2D than an individual with only 2 risk factors. Metabolic groups and the number of risk factors did only moderately correlate with each other (Spearman rho = 0.45), confirming that they described different aspects of the disease. Treating the metabolic groups as well as the number of risk factors as continuous descriptors we identified a set of 4 bacterial genera that associated at least weakly with both of them (Escherichia, Veillonella, Blautia and Anaerostipes, FDR-corrected LRT p < 0.1). It should be noted that those gradual changes do not reflect longitudinal changes within individuals but rather continuous associations with severity across the entire population.

Because invasion with Proteobacteria such as E. coli is often a sign of intestinal inflammation we also investigated the association with the identified taxa with inflammation markers. We found that Veillonella increased with higher concentrations of C-reactive protein (CRP) whereas Blautia and Anaerostipes decreased with higher concentrations of interleukin 6 (IL-6) in treatment-naive individuals (all FDR-corrected LRT p < 0.1, Figures 5A, B ). Strikingly, both of the identified inflammation markers were increased in treatment-naive diabetic individuals compared to healthy individuals and remained elevated in treated individuals ( Figures 5C, D ). Thus, in contrast to microbial shifts, the increase in inflammation markers is not ameliorated by T2D treatment.

As mentioned before, T2D shows comorbidity with many other clinical conditions such as obesity and cardiovascular disease. For instance, we observed correlations of the major glucose metabolism measurements such as the area under the glucose curve and insulin sensitivity with obesity-related variables such as BMI, visceral fat, and waist-to-hip ratio (see Figure 1D ). Thus, there was a possibility that our observed changes across disease progression were driven by other covariates. For instance, the association between a bacterial genus and glucose metabolism may be a consequence of obesity which itself is associated with higher glucose levels. This is commonly known as confounding and obesity would be the confounder in that case.

Coefficients for the diabetes-related clinical variables were not significantly impacted by the introduction of the additional confounders (see Figure 6 ), whereas the coefficients for obesity-related variables were almost completely abolished by adding the additional confounders. This means that the associations between the four identified bacterial genera and obesity-related clinical variables were essentially lost when correcting for diabetes status. Thus, diabetes measures explained most of the associations between bacterial abundances and obesity but not vice versa. Cardiovascular health was also confounded heavily by the T2D-related variables. In particular, we observed that association coefficients between the tested microbial genera and BMI, body fat, or diastolic pressure changed sign when correcting for secondary clinical variables ( Figure 6 ). This indicates that non-corrected associations can misinterpret the isolated effect of those clinical variables. Those spurious associations with obesity or cardiovascular disease could be observed with all of the four genera identified in our previous analysis. Here, only Veillonella showed residual associations with body fat and blood pressure after correction for some of the clinical variables (body fat and blood pressure) which led us to hypothesize that Veillonella seems to associate unspecifically with a variety of “bad health” markers.

One of the challenges in studying the connections between the gut microbiome and T2D is the strong effect of medication on the gut microbiota. Metformin in particular has been shown to induce changes in the microbiome that may themselves alleviate some of the symptoms of T2D either directly or indirectly (22). Consequently, T2D medication with metformin may mask T2D-specific changes in microbial composition. We confirm this in our study and avoided those treatment-specific effects by concentrating on a large treatment-naive cohort. This allowed us to identify a set of four bacterial genera that are closely connected to T2D disease progression and risk in treatment-naive individuals of a high-risk population. Notably, all of the four identified genera returned to near-normal levels in treated individuals. Thus, we found that metformin does not only affect more taxa in the gut microbiome than suggested previously but may also completely disguise microbial changes induced by T2D ( Figure 4A ). It is unclear whether this medication-induced restoration of the gut microbiome is a consequence of alleviated symptoms such as the regulation of blood glucose levels or a direct interaction between drugs and the microbiome. However, our observation that metformin treatment counteracts microbial changes associated with T2D but not with other bacteria seems to suggest that this happens in a disease-dependent manner. Importantly, treatment did not lower the concentrations of the microbiome-associated inflammation markers CRP and IL-6 which indicates that there may be secondary effects of T2D that persist after treatment.

Though there is some evidence that gut inflammation may be modulated by the microbiome, it is still unclear whether one could potentially target T2D via altering the gut microbiome (55, 56). We did identify a microbiome-inflammation axis formed by three of the four identified taxa and observed that inflammation markers remained elevated even in treated individuals. E. coli was not directly associated with CRP or IL-6 (FDR-adjusted LRT p = 0.7) which indicates that there may be additional factors driving the colonization with Proteobacteria. Thus, the observed compositional changes consistent with inflammation might be useful as markers for long-term effects of diabetes-induced phenotypes. For instance, the gut microbiome may help to identify diabetes patients with a high risk for irritable bowel disease or colorectal cancer which have a higher incidence in T2D patients (57–59). In the end, additional studies will be required to elucidate the causal connections between the gut microbiome and T2D.

The datasets presented in this study can be found in online repositories. Raw sequencing data along with metadata is provided on the sequence read archive (SRA) under the Bioproject PRJNA541332 at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/. All additional primary input files as well as intermediate files and R notebooks to reproduce the analysis and figures are provided at https://github.com/resendislab/mext2d. More complex functions that could be potentially useful in the analysis of other data sets are furthermore provided along with documentation in a dedicated R package at https://github.com/resendislab/mbtools.

The study protocol was reviewed and approved by the Research Council of the University ofGuanajuato. All participants provided their written informed consent to participate in this study.

OR-A, RG-M, and EA designed the study and wrote the manuscript. CD analyzed the data and wrote the manuscript. MR-E, LJ-C, MM, and CG-N extracted the samples and obtained the clinical data. NC and VZ performed the co-occurrence and machine learning analyses and wrote the manuscript. MT analyzed the diet data. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.

The authors thank the financial support from CONACYT (Grant Ciencia de Frontera 2019, FORDECYT-PRONACES/425859/2020), an internal grant of the National Institute of Genomic Medicine (INMEGEN, México), a grant from the University of Guanajuato (RG-M, Grants 010/2014, 018/2015, and 1098/2016), and the MIT International Science and Technology Initiatives (MISTI-2015-2016). CG-N received a Ph.D. scholarship from the CONACYT.

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fendo.2020.602326/full#supplementary-material

