Guts within guts: the microbiome of the intestinal helminth parasite Ascaris suum is derived but distinct from its host

Intestinal helminths are extremely prevalent among humans and animals. In particular, intestinal roundworms affect more than 1 billion people around the globe and are a major issue in animal husbandry. These pathogens live in intimate contact with the host gut microbiota and harbor bacteria within their own intestines. Knowledge of the bacterial host microbiome at the site of infection is limited, and data on the parasite microbiome is, to the best of our knowledge, non-existent.

The intestinal microbiome of the natural parasite and zoonotic macropathogen, Ascaris suum was analyzed in contrast to the diversity and composition of the infected host gut. 16S sequencing of the parasite intestine and host intestinal compartments showed that the parasite gut has a significantly less diverse microbiome than its host, and the host gut exhibits a reduced microbiome diversity at the site of parasite infection in the jejunum. While the host’s microbiome composition at the site of infection significantly determines the microbiome composition of its parasite, microbial signatures differentiate the nematodes from their hosts as the Ascaris intestine supports the growth of microbes that are otherwise under-represented in the host gut.

Our data clearly indicate that a nematode infection reduces the microbiome diversity of the host gut, and that the nematode gut represents a selective bacterial niche harboring bacteria that are derived but distinct from the host gut.

Video Abstract video file.(95M, mp4)

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s40168-022-01399-5.

The gastrointestinal ecosystem contains a diverse community of viral, prokaryotic (bacteria & archaea), and eukaryotic (helminths & protozoa) components, the latter being recognized mainly as parasites. Understanding host-parasite interactions in this complex environment requires knowledge on the dynamics between these community members. Bacteria and parasites share the same environment in the gut in which they alter host physiology and metabolism and at the same time provide crucial signals for the development and function of the host intestinal immune system [1–3]. Intestinal nematode infections are extremely widespread in humans as well as companion animals, livestock, and wildlife. Studies suggest that helminths may modify host-associated bacterial communities to modulate host immunity to promote their own successful establishment in the gut [4, 5]. Despite the close coexistence of helminths with numerous microbes, little is known concerning the reciprocal interactions of intestinal helminths with the microbiota and underlying mechanisms, and in particular, nothing is known about how parasite-associated microbiomes interact with the host microbiome and the host itself.

Ascaris is one of the most common and widespread intestinal parasites in humans and livestock. In tropical countries, the prevalence exceeds 10% of the population, causing around 60,000 deaths per year, malnutrition, and developmental deficits in children [18–21]. In pig husbandry, Ascaris leads to significant economic losses due to reduced feed conversion and liver condemnation at slaughter [22]. Although Ascaris exhibits a tissue migratory phase, it spends most of its lifetime in the gut sharing its environment with host-associated microbes that might present infectious threats or be beneficial by providing key nutrients, protecting against infections [23], promoting fecundity, or modulating host responses against Ascaris [17]. While there is some knowledge on alterations of the fecal microbiome of Ascaris-infected humans [24–26] as well as the porcine colonic and fecal microbiome during Ascaris infection [27, 28], the microbiome of Ascaris itself has not yet been studied. Ascaris produces various antimicrobial proteins and peptides which likely shape the microbiome in the immediate vicinity of, and within, the nematode itself [29]. Further insights into parasite-associated microbiomes could unveil novel strategies to control helminth infections [30]. Thus, we aimed to unravel the parasite microbiome and its interdependence with the host microbiome in which it exists. Our study indicates for the first time that a parasitic nematode’s microbiome is derived from microbes in its immediate vicinity but distinct in composition from the microbiome of the host.

Intestinal content and worm samples were derived from two independent A. suum infection trials as well as noninfected animals. Infective A. suum eggs were collected and prepared as previously described [29]. In brief, slaughterhouse-derived adult female worms were cultured overnight, and released eggs were collected from culture fluid, washed, and incubated at room temperature in the dark for 6–8 weeks until > 90% embryonation rates were observed.

Standard curves for quantification consisted of 10-fold serial dilutions in the range of 109–102 copies of the 16S rRNA gene of the E. coli (Invitrogen, C404010) amplified with primers 27 F (5′-GTTTGATCCTGGCTCAG-3′) and 1492 R (5′-CGGCTACCTTGTTACGAC-3′). Copy numbers per ng DNA were calculated for each. Additionally, DNA samples from larvae were subjected to the two-step PCR method for library preparation described below.

DNA extracted from pig gastrointestinal (GI) tract contents and from Ascaris intestines were subjected to PCR amplification of the V3-V4 (~460 bp) hypervariable region of the 16S rRNA gene. The primers of Klindworth et al. [32] were modified to contain universal adaptor sequences for later addition of indexing barcodes as follows: forward Klin0341-19: [ACACTGACGACATGGTTCTACA]CCTACGGGNGGCWGCAG and reverse Klin0785_CR: [TACGGTAGCAGAGACTTGGTCT]GACTACHVGGGTATCTAATCC.

PCR target-specific amplification was performed with the S7 Fusion High-Fidelity DNA polymerase (Biozym Scientific GmbH, Germany) in 25 μL final volume of reaction with primers at a final concentration of 0.2 μM and 25 ng of extracted DNA under the following conditions: 95° for 30 s, followed by 35 cycles of 95° for 30 s, 60° for 30 s, 72 °C for 30 s, and a final extension of 72° for 5 min. PCR amplicons were cleaned using the magnetic beads MagBio HighPrep Clean-up kit (MagBio, USA) following the instructions of the manufacturer and eluted in 40 μL of elution buffer (10 mM Tris pH 8.5). The layout of samples over microtiter plates was randomized, including extraction controls (allowing detection of contamination during DNA extraction), non-template controls (allowing detection of contaminant DNA introduced during library preparation and PCR amplification), and a standard mock-community DNA as positive control (Zymo Research, USA). Negative and positive controls were processed and sequenced alongside the biological samples. A second PCR using 5 μL of the purified PCR products was performed employing Access Array indexing primers (Fluidigm, USA). The second PCR was run at 95° for 3 min followed by 8 cycles of 95° for 30 s, 60° for 30 s, 72° for 30 s, and a final extension at 72° for 10 min. Indexed amplicons were purified with magnetic beads and quantified using a Qubit 2.0 fluorometer with the dsDNA high sensitivity assay kit (Thermo Scientific, USA). Libraries were created by pooling each sample in equimolar concentrations. Quality and integrity of the final library were verified using the Agilent 2200 TapeStation with D1000 ScreenTapes (Agilent Technologies, USA). The pooled library was sequenced at the Berlin Center for Genomics and Biodiversity Research (BeGenDiv) on the Illumina MiSeq platform using MiSeq v2 (500 cycles) reagent kit for 2 × 250 bp paired-end reads.

Sequences were preprocessed to infer amplicon sequence variants (ASVs) following the pipeline of DADA2 v1.18 [33]. In brief, the raw forward and reverse reads (fastq) were truncated at base 240, as quality scores dropped at this point. Primer sequences were trimmed, and other filtering parameters were kept at default settings. Only fragments between 410 and 440 bp (expected amplicon size is ~426 bp) were further processed by removing PCR chimera sequences. Taxonomic annotation was done using the naive Bayesian classifier [34] as implemented in DADA2 with SILVA SSU database v138.1. Species were assigned for exact matches of the 16S fragments. All ASVs, metadata, and taxonomic information were compiled into a single object for further analysis using the package Phyloseq v1.22.3 [35].

Further cleaning was performed as follows: (1) removing samples with zero or low read counts (less than 2000 reads), (2) discarding ASVs of nonbacterial origin or unassigned at phylum level to ensure off-target amplicon removal, and (3) removing low prevalent ASVs that do not appear more than five times in more than 10% of the samples. Samples were further analyzed according to their host (pig individual) and intestinal (duodenum, jejunum, ileum, cecum, colon) origin (Table S1). Ascaris microbiomes were treated as independent samples, irrespective of their eventual origin from the same host. This merged and filtered dataset was rarefied to the minimum library size and used for further alpha diversity estimation (see next section). Finally, the data was normalized by transforming ASV proportions by sample to an even depth (106) for beta diversity estimations.

The Chao1 index was used as a metric for richness. Alpha diversity was calculated using the package Microbiome v1.13.8 [36]. Alpha diversity was compared (1) between gastrointestinal compartments for infected and noninfected hosts, (2) between infected hosts and their parasites, and (3) between Ascaris from different origin or sex. Mann–Whitney U-(MWU) tests with Bonferroni correction for multiple testing were computed to assess significance with the package rstatix v0.7.0 [37]. Beta diversity was assessed using Bray-Curtis dissimilarity index between samples and computed using vegan v2.5-7 [38]. Comparisons of distance between individual hosts and parasite microbiomes were tested using MWU tests. Multivariate analysis was carried out using nonmetric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) with the vegan package v2.5-7 [38], also employing Bray-Curtis distance metrics as above.

Bacterial community type (enterotype) classifications were performed from the ASV abundance matrix using the Dirichlet multinomial mixture (DMM) method described in [39] and implemented in the R package DirichletMultinomial.

PERMANOVA and ANOSIM tests for multivariate effect were done using the adonis and anosim function, respectively, from the vegan package v2.5-7 [38], stratified by experimental batch. PERMANOVA tests whether Bray-Curtis dissimilarity distance differs between groups and assesses marginal effects of variables, while ANOSIM tests whether distances between groups are greater than within groups. Dominant genera were defined as those with the highest relative abundance in at least one sample. The composition of ASVs belonging to those genera were then compared between different sample types (parasites, hosts, worm sexes).

GLMM tests were also employed to test whether Ascaris microbiomes at the site of infection were more similar to each other when both were collected from the same pig host than when they come from different hosts and whether two Ascaris microbiomes were more similar when both worms had the same sex. All the models and statistical analysis are summarized by research question in Table
1.

To investigate whether composition variation between the site of infection and parasites is driven by the most dominant bacteria (see section above, 'Estimation of alpha and beta diversity and dominant taxa'). Jejunum-Ascaris microbes were analyzed using the microbial (ASV level) composition restricted to dominant taxa. Bray-Curtis dissimilarity was estimated, and further PERMANOVA and ANOSIM analysis was done using individual pig and host or parasite assignment as predictors.

ASV enrichment was tested as a function of (1) host jejunum against Ascaris microbiomes and (2) Ascaris female against male microbiomes. DESeq2 package v1.30.1 was used for the assessment; this pipeline uses negative binomial distribution models that account for differences in library sizes to test for differential abundance between testing conditions using the Wald statistics test [39]. Raw counts were used, and the pipeline ran under default settings. The q-values were calculated with the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure [40] to correct p-values and control for false discovery rates. All significant ASVs were additionally checked using NCBI BLAST searches against the NCBI nr database to confirm their identity.

The parasite and host microbiome sequencing data contained 3,004,508 total reads with an average of 12,677 reads/sample, ranging between 2090 and 57,121 reads. A total of 7934 amplicon sequence variants (ASV) were derived, with an average of 125 ASVs/sample. A total of 172 genera were detected across all samples. We found no evidence of bacterial DNA in larval samples (Fig. S1) and thus focused our analyses on adult parasites and host contents.

In order to decipher the microbiome of the parasite gut we first asked, is an Ascaris infection beneficial or detrimental for the microbial diversity of the host gut, and does Ascaris influence the host microbiome along the entire gut? To locate the effects of Ascaris infection on the host microbiota, we assessed the alpha diversity and compared the richness among different intestinal compartments of infected and noninfected pigs. We observed a general and progressive increase in the richness from the small intestinal compartments further down the gut to the colon, independent of the infection status. Interestingly, a notably lower richness was detected in the jejunum of infected hosts in contrast to noninfected hosts, independently from the batch of the experiment (Fig.
1B). The extent of richness decrease at the site of infection was not correlated with individual worm burden (Fig. S2), suggesting a decrease in resident host bacteria between microbiomes of infected and noninfected hosts independent of infection intensity.

In conclusion, an Ascaris infection leads to a loss of microbial diversity of the host gut, though only at the site of Ascaris infection in the small intestine. The parasite microbiomes differ drastically in diversity from their host environments, being less diverse while sharing specific taxa with infected pigs at the site of infection.

Our next question was where is the parasite microbiome derived from? Having observed a less diverse worm microbiome, we now assessed how closely the microbiome composition of the worm resembles that of its immediate environment, the jejunum. To compare microbiome composition between intestinal compartments from infected hosts and their worms, we used permutational analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) based on Bray-Curtis dissimilarities. Nonmetric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) analysis shows that Ascaris microbiomes cluster closer to microbiomes from the upper intestinal compartments (Fig.
2A). In particular, the Ascaris microbiome is more similar to the microbiome of the jejunum and duodenum and more different to the colon microbiome. ANOSIM results showed that both host-parasite differentiation and intestinal compartment are the significantly influential parameters explaining the clustering of the samples (ANOSIMcompartment: R = 0.455, p < 0.01; ANOSIMhost-parasite: R = 0.378, p < 0.01). The differentiation between the host or parasite microbiome (PERMANOVA, R2 = 0.157, p < 0.01) and intestinal compartment (PERMANOVA, R2 = 0.137, p < 0.01) explained almost 30% of the variation (Table S4), suggesting a higher impact from the worms’ microbiomes in the clustering than the infection status per se. In addition, enterotype clustering and the best Dirichlet multinomial mixture model (DMM, π = 0.284, θ = 247.873, k = 2, Laplace: 175799.8 BIC: 198685.3 AIC: 188431.3) confirmed the similarity of Ascaris microbial communities to the upper GI tract by classifying the samples into two enterotypes (Fig. S3). The first enterotype contained all samples from the upper gastrointestinal tract (GI; duodenum, jejunum, and ileum) and most of the Ascaris microbiomes (N = 46/47), while a second enterotype included all lower GI samples and one Ascaris sample.

Taken together, our data show that the less diverse Ascaris microbiome is similar to its immediate host microbial environment, rather than containing a random subset of host microbiomes.

We now asked, is there a detectable core microbiota in the parasite gut? After finding the worm microbiome to be highly similar to the microbiome of the individual host at the site of infection, we aimed to investigate whether this similarity between the parasite and its host microbiome is driven by ASVs belonging to the most dominant bacterial genera. For this purpose, we defined the dominant bacteria as the taxa at genus level with the highest relative abundance within any one of the microbial communities. Six genera are the most dominant in jejunum and Ascaris microbiomes: Clostridium sensu stricto 1 (29 samples), Lactobacillus (17 samples), Escherichia-Shigella (3 samples), Romboutsia (4 samples), Prevotella (1 sample), and Streptococcus (1 sample). The most dominant bacterial genus in the jejunum is Lactobacillus (in 4 out of 8 pigs). Ascaris microbiomes derived from those pigs have microbiomes dominated by either Lactobacillus or Clostridium sensu stricto 1 (13 and 28 worms, respectively) (Fig.
3A). Escherichia-Shigella and Streptococcus are dominant in just three and one Ascaris microbiome, respectively. Prevotella dominates in just one jejunum microbiome, while Romboutsia dominates in each of two Ascaris and pig samples.

Taken together, these data indicate that the host of origin and dominant taxa of the infected host respectively are the main drivers of the differences in microbial composition among Ascaris samples.

The next major question was as follows: are gut microbes distinct in female parasites compared to males? Female Ascaris worms are significantly larger than males, and individual females release over 200,000 eggs per day [41]. As female worms may depend on particular microbial metabolites for their excessive reproduction, we investigated whether the sex of worms is associated with differences in the diversity or specific composition of microbes. We compared the alpha diversity (ASV richness) of Ascaris worms depending on their sex. We did not observe differences in ASV richness linked to the sex of the worms (Fig.
4A). The lack of sex difference with regard to the bacterial composition in worms was independent of the experimental batch effects, as for the richness in infected and noninfected pigs (Fig.
1B). We compared microbial composition between worms from different sexes. Our data indicate that sex plays a minor role as a driver of the bacterial composition in the worm and did not achieve significance (PERMANOVAsex: R2 = 0.009, p > 0.05; ANOSIMSex: R = 0.091, p > 0.05) (Fig.
4B), while the dominant bacteria of the individual host is the most relevant driver of the bacterial composition in the worm (PERMANOVAdominant bacteria: R2 = 0.244, p < 0.01; ANOSIMdominant bacteria: R = 0.759, p < 0.01; PERMANOVAIndividual: R2 = 0.532, ANOSIMIndividual: R = 0.485, p < 0.01) (Table
4). To confirm the drivers in Ascaris bacterial composition, we compared parasite-parasite Bray-Curtis microbial dissimilarity using a GLMM approach. We confirmed that coming from the same host (LRT: χ2 = 113.61, df = 1, p < 0.001) better explained microbiome composition proximity between Ascaris worms (Table
5). Microbiomes from worms of the same sex are not more similar than those of worms with different sexes (LRT: χ2 = 0.105, df = 1, p = 0.746).

Having found similar ASV richness between male and female worms, we sought to assess compositional differences between worms of different sexes. We did not observe a difference in the abundance of the four major phyla: Actinobacteoriota, Bactoriodota, Firmicutes, and Proteobacteria between female and male worms (Fig.
4C). Despite there being no overall community level differences between worm sexes (alpha and beta diversity not significantly altered), we found a few ASVs differentially abundant between males and females. Male worms presented 15 differentially abundant ASVs compared to females that presented five ASVs (Fig.
4D; Table S7). Males have Prevotella or members of the family Prevotellaceae as the most represented ASVs, in contrast to females in which the majority of the enriched ASVs belong to Clostridium sensu stricto 1. The few taxa showing differences do not impact the overall composition, as observed in Fig.
4A–C, if they are not relevant to the microbiome structure (keystones). Microbial composition of worms by sex (Fig.
4E) generally shows similarly abundant genera of bacteria; Clostridium sensu stricto 1, Escherichia-Shigella, Lactobacillus, Prevotella, Romboutsia, and Streptococcus have the highest relative abundance compared to the rest and dominate the communities in both female and male worms. Given the lack of sex effect in the overall bacterial composition of the worm intestines, the few differentially abundant ASVs can probably not be linked to any worm physiological function. In conclusion, these results further highlight the importance of the host of origin and dominant host genera as essential determinants of the Ascaris microbiome.

Finally, we asked, do the intestines of the parasites show a depletion or enrichment of specific bacterial species? Having ascertained that dominant ASVs at the site of infection in the host of origin serve as the primary determinants of the Ascaris microbiome, we now characterized the constituents of the Ascaris microbiome in relation to the jejunum. To test whether specific bacteria are enriched or depleted in the microbiomes of worms compared to their hosts, we performed an analysis of differential abundance. In jejunum samples from infected pigs, 17 ASVs were enriched, compared to 21 ASVs enriched in Ascaris (Fig.
5A, Table S8). In jejunum microbiomes, those include seven ASVs belonging to the dominant taxa Lactobacillus (ASV203, ASV400, and ASV430), Clostridium sensu stricto 1 (ASV462, ASV513), and Prevotella (ASV112 and ASV169) and ten more to nondominant taxa Bifidobacterium (ASV197, ASV266, and ASV426), Peptococcus (ASV226), Pseudoscardovia (ASV1328), Asaccharospora (ASV455), and Megasphaera (ASV248) and from the families Prevotellaceae (ASV119 and ASV134) and Coriobacteriaceae (ASV350). In Ascaris gut microbiomes, eight ASVs belonged to the dominant taxa Clostridium sensu stricto 1 (ASV15, ASV156, and ASV259), Prevotella (ASV82, ASV228), Lactobacillus (ASV212), Streptococcus (ASV505), and Escherichia-Shigella (ASV4) and 13 more to nondominant taxa mainly from the family Prevotellaceae (ASV73, ASV111, ASV118, ASV141) and to the genus Alloprevotella (ASV116), Agathobacter (ASV84), Anaerosporobacter (ASV315), Dialister (ASV155), Lachnospira (ASV66), Pseudomonas (ASV171), Roseburia (ASV124), Ruminococcus (ASV215), and Staphylococcus (ASV367).

In conclusion, though host microbes from the immediate surroundings are primary determinants of nematode microbiomes, we provide evidence of bacteria that characterizes either the local microbiome at the site of infection of the host or the inner microbiome of the Ascaris worms inhabiting it (summarized as a graphical overview in Fig.
6). An enrichment of specific ASVs in the Ascaris gut suggests that the Ascaris intestine is a unique niche which may support the growth of microbes that are otherwise under-represented in the host gut.

Despite numerous studies showing that intestinal nematode infections lead to alterations in the gut microbiome of the host, the helminths’ microbiomes and their relationship with host microbes are still an understudied aspect of the parasite-host relationship [15, 16]. Previous work has shown that live bacteria can be retrieved and cultured from the intestine of adult ascarids [13, 14]; however, a culture-free assessment of the microbial composition of the Ascaris intestine has not yet been reported. Our work characterizes for the first time the microbiome of this parasitic nematode with respect to its porcine host. We assessed diversity differences between hosts and worms. We report that an Ascaris infection reduces microbiome diversity at the site of infection, the jejunum, and that the Ascaris microbiome is less diverse than its environment. Importantly, we elucidated the parasite gut microbiome and investigated factors which determine its composition. We highlight that bacteria dominant at the site of infection within the individual host are critical determinants of Ascaris microbiome composition in contrast to host bacteria in more distant sites. Our data also indicate that worm microbiome composition is independent of worm sex and parasite burden within the host. While we detected shared bacteria between the parasite microbiome and its microbial environment within the host, we also identified bacteria that differentiate bacterial communities of hosts and parasites. Thus, it appears that the parasite intestine is itself a unique environmental niche better suited for the growth of bacterial communities which are otherwise under-represented in the host gut.

As a niche, there is the potential that the Ascaris intestine may retain or carry potential pathogens, for itself and for the host. Ascaris lumbricoides obtained from cholera patients was shown to be colonized by Vibrio cholerae [57]. Certain genera detected in the nematode intestine, including Escherichia-Shigella, Pseudomonas, Staphylococcus, and Streptococcus, tempt us to ask if the Ascaris intestine may serve as a niche for potential porcine and human pathogens. Work in C. elegans has shown that human-relevant pathogens like Salmonella can infect the nematode intestine and serve as a valuable infection model [58]. At present, nothing is known about microbial pathogens of helminths and whether, like Salmonella, certain pathogens might infect both the host and the helminth. We can speculate that in cases where commonly co-occurring zoonotic pathogens such as Campylobacter and Salmonella have also colonized the porcine intestine, the Ascaris intestine may provide protection from host immunity and antibiotics. While we have observed key genera present in the Ascaris intestine, experimental analysis of the stability of the Ascaris microbiota may reveal species and strains that are essential for helminth survival. Ex vivo antibiotic treatment could be used to disrupt the microbiota [59] allowing for studies with experimental microbiomes [50]. Thus, we may discover commensalistic parasite-microbe relationships as well discovering potential microbial pathogens of helminths. Such findings would open the door for novel therapies focused on parasite control via manipulation of the microbiota.

Our work presents the first characterization of the microbiome of a zoonotic macroparasite in relation to its host. This provides a starting point towards understanding the complex multilateral relationships between helminth parasites, microbes, and their hosts. Our findings suggest that Ascaris selectively acquires its own microbiome from the available pool of microbes in its environment within the upper intestinal tract. Furthermore, our data lead us to intriguing new research questions important for further study. An in-depth characterization of the A. suum microbiome across different life stages would shed light on the stability of the microbiome of a body-migratory and long-lived parasitic nematode such as Ascaris. Future studies should assess the potential of the helminth intestine to serve as a protective niche for different microbes, along with determining which microbes are beneficial and harmful to the worm. The characterization of helminth microbiomes is a crucial step towards disentangling the mechanisms driving microbiome variation in infected hosts. Understanding parasite-microbiome interactions may aid in predicting disease outcomes and designing novel parasite control strategies.



Publisher’s Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Ankur Midha and Víctor Hugo Jarquín-Díaz contributed equally to this work.

