The critical role of dietary foliage in maintaining the gut microbiome and metabolome of folivorous sifakas

The gut microbiome (GMB) of folivores metabolizes dietary fiber into nutrients, including short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs); however, experiments probing the consequences of foliage quality on host GMBs are lacking. We therefore examined GMB structure and function via amplicon sequencing and Nuclear Magnetic Resonance spectroscopy in 31 captive sifakas (Propithecus coquereli) during dietary manipulations associated with husbandry. Supplementing standard diets with diverse foliage blends, versus with a single plant species, promoted more diverse GMBs, enriched for taxa implicated in plant-fiber metabolism, but depleted in taxa implicated in starch metabolism and bile tolerance. The consumption of diverse blends was associated with greater concentrations of colonic SCFAs. Abundant foliage, via forest access, promoted compositionally distinct and more stable GMBs, but reduced concentrations of SCFAs, possibly reflecting selection of high-quality leaves. In 11 subjects denied forest access, we examined the temporal pace of microbial shifts when supplemental foliage was abruptly switched between diverse blends and single species. The sifaka GMB responded within days, with community diversity and composition closely tracking foliage diversity. By providing experimental evidence that the folivore GMB is sensitive to minor changes in dietary foliage, we reveal the fragility of specialist GMBs, with implications for managing the wellbeing of endangered wildlife.

Animal gastrointestinal tracts are colonized by communities of microorganisms, known as the gut microbiome (hereafter ‘GMB’), that profoundly impact the health of their hosts1. Among the most intuitive and critical functions of the GMB is the promotion of host nutrition: GMBs possess a wealth of metabolic machinery, facilitating pathways that can promote the digestion of various macronutrients2, satisfy vitamin requirements3 and metabolize ingested tannins4 or toxins5. Although hosts characterized by all types of feeding strategies rely on their GMBs, the metabolic capacity of the GMB is particularly critical for herbivorous or folivorous animals6,7 (i.e., animals that, broadly, consume plant-based diets or, specifically, consume leaf-based diets). This particular reliance owes to ingested plant fiber becoming nutritious only after its conversion, via microbial action, into essential nutrients, such as short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs)8,9. Microbially synthesized SCFAs, particularly acetate, propionate and butyrate, nourish host organs and can account for 30–57% of a folivore’s daily energy demands6. To extract sufficient nutrients from fibrous diets, herbivores and folivores harbor dense and diverse GMBs that are enriched for microbes and metagenomic pathways associated with plant-fiber metabolism and SCFA production10–13.

In Study 2, we examined GMB dynamics during narrower (week-long), transitional periods, both in the fall, when diverse blends were abruptly replaced with single-species supplements (hereafter ‘fall transition’), and in the spring, when diverse blends were abruptly reintroduced (hereafter ‘spring transition’). We collected samples 1–2 days prior to each dietary switch, as well as 2–4 days and 1 week after each dietary switch, thereby producing two sampling time points for each of the four conditions (diverse blend, fall transition, single species, spring transition; Fig. 1). For sifakas denied year-round, forest access, which controls for dietary variability, we expected GMB structure to track the foliage component of the diet, such that microbial community richness, diversity, variability and capacity for fiber metabolism would change in step with the loss or gain of foliage diversity.

Independent of forest access, the sifakas hosted significantly richer and more diverse GMBs when in the diverse-blend condition than when in the single-species condition (Table 1 and Fig. 2a–c). As revealed by Linear Mixed Models (LMM), this finding held across all measures of alpha diversity, namely the Chao1, Shannon and Faith’s Phylogenetic Diversity (PD) indices that, respectively, capture GMB richness, community evenness and microbial phylogenetic representation39. Although we found no main effect of forest access on GMB alpha diversity, for two of the indices, Chao1 and PD, there was a significant interaction between foliage condition and forest access. Notably, when diets included single-species supplements and forest access was minimal, sifakas that had gained forest access at any point during the study maintained greater GMB diversity than did peers routinely denied forest access.

Overall, the sifaka GMB was dominated by members of the Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes phyla, with smaller contributions from Cyanobacteria, Proteobacteria, and Tenericutes (see Supplementary Material S1), and the abundance of specific microbial genera varied with foliage diversity. An analysis using Linear Discriminant Analysis Effect Size (LEfSe)41 revealed that 28 microbial genera (i.e., OTUs) varied with the sifakas’ access to diverse blends versus single species of foliage (Fig. 3), 18 of which remained significant, or trending towards significance, after applying a correction factor for multiple testing (see Supplementary Material S2). Whereas many members of the Clostridiales order and Lachnospiraceae family were enriched when sifakas received diverse blends, Oscillospira, Rikenellaceae members and Bilophila were notably enriched when sifakas received the single species. Many of these enriched genera were also those that co-varied with SCFA concentrations (Fig. 3). Overall, correlation analysis indicated that SCFA concentrations co-varied with 12 microbial genera, regardless of foliage diversity (see Supplementary Material S3). Notably, acetate correlated positively with Lachnospiraceae members, such as Blautia and Lachnobacterium, but negatively with Oscillospira, Bilophila and Prevotella (Kendall’s tau = −0.284, p = 0.016). Propionate was likewise negatively correlated with Oscillospira, whereas butyrate was negatively correlated with Sutterella, but positively correlated with Lachnobacterium.

We found that the sifaka GMB responded within mere days to abrupt dietary manipulations. By collapsing the ‘duplicate’ sampling points in each of the four dietary conditions (diverse blend, fall transition, single species, spring transition; Fig. 1), we found that alpha diversity decreased with reduced foliage diversity and was regenerated with increased foliage diversity (Table 3 and Fig. 4a–c). Nevertheless, the magnitude of change varied with each diversity metric: Notably, richness was more extreme during transitional periods (i.e., lowest and greatest during fall and spring transitions, respectively) than during periods of consistent foliage supplements (Fig. 4a); evenness was greatest when animals received diverse blends, was intermediate during transitions, and was lowest when animals received single-species supplements (Fig. 4b); and phylogenetic diversity during each transitional period converged to match that of its respective foliage-diversity condition during more consistent periods (Fig. 4c). Consequently, hosts consuming the same diversity of foliage, whether for two days or several months, harbored comparably diverse consortia.

Specific microbial genera also varied significantly within the week-long fall and spring transitions (Fig. 5d–g). LEfSe identified two unknown taxa from the Enterobacteriaceae family that were significantly enriched in samples collected immediately prior to the fall transition, (Log(LDA) > 2.84, p < 0.02 for both), whereas immediately after the fall transition, LEfSe identified seven genera that were enriched, including Oscillospira (Log(LDA) = 3.90, p = 0.001, Fig. 5e), Prevotella (Log(LDA) = 4.36, p < 0.001) and unknown genera within the Ruminococcaceae (Log(LDA) = 2.88, p = 0.009), Lachnospiraceae (Log(LDA) = 3.66, p = 0.014) and Coriobacteriaceae families (Log(LDA) = 2.83, p = 0.018; see Supplementary Material S2). Likewise, seven taxa were enriched in samples collected immediately prior to the spring transition, including Oscillospira (Log(LDA) = 4.03, p = 0.005, Fig. 5e), Phascolarctobacterium (Log(LDA) = 2.89, p = 0.026), Clostridium (Log(LDA) = 3.80, p = 0.021) and Bilophila (Log(LDA) = 2.39, p = 0.044, Fig. 5g), whereas another six taxa were enriched immediately after the spring transition, including Blautia (Log(LDA) = 2.51, p = 0.041, Fig. 5d) and Ruminococcus (Log(LDA) = 2.47, p = 0.001, Fig. 5f) from the Lachnospiraceae family, Adlercreutzia (Log(LDA) = 2.45, p < 0.001), and unknown genera from the Mogibacteriaceae (Log(LDA) = 2.80, p = 0.008) and Desulfovibrionaceae (Log(LDA) = 2.38, p = 0.022) families (see Supplementary Material S2). No taxa remained significant across either transitional period after further correcting for multiple testing (see Supplementary Material S2).

Identifying the nutritional requirements that support the symbiosis between folivores and their GMBs is a burgeoning research aim within conservation and microbial ecology. Here, we contribute to this endeavor by showing that the diversity, variability, membership and function of the folivore GMB change dramatically with even minor shifts in dietary foliage. In omnivores, altering the GMB typically requires extreme dietary perturbation, including experimentally pushing the diets of human volunteers or laboratory rodents to the limits of health42,43. Yet, for folivores and herbivores, their complex and specialized gastrointestinal systems may promote the establishment of microbial communities that are susceptible to even small-scale perturbation. Thus, feeding strategy, reflecting the host’s degree of dietary specialization versus generalization, may ‘set up’ the relative resilience or intransigence of the host’s GMB to dietary shifts. Recognizing the relationships between feeding strategy and GMB integrity has implications for our understanding of how microbes can drive vertebrate evolution, including niche specialization and adaptive radiation.

In addition to the empirical value of studying and manipulating host-microbe symbioses, research on the GMBs of endangered wildlife is also poised to make significant contributions to conservation and husbandry strategies55. Relative to hearty omnivorous hosts, folivorous and herbivorous hosts, like sifakas, face more tenuous survival in the wild32 and in captivity35,36,56, potentially because of their more ‘fragile’ GMBs; folivores and herbivores are likely more susceptible and, thus, less resistant to dietary and habitat perturbation. Indeed, that feeding strategy may dictate GMB flexibility, resilience or fragility provides a potential mechanism for predicting how wild populations may cope with increasing dietary, habitat or climate change. For the Coquerel’s sifaka, specifically, future studies comparing the GMBs of wild and captive populations should be a research priority. With regard to animal husbandry, more broadly, we suggest that facilities housing folivorous species promote access to forested enclosures whenever possible or prioritize access to a diversity of dietary foliage year round.

The subjects included 31 healthy Coquerel’s sifakas (18 females, 13 males) housed in 10 social groups at the Duke Lemur Center (DLC) in Durham, NC. The subjects ranged in age from 6 months to 23 years: Although our youngest subjects (<4 years) may not have been sexually mature at the time of sampling36, sifaka GMBs converge on the adult host’s profile prior to 6 months of age31.

Lemurs at the DLC are maintained in accordance with the U.S. Department of Agriculture regulations and the National Institutes of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. The research protocols for this study were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Duke University (protocol number A171-09-06).

We collected faeces from the sifakas, all of which were individually identifiable via distinguishing markings, at eight time points between July 2015—March 2016 (Fig. 1). For Study 1, we sampled all 31 sifakas once in midsummer and once in midwinter, when their diets were consistently supplemented with diverse blends or single species, respectively. For Study 2, we focused on 11 sifakas that lacked year-round forest access, including from the three social groups that were always denied forest access and from the group that gained forest access only in the summer. These subjects were sampled at six additional times, including 1–2 days before, 2–4 days after and 1 week after the abrupt transitions in fall (i.e., from diverse blends to single species in October) and spring (i.e., from single species to diverse blends in March). We collected samples in the morning (6:30–10:30 H), post voiding, immediately placed them in sterile tubes on ice and stored them at −80 °C within 2 hours of collection.

We extracted genomic DNA from faeces using the MoBio Powersoil DNA Isolation Kit (Carlsbad, California, USA) and sent aliquots to Argonne National Laboratory (Lemont, Illinois, USA) for sequencing of the v4 region of the 16S rRNA gene using established methods57,58. Sequence data are available in the NCBI Sequence Read Archive under accession numbers SRP158783.

We processed sequences using the Quantitative Insights into Microbial Ecology (QIIME) package (v1.9.1)57, using a published analytical workflow58. We retained samples that were sequenced to a depth of 10,000 reads and ultimately discarded two samples from downstream analyses. We picked Operational Taxonomic Units (OTUs) using the de novo UClust method and based on 97% sequence similarity. OTU taxonomy was assigned using the Greengenes database (v13_8). We used OTUs to calculate alpha-diversity measures, including Good’s Coverage, Chao1, Shannon and Faith’s Phylogenetic Diversity (PD) indices. Good’s Coverage, which estimates what percent of the total number of OTUs in the original community are represented by the sequencing effort, was >95% for all samples. Chao1 captures OTU richness, PD accounts for the relatedness between OTUs, and the Shannon index reflects community evenness39. We likewise used OTUs to calculate beta diversity, including unweighted and weighted UniFrac distances. UniFrac distances measure the phylogenetic dissimilarity between pairs of samples, with unweighted measures relying on the presence of OTUs and weighted measures taking into account their relative abundance40.

We analysed the colonic metabolome via NMR spectroscopy in a subset of 35 samples from Study 1 using previously established methods59 optimized for lemurs12. These samples were equally split between midsummer and midwinter, and represented sifakas that gained or were denied forest access. We specifically targeted concentrations of three SCFAs, notably acetate, propionate and butyrate. Spectra were acquired at 600 MHz using a standard Nuclear Overhauser Effect Spectroscopy (NOESY) preset experiment. SCFA concentrations are available in the Supplementary Material (S5).

To assess the influence of foliage diversity and forest access on alpha diversity and SCFA concentrations in Study 1, we implemented Linear Mixed Models (LMM), using the glmmADMB package (version 0.8.3.360) in Rstudio (version 0.99.90261). For alpha diversity, we ran three models in which the dependent variable was the Chao1, Shannon or PD index. For SCFAs, we ran three models in which the dependent variable was acetate, propionate or butyrate concentration. We included the sifaka’s identity as a random term and, as explanatory variables, we included foliage condition (two classes: diverse blends or single species), forest access (two classes: yes or no) and their interaction. We considered the sifakas to have forest access if they could semi free-range at any time during the year, even if they were not concurrently in their forested enclosure at the time of sampling. We reran these models including sex as a third explanatory variable and the individual nested within its social group as our random term; however, sex was always an insignificant predictor and neither variable changed the results. We ultimately report the values from the simplified models.

To identify which microbes correlated with SCFA concentrations, we computed Kendall’s tau correlations using the cor.test function in Rstudio. To avoid spurious correlations, we retained a subset of 38 OTUs that represented either major taxa (i.e., minimally 1% of an individual’s GMB, on average) or varied by foliage supplements (as identified by LEfSe). The results from the full Kendall’s tau correlations are presented in the Supplemental Material (S3).



The authors declare no competing interests.

Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Supplementary information accompanies this paper at 10.1038/s41598-018-32759-7.

