Impact of the gut microbiome on the genome and epigenome of colon epithelial cells: contributions to colorectal cancer development

In recent years, the number of studies investigating the impact of the gut microbiome in colorectal cancer (CRC) has risen sharply. As a result, we now know that various microbes (and microbial communities) are found more frequently in the stool and mucosa of individuals with CRC than healthy controls, including in the primary tumors themselves, and even in distant metastases. We also know that these microbes induce tumors in various mouse models, but we know little about how they impact colon epithelial cells (CECs) directly, or about how these interactions might lead to modifications at the genetic and epigenetic levels that trigger and propagate tumor growth. Rates of CRC are increasing in younger individuals, and CRC remains the second most frequent cause of cancer-related deaths globally. Hence, a more in-depth understanding of the role that gut microbes play in CRC is needed. Here, we review recent advances in understanding the impact of gut microbes on the genome and epigenome of CECs, as it relates to CRC. Overall, numerous studies in the past few years have definitively shown that gut microbes exert distinct impacts on DNA damage, DNA methylation, chromatin structure and non-coding RNA expression in CECs. Some of the genes and pathways that are altered by gut microbes relate to CRC development, particularly those involved in cell proliferation and WNT signaling. We need to implement more standardized analysis strategies, collate data from multiple studies, and utilize CRC mouse models to better assess these effects, understand their functional relevance, and leverage this information to improve patient care.

Human gut microbiome composition has recently been associated with a myriad of diseases, ranging from autism and schizophrenia to inflammatory bowel disease and colorectal cancer (CRC) [1–3]. Many of the associations between the gut microbiome and disease implicate both the microbiome composition overall and specific microbial species in disease development; the link between the gut microbiome and cancer is no exception. Several studies show that both the overall gut microbiome composition and microbial organization differ in CRC patients compared to healthy individuals [4–9]. Other studies show that, in some cases, particular microbial species are present more frequently in tumor tissue than in flanking normal tissue throughout the entire progression of disease, from early tumor development to metastasis [5, 7, 10–22]. Table 1 summarizes key features of the major changes in the gut microbiome and the individual microbes associated with CRC.

In this review, we focus on examining recent articles (2015–present) that describe the direct effects of bacteria on CECs. We highlight studies that have utilized live bacteria, bacterial communities, or species-specific virulence factors to determine whether microbes can alter the genome or epigenome in ways that directly propel CEC transformation and the clonal expansion that defines CRC (Table 2). We also discuss recent studies in which direct effects of microbial metabolites on the genome or epigenome of CECs have been demonstrated. We anticipate that a more complete understanding of all of these effects will allow us to add microbiome data to the accruing CEC genetic and epigenetic data used to screen for CRC. Moreover, we predict that these data will enable the development of combination strategies for the prevention and treatment of CRC that target: (i) CEC pathways that are altered by genome or epigenome changes; and (ii) the microbiome, for example, via bacteriophage microbiome modulation, targeted antibiotics, and/or specific bacterial vaccines.

The majority of spontaneous CRC development follows Knudson’s classic two-hit hypothesis [51, 52]. In this model, one mutation in each allele of the APC gene is needed to initiate tumorigenesis in the colon, and subsequent mutations in additional genes increase the rate of tumor growth and development [53, 54]. This pattern is seen in both hereditary and spontaneous CRC development, with at least 70–80% of spontaneous CRC tumors possessing mutations in both APC alleles [52]. As a result, when examining the impact of gut microbes on CRC development, it is important to determine whether the direct interaction between microbes and CECs can lead not only to DNA damage but also to specific gene mutations that contribute to CRC development.

Whole-genome sequencing can also be used to measure mutation frequency and to observe pathogen-specific mutational patterns directly. In a study conducted by Szikriszt and colleagues [66], cisplatin treatment of a chicken lymphoblastic cell line was shown to induce primarily C > A mutations, a pattern found frequently in aflatoxin-induced cancers [66]. Importantly, the specific signature identified after cisplatin exposure differed when human cell lines were used (C > T instead of C > A mutations were most frequent) [67], which emphasizes the importance of relevant model selection in experimental design. These experiments would be particularly informative in models where bacterial communities, such as biofilms, induce tumor formation, as the causal bacteria are difficult to identify. Knowing the mutational signature caused by the biofilm may narrow down the list of driver organisms and provide us with a new target for screening.

DNA methylation generally describes the addition of a methyl group (CH3) to a cytosine residue that precedes a guanine residue in DNA (termed CpG islands, often at or near the start site of gene transcription) [68]. The effects of DNA methylation on cancer development have been examined extensively. Two of the first studies showed both global and gene-specific DNA hypomethylation in cancer [69, 70]. Both hypomethylation and hypermethylation have been linked to CRC development, but the mechanisms by which they contribute to cancer development differ. DNA hypomethylation is generally thought to lead to tumorigenesis via one of three pathways: chromosomal instability, loss of imprinting, or reactivation of transposable elements [71]. Hypermethylation, on the other hand, is believed to lead to the decreased expression of tumor suppressor genes. Since the early studies, data have accrued to show that methylation differences play a major role in the initiation and progression of many types of cancer [72]. Much of this research has focused on CRC, where CpG island hypermethylation of MLH1, RARB2, CDKN2A, and other genes has been linked to tumor formation and growth [68, 71].

More studies are needed to better understand how methylation changes that are induced by specific microbes and their toxins contribute to CRC development. Initial experiments should focus on determining whether presumably health-promoting probiotic species, such as Lactobacillus acidophilus, have a common impact on methylation in CECs that is distinct from the signature induced by pathogenic bacteria. Furthermore, several studies have shown that butyrate can affect both the methylation of DNA globally [77, 78] and the expression of genes that function in DNA methylation or demethylation pathways [79, 80]. Because most of these experiments have been conducted in vitro using non-CEC lines and have only examined the effects of butyrate in isolation, in vivo studies should be conducted to determine whether butyrate-producing gut microbes can alter DNA methylation in CECs. Finally, more focus should also be placed on effects that are induced by specific bacterial toxins as strategies to detect, alter, or induce protective immunity to these toxins can be utilized more readily in the clinic.

In the nucleus, DNA is wrapped around histones, which are protein complexes composed of eight subunits. Each histone is made up of two copies each of H2A, H2B, H3, and H4 subunits, and the DNA–histone complex is referred to as a nucleosome. In general, the nucleus can be divided into regions of heterochromatin (areas in which nucleosomes are packed tightly together) or euchromatin (areas in which nucleosomes are more loosely packed). Areas of heterochromatin tend to be less transcriptionally active whereas areas of euchromatin tend to be more transcriptionally active. The location of histones is tightly regulated by a number of proteins and enzymes that modify the histones or serve as docking sites for other proteins that recognize those modifications [81]. Histone modifications include the methylation, acetylation, or phosphorylation of various residues, among others. Each modification has a unique impact on chromatin structure. For example, the acetylation of histone lysine residues is involved in transcriptional regulation and DNA repair. Histone acetylation and deacetylation are regulated by histone acetyltransferases, which acetylate histones, and histone deacetylases (HDACs), which remove acetyl groups from histones, respectively. Mutations in enzymes that belong to each of these groups have been found in cancer. HDAC inhibitors have already been approved for the treatment of hematologic malignancies, and growing evidence suggests they might be useful in CRC too [81, 82].

As the number of known post-translational histone modifications continues to increase [95], these results suggest a burgeoning role for these modifications in gut microbiome–CRC interactions, and perhaps potential new targets for intervention. Moreover, mouse models that test the tumorigenic effect of gut microbes or microbial communities are being used extensively, and thus should be employed to determine whether microbe-induced changes in specific histone modifications or the accessibility of specific transcription factor binding sites affects CRC pathogenesis.

Non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) are RNA molecules that are transcribed from DNA but not translated into protein. They are generally classified into two groups: small non-coding RNAs (snRNAs) and long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) [97]. The most commonly studied snRNAs are microRNAs (miRNAs), which are approximately 22 nucleotides long [98]. By contrast, lncRNAs are ncRNAs that are always greater than 200 nucleotides in length, although some are much larger. MicroRNAs regulate protein-coding gene expression by binding to the 3′ UTR of mRNA molecules, causing repressed translation and encouraging the degradation of target mRNAs [99]. By contrast, lncRNAs generally regulate protein-coding gene expression by one of several mechanisms (for example, by acting as a scaffold for histone-modifying complexes, inhibiting the binding of transcription factors by direct binding to the transcription factors themselves or to their DNA targets, directly binding RNA polymerase 2, or binding and sequestering miRNAs) [100].

Notably, the study by Liang and colleagues [119] was conducted using a publicly available database of microarray data. This research strategy can be used to further the field of gut microbiome–lncRNA interactions by mining data from other RNA-sequencing studies that disregarded lncRNAs in their analysis, or that analyzed lncRNAs in conjunction with protein-coding genes. For example, Peck and colleagues [115] identified 1157 protein-coding genes and lncRNAs that were upregulated or downregulated in the IESCs of conventional mice when compared to those of germ-free mice [115]. The genes that were elevated in conventional mice were involved in processes such as ‘mitotic cell cycle’ and ‘nuclear division’, suggesting a role in cell proliferation and potentially CRC progression. These data should be further examined to determine whether lncRNAs show the same or a different pattern when analyzed alone.

Figure 1 provides an overview of the mechanisms by which bacterial communities and species might impact the CEC genome or epigenome, thus altering tumor initiation, growth, and metastasis. An understanding of these mechanisms is necessary to develop creative approaches for the prevention, detection, and treatment of CRC. Most studies to date have examined the effects of changing the microbial community by using either antibiotics or germ-free mice, but only a few have studied the effects of specific bacteria. These studies show that altering the microbial community has a large impact on DNA methylation, histone modifications, and ncRNA expression patterns. The effects on broad categories of genes, such as those involved in cell proliferation, WNT signaling, maintenance of the innate mucosal barrier, generation of reactive oxygen species, ephrin signaling, or TGF-β signaling, have been shown by several groups.

The microbiome community needs to marshal toward the utilization of diverse strategies to identify specific microbes, communities, and mechanisms governing genetic and epigenetic changes that can be targeted to enhance the screening, prevention, or treatment of CRC. Although recent studies have identified an association between both fungi and viruses in the gut and CRC development [123, 124], no specific impacts on CECs or their genomes or epigenomes have been described yet, providing additional opportunities for discovery.

One clear goal moving forward is to explore how microbes can be used to better prevent CRC. Bacteria might act directly to impact CRC pathogenesis via the effect of one or more virulence factors on CECs, or indirectly via the production of secondary metabolites or the induction of immune changes in the mucosal environment; but how the immune system alters the genome or epigenome of CECs remains a gap in knowledge. As a result, if convincing data accrue that show that bacteria or bacterial communities directly influence colon carcinogenesis, then we may be able to target these bacteria for elimination from the colon via bacteriophage microbiome modulation or targeted antibiotics, or perhaps even develop protective vaccines against them or their virulence determinants. In this approach, the effect of gut microbes on the genome or epigenome of CECs could be utilized to monitor the effectiveness of the vaccine or bacterial elimination strategies, ensuring that other bacteria have not emerged to fill the niche left by the eliminated microbes and thus reduced the effectiveness of these prevention strategies.

Overall, understanding and corralling knowledge of the microbiome to thwart disease and to augment disease therapy are towering cross-disciplinary goals. In a time when combination strategies are being implemented to address many diseases, both gut microbes and the genetic or epigenetic alterations that they induce are certain to add value to current targets for the prevention, detection, and treatment of CRC. As CRC is one of the diseases currently being studied most extensively in its connection to the microbiome, translational advancement in this field seems poised to spur progress in other microbiome-associated diseases.

CLS is supported, in part, by a grant from Bristol-Myers Squibb; JA declares that he has no competing interests.

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

