Sexual dimorphism in glucose metabolism is shaped by androgen-driven gut microbiome

Males are generally more susceptible to impaired glucose metabolism and type 2 diabetes (T2D) than females. However, the underlying mechanisms remain to be determined. Here, we revealed that gut microbiome depletion abolished sexual dimorphism in glucose metabolism. The transfer of male donor microbiota into antibiotics-treated female mice led the recipients to be more insulin resistant. Depleting androgen via castration changed the gut microbiome of male mice to be more similar to that of females and improved glucose metabolism, while reintroducing dihydrotestosterone (DHT) reversed these alterations. More importantly, the effects of androgen on glucose metabolism were largely abolished when the gut microbiome was depleted. Next, we demonstrated that androgen modulated circulating glutamine and glutamine/glutamate (Gln/Glu) ratio partially depending on the gut microbiome, and glutamine supplementation increases insulin sensitivity in vitro. Our study identifies the effects of androgen in deteriorating glucose homeostasis partially by modulating the gut microbiome and circulating glutamine and Gln/Glu ratio, thereby contributing to the difference in glucose metabolism between the two sexes.

In recent decades, the prevalence of type 2 diabetes (T2D) has rapidly increased worldwide, becoming a global health issue1. Of note, population studies have reported a higher prevalence of T2D in men than in women2,3. Consistent with humans, male mice have lower insulin sensitivity than female mice4 and are more susceptible to high-fat diet (HFD) induced obesity and metabolic syndrome5. The sex-dependent glucose metabolism difference is commonly observed in both humans3,6,7 and rodent animals4,8. However, the underlying mechanisms that drive sexual dimorphism in metabolism remain unclear.

Here, we demonstrated that androgen-regulated gut microbiome drives the sex differences in glucose metabolism. Moreover, androgen modulates the circulating glutamine levels and Gln/Glu ratio partially via the gut microbiome, which further affected insulin sensitivity. Thus, we demonstrated that the sex bias of the gut microbiome and glutamine, regulated by androgen, drives the sexual dimorphism in glucose metabolism, revealing previously undetermined links between hormones, the gut microbiome, and amino acids in sex-specific glucose metabolism.

We firstly compared the gut microbiome between male and female adult mice fed a normal chow diet (NCD) using 16S rRNA gene sequencing. The two groups showed distinct gut microbiome compositions, as demonstrated using principal component analysis (PCA) (Fig. 1a). Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes were the most abundant phyla in all samples (Fig. 1b). Of note, the abundance of Akkermansia muciniphila which was reported to have antidiabetic effects24–26, was lower in male mice than in females, while the abundance of Prevotella was higher in male mice (Fig. 1c). These data demonstrated that the gut microbiome of male mice differed from that of female mice. To test whether the sex differences in the gut microbiome contributed to sex-biased glucose metabolism, we deleted gut microbiome in male and female mice with two weeks of treatment using an antibiotics (ABX) cocktail (Fig. 1d and Supplementary Fig. 1a, b). Male mice presented a poorer glucose tolerance than female mice, while this difference was largely abolished after ABX treatment (Fig. 1e, f). We further detected an interaction effect between the ABX treatment and sex on area under the curve (AUC) of glucose tolerance test (GTT) (P = 0.003) (Supplementary Data 1), indicating that male and female mice responded differently to the depletion of the gut microbiome. Insulin tolerance test (ITT) further showed that male mice had lower insulin sensitivity than female mice, while this difference was not completely abolished after ABX treatment (Fig. 1g–i). We did not detect a significant interaction effect between the ABX treatment and sex on insulin sensitivity or fasting insulin levels (Supplementary Data 1). Further, the insulin signaling activities represented by phospho-Akt (pAkt) levels were lower in visceral white adipose tissues (VWAT) of male mice than in females but displayed comparable levels between the two sexes after ABX treatment (Fig. 1j). Notably, the pAkt levels in VWAT of female mice decreased after ABX treatment, which was not parallel to the changes in whole-body insulin sensitivity in ITT in response to ABX treatment (Fig. 1j). This may suggest that other insulin-sensitive tissues that may respond differently to the depletion of gut microbiota by ABX treatment, could also contribute to the whole-body insulin sensitivity, while the underlying mechanisms still need fine explorations. These results suggest that the gut microbiome depletion largely ablates the sexual dimorphism in glucose metabolism. Similarly, fasting plasma triglyceride (TG) levels were higher in male mice than in female mice and this difference was not significant after ABX treatment (Supplementary Fig. 1c). Other metabolic parameters such as total cholesterol (TC), leptin and food intake showed higher trends and body weight was significantly higher in males than in females, while these differences were still present after ABX treatment (Supplementary Fig. 1d–g). No significant interaction effects between the ABX treatment and sex on these parameters (Supplementary Data 1). These data suggest that the trends of higher food intake in males or the difference in body weight between sexes may have limited contribution to the gut microbiome-induced sexual dimorphism in glucose metabolism. In addition, the fasting plasma free fatty acids (FFAs), adiponectin, gut hormones such as glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1), peptide tyrosine tyrosine (PYY) and glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) levels, as well as circulating inflammatory factors, including lipopolysaccharides-binding protein (LBP), interleukin-1b (IL-1b), interleukin-6 (IL-6), monocyte chemotactic protein 1 (MCP1), and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFα) were also detected, but were not significantly different between the two sexes (Supplementary Fig. 1h–n). Thus, they were not likely to contribute to the sex difference in glucose metabolism. Male and female germ-free (GF) mice were also examined, and male GF mice presented better glucose tolerance than conventionally raised male mice, while female GF mice showed no improvement compared with conventional female mice (Fig. 1k, l). We also detected an interaction effect between GF status and sex on glucose tolerance (P for interaction = 0.0001). Again, these results suggest that the glucose tolerance is more affected by the gut microbiome in male mice than in female mice. Additionally, the body weight and food intake remained different in male and female GF mice (Supplementary Fig. 1o, p). Together, these results demonstrate that gut microbiome is required for the sex dimorphism in glucose metabolism.

A HFD consumption is considered as a major environmental risk factor for metabolic diseases. We next examined the gut microbiome and metabolic changes in mice challenged with HFD with or without ABX treatment (Fig. 2a). Consistently, the gut microbiome of HFD male mice was distinguished from that of female mice and was similar after ABX treatment (Fig. 2b, c). Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes were the most abundant phyla in both sexes (Fig. 2d). Akkermansia was less enriched in male HFD mice than in females (Fig. 2e), which was consistent with the results in NCD mice. While, Prevotella was not identified as the dominant genus in males. Furthermore, glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity were impaired and the fasting insulin levels were higher in male HFD mice than in females, which were improved to the comparable levels to those of female mice after ABX treatment (Fig. 2f–j). We further detected significant interaction effects of ABX treatment and sex on AUCs of GTT and ITT in HFD mice (P value = 0.028 and 0.007, respectively) (Supplementary Data 1), which indicated different responses of the two sexes to the depletion of the gut microbiome in glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity in mice challenged with HFD. Moreover, ABX-erased sex-difference in glucose metabolism was mainly due to the improvement of male mice in response to gut microbiome depletion (Fig. 2f–j). Further, the pAkt levels in the muscles were lower in male mice compared to females, and this difference was abolished after the ABX treatment (Fig. 2k). In addition, metabolic factors such as plasma levels of FFA and adiponectin levels also differed between male and female mice and were comparable after ABX treatment (Supplementary Fig. 2a, b). While the higher plasma TG and leptin levels in men were not completely abolished by ABX treatment (Supplementary Fig. 2c, d). Moreover, other metabolic parameters such as TC, body weight and food intake were higher in male mice than in females; however, these metabolic differences remained significant after ABX treatment (Supplementary Fig. 2e-g). No interaction effects were detected between ABX treatment and sex on these parameters (Supplementary Data 1), suggesting that these metabolic differences between sexes did not depend on the gut microbiome. Gut hormones, including active GLP-1, PYY, and GIP, were also examined; however, no significant difference was observed between the two sexes either before or after ABX treatment (Supplementary Fig. 2h-j). These data consistently demonstrated that the gut microbiome was involved in the sex difference in glucose metabolism in mice challenged with HFD.

To identify the effects of the sex-specific gut microbiome on glucose homeostasis, we further conducted a fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) experiment, includuing four groups of male and female mice. After treatment with ABX for two weeks, one group of male mice were gavaged with feces from male donors, and one group of female mice were gavaged with feces from female donors to recapitulate the sex differences in the gut microbiome. While the other two groups of male and female mice maintained the ABX treatment without FMT as controls. ITT and GTT were performed after the mice being gavaged for another four weeks (Fig. 3a). Consequently, male and female mice did not show significant differences in glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity with ABX treatment, while the two groups with FMT resumed the sex differences in glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity (Fig. 3b–e). Notably, we observed a significant interactive effect between sex and the gut microbiome reconstruction on blood glucose levels at 30 and 60 min after glucose injection in GTT (Supplementary Data 1). Meanwhile, this interactive effect was also observed on blood glucose levels at 0, 90, and 120 min after insulin injection as well as for the AUC of ITT (Supplementary Data 1). These results demonstrated the driving role of the gut microbiome in the sexual dimorphism in glucose metabolism.

To further verify the causal effects of the gut microbiome on the sex difference in glucose metabolism, We transferred male and female donor feces to antibiotics-treated female recipients (M → F vs F → F) at five weeks, respectively, and also transferred male donor feces to antibiotics-treated male recipients (M → M) (Fig. 3f). As expected, when gavaged with the feces from NCD-fed donors, the gut microbiome of the M → F group was distinct from the F → F group and was more closed to the M → M group, as reflected by the PCA analysis and weighed UniFrac distance (Fig. 3g, h and Supplementary Fig. 3a). More importantly, female recipient mice receiving male donor feces (M → F group) also showed reduced insulin sensitivity than the F → F group (Fig. 3i). While, glucose tolerance was not different between two groups (Supplementary Fig. 3b). In consistence, when gavaged with the feces from HFD-fed donors (Fig. 3j), the M → F group showed distinct microbial compositions (Fig. 3k, l and Supplementary Fig. 3c) and impaired insulin sensitivity (Fig. 3m and Supplementary Fig. 3d) compared with those of the F → F group. These results together demonstrated that FMT could reproduce the sexual dimorphism in the gut microbiome and glucose metabolism, and that the male microbiome led to insulin resistance, contributing to sex-biased glucose metabolism.

Sex hormones are reported to regulate gut microbiome in certain states19,21,27. We next compared the gut microbiome between male and female mice at weaning (sexually immature) and eight weeks (sexually mature), and found that the weighted UniFrac distance between adult male and female mice was significantly higher than that between the immature two sexes (Fig. 4a). Consistently, glucose tolerance was overall identical between the two sexes at weaning time but it was significantly different at eight weeks of age (Fig. 4b, c). These results suggest that sex hormones may be involved in sex-biased gut microbiome and glucose metabolism. As mentioned above, glucose metabolism was more robustly affected by gut microbiome in male mice than in female mice. We then castrated male mice to investigate the effect of androgen on gut microbiome and glucose metabolism (Supplementary Fig. 4a). Interestingly, the microbiome in castrated male mice had lower distance from females than that between males and females (Supplementary Fig. 4b, c), suggesting that androgen is an important factor driving the difference of gut microbiome between the two sexes. Meanwhile, glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity were also improved after castration (Supplementary Fig. 4d, e). These results suggest that androgen regulates gut microbiome and glucose metabolism. To further explore whether the effect of androgen on glucose metabolism was dependent on the gut microbiome, we castrated male mice and reintroduced dihydrotestosterone (DHT) with or without ABX treatment (Fig. 4d). The distance between male castrated mice and male sham mice were significantly higher than that between the DHT group and sham males (Fig. 4e), supporting that castration changed the gut microbiome, and DHT treatment drove it similar towards males. Of note, among the differed top 20 abundant species in the three groups, we detected that the abundance of Prevotella sp. Bacteroides massiliensis and Cupriavidus metallidurans was decreased while the abundance of Eubacterium plexicaudatum, Lachnospiraceae bacterium A2 and Dorea_sp. was increased after castration as compared with sham mice or DHT-treated group (Fig. 4f). Consequently, castration improved glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity in male mice while DTH treatment deteriorated glucose metabolism (Fig. 4g–j). Importantly, the effects of androgen on glucose metabolism were largely abolished when deleting gut microbiome via ABX treatment (Fig. 4k–n), which was also supported by the detection of the interaction effects of DHT and ABX treatment on glucose levels during GTT or ITT (Supplementary Data 1). Together, these results indicated that the effects of androgen on glucose metabolism were largely dependent on the gut microbiome. Consistent results were observed in fasting plasma insulin levels (Fig. 4o and Supplementary Data 1). Besides, the pAkt levels were increased in the liver and muscles of the castrated male mice as compared with male sham mice but were decreased in the liver and showed decreased trend in muscles after DHT injection (Fig. 4p). These differences were also blunted under ABX treatment. Together, these results demonstrated that androgen deteriorated glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity, partially via modulation of the gut microbiome, contributing to the sexual dimorphism in glucose metabolism.

Amino acids are well known metabolites that regulate insulin resistance and the development of T2D28–30 and can be metabolized by the gut microbiota31. We next compared the blood amino acid profiles between male and female mice with or without ABX treatment. We observed significantly different amino acid profiles in male and female NCD mice (Fig. 5a and Supplementary Fig. 5a–d). Among them, the concentrations of glutamine and the Gln/Glu ratio were lower in male mice than in females but these differences were not significant after ABX treatment or in GF mice (Fig. 5a, b and Supplementary Fig. 5e–g). We also observed a potential interaction effect between the GF status and sex on Gln/Glu ratio (P = 0.116) (Supplementary Data 1). As glutamine and the Gln/Glu ratio have been repeatedly reported as protective factors for glucose metabolism and cardiometabolic events30,32,33, we further tested their changes in other models. Consistently, plasma glutamine and Gln/Glu ratio were also lower in male mice than in females fed HFD, and these differences were not significant after ABX treatment (Supplementary Fig. 5h and Supplementary Data 1), consistent to the results in NCD mice. Further, in FMT using feces from NCD fed donor mice, plasma glutamine levels and Gln/Glu ratio showed lower trend or significantly lower in the M → M group and the M → F group as compared with F → F group (Fig. 5c). In FMT using feces from HFD fed donor mice, although no difference was seen between the M → F group and the F → F group, plasma levels of glutamine and Gln/Glu ratio were significantly lower in the M → M group than in the F → F group (Supplementary Fig. 5i). These results suggest that the gut microbiome reconstitution partially triggers sex differences in the circulating glutamine levels and the Gln/Glu ratio. To further explore the effects of androgen on glutamine and Gln/Glu ratio and whether these effects were dependent on gut microbiome, we examined the glutamine and glutamate levels in male castrated mice and castrated mice injected with DHT in the presence or absence of antibiotics treatment. Consistently, we observed that castration increased while DHT decreased circulating glutamine levels and Gln/Glu ratio, while these alterations were not significant with ABX treatment (Fig. 5d, e). A borderline interaction effect was detected between castration or DHT treatment with ABX treatment (Supplementary Data 1). These results together suggest that androgen regulates the glutamine levels and the Gln/Glu ratio, which was partially mediated by the gut microbiome. To evaluate the biological roles of glutamine on insulin sensitivity, we next treated HepG2, differentiated C2C12, and 3T3-L1 cells with glutamine in vitro, and found that the pAkt levels were elevated with the increase in glutamine concentrations, demonstrating that glutamine directly improved insulin sensitivity in hepatocytes, myocytes and adipocytes (Fig. 5f). In summary, an androgen-regulated gut microbiome influences the sexual dimorphism in the circulating glutamine levels, further regulating insulin sensitivity.

We next compared the serum glutamine, glutamate, and the Gln/Glu ratio in healthy young male with those of female individuals, who were recruited in our previous research12. Although there was no significant difference in the serum glutamine levels, men showed higher glutamate levels and lower Gln/Glu ratio than women (Fig. 6a), which may suggest that disturbed Gln/Glu transition might exist in men. We then examined the associations of glutamine, glutamate and their ratio with the glucose parameters after adjusting for age and body mass index (BMI). Matsuda index, an indicator for insulin sensitivity, which is correlated with the rate of whole-body glucose disposal during the euglycemic insulin clamp34, showed a significant positive correlation with Gln/Glu ratio in men and a correlation trend in women (Fig. 6b–d). HbA1c showed an inverse correlation with glutamine levels and the Gln/Glu ratio, and a positive correlation with glutamate levels in men (Fig. 6e–g). Additionally, the serum testosterone was also measured and was positively correlated with glutamate and negatively correlated with Gln/Glu ratio in women (Fig. 6h–j). Together, these results suggest that lower Gln/Glu ratio correlated with a worsened glucose metabolism especially in men.

Metabolic differences between males and females are commonly observed across various species35,36. However, the detailed mechanism remains largely undetermined. Here, we demonstrated the essential role of the gut microbiome especially that of males, in driving sexual difference in glucose metabolism and revealed the role of androgens in regulating the glucose metabolism through the gut microbiome. Finally, we demonstrated that the gut microbiome drives sex bias in circulating glutamine and Gln/Glu ratio, which are associated with glucose metabolism.

In conclusion, our study identified the essential role of gut microbiome in triggering sex-biased glucose metabolism and uncovered the effects of androgen in deteriorating glucose homeostasis via modulating the gut microbiome and glutamine levels, at least in part. These findings provide the basis for developing drugs targeting the gut microbiome to combat type 2 diabetes, especially in men, and highlight the importance of stratifying male and female diabetic patients when using drugs that may affect the gut microbiome.

Specific pathogen-free (SPF) grade male and female C57BL/6 mice were purchased from Linchang Company (Shanghai, China), and were housed in a 12 h dark-light cycle room and allowed access to water and food ad libitum. Mice were kept at 22–24 °C, in 50–70% humidity. Mice were fed a normal chow diet (NCD) (SLACOM, P1101F-25) or a high-fat diet (HFD) with 60 kcal % fat (Research Diet, D12492i) from eight weeks old of age. Littermates of the same sex were randomly assigned to the experimental groups. The body weight of NCD mice was measured at the beginning and end of the experiments. The body weight of HFD mice was measured every two weeks. Food intake was recorded continuously for three days in the unit of a cage and was calculated as the average food intake per mouse per day. Male and female eight-week-old germ-free (GF) C57BL/6 mice were imported from Taconic Biosciences (Rensselaer, NY) and the age and sex matched SPF C57BL/6 mice were purchased from Vital River Laboratory Animal Technology Co., Ltd. (Beijing, China) via Cyagen Biosciences (Suzhou, China). Male and female GF mice were housed in a sterile isolator and the SPF control mice were housed in another isolator and fed with a NCD (Envigo, 2020SX) for analysis of the metabolic parameters. All animals were fasted for 6 h prior to sacrifice. This study complied with all relevant ethical regulations for animal testing and research. All procedures were approved by the Animal Care Committee of Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine.

The ABX cocktail used in this study included vancomycin hydrochloride (250 mg/L; Meilunbio, China) and gentamycin sulfate (200 mg/L; Meilunbio, China). The ABX cocktail was added to the drinking water for more than two weeks and refreshed every week to eliminate the gut microbiome.

Mice were fasted for 14–16 h with free access to water and intraperitoneally injected with glucose (2 g/kg body weight in NCD mice and 1 g/kg in HFD mice) in an alternating order. Blood glucose was measured in tail vein blood before and 15, 30, 60, 90, and 120 min after glucose injection, using a glucometer and test strips (Johnson & Johnson, USA). The area under the curve (AUC) was calculated to evaluate the glucose tolerance.

Mice were fasted for 6 h and injected intraperitoneally with insulin at 1 IU/kg body weight. Blood glucose was measured in tail vein blood at the same time points with GTT. The AUCs were calculated to evaluate the insulin tolerance.

All conventionally raised C57BL/6 recipient mice were pretreated with the ABX cocktail for two weeks, and ABX was withdrawn 24 h before FMT. Feces for FMT were collected from 10-week-old C57BL/6 donor mice fed a NCD or mice fed with a three-month HFD. The feces were stored in 20% glycerol at −80 °C until use. A fecal solution was introduced to the recipient mice in 200 μL of sterile PBS at a concentration of 125 mg/mL three times a week. Feces were collected before and two weeks after ABX treatment, and four weeks after FMT.

Five-week-old male C57BL/6 mice were castrated (MC) or sham-operated (MS) under pentobarbital sodium anesthesia (60 mg/kg body weight). For castration, after a 5-mm incision between the penis and anus, the testes were slightly extruded out from the scrotum and excised after ligating the blood vessels. For male sham mice, an incision between the penis and anus was also performed. The testes were exposed and put back in male sham mice. The incisions were then closed with sutures. After three weeks, half of the castrated male mice were subcutaneously injected with dihydrotestosterone (DHT) (Meilunbio, China) at 2.8 mg/kg once a day for five weeks (MC + DHT). DHT was dissolved in the mixture of 90% corn oil and 10% ethanol. The mice of the other groups were injected with a mixture of 90% corn oil and 10% ethanol, as a control. Meanwhile, some of the mice in the MS, MC, and MC + DHT groups were treated with the ABX cocktail to delete the gut microbiome, and some were not. GTT and ITT were performed three and five weeks after ABX treatment, respectively.

3T3-L1, C2C12, and HepG2 cell lines were obtained from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC). HepG2, 3T3-L1 and C2C12 cells were seeded into 12-well plates in growth medium DMEM with glucose (25 mmol/L) and sodium pyruvate (1 mmol/L) (Gibco11995, USA), and supplemented with 10% of fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Gibco, USA), penicillin-streptomycin solution (100 IU/mL–100 µg/mL, Gibco, USA) and L-glutamine (2 mmol/L, Gibco, USA). After 48 h’ incubation, HepG2 and 3T3-L1 cells were starved for 12 h in the growth medium, in which the FBS was replaced with 0.5% bovine serum albumin (BSA). The growth medium of C2C12 was switched to differentiation medium (DMEM, 2% horse serum, penicillin/streptomycin and L-glutamine) for 3 days before starvation. After starvation, the medium was exchanged by DMEM supplemented with 0, 50, 100 and 200 mmol/L of glutamine for 4 h for HepG2 and 3T3-L1 cells and 8 h for C2C12 cells. Cells were stimulated with or without 200 nmol/L insulin for 12 min before harvesting.

Tissues were homogenized with radio immunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer and then incubated on ice for 30 min. The homogenates were centrifuged at 21,130 × g for 30 min at 4 °C and the supernatants were collected. The protein concentrations were quantified using the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. A total of 20 μg of protein were fractionated using SDS-PAGE on 10% polyacrylamide gels and transferred onto PVDF membranes (Millipore, USA). After blocking with 5% BSA (Genebase, China) in TBS-T for 1 h at room temperature, the membranes were incubated with the following primary antibodies at 4 °C overnight: primary antibodies against pAkt (Cell Signalling Technology, USA), Akt (Cell Signalling Technology, USA), HSP90 (Cell Signalling Technology, USA), and anti-α-tubulin antibody (Sigma, USA). HSP90 and α-tubulin were used as internal controls. The blots were washed three times in TBS-T and then probed with the corresponding secondary antibodies (anti-rabbit/mouse IgG, HRP-linked antibody, Cell Signalling Technology, USA) for 1 h at room temperature. All the antibodies were used with 1:1000 dilution. The chemiluminescence of bands on the membrane was detected using horseradish peroxidase (HRP) substrate (Millipore, USA) and visualized using ImageQuant LAS 4000 Imaging System (GE, USA). Protein band intensities were quantified using the Image J software (Wayne Rasband, The National Institute of Mental Health, Bethesda, MD).

Plasma was collected from mice fasted for 6 h before sacrifice. The plasma lipid levels including triglyceride (TG) and total cholesterol (TC), were measured using the commercial testing kits (Kehua, China). Free fatty acids (FFAs) were tested using a quantification colorimetric kit (BioVision, USA). Plasma insulin (Crystal Chem, USA), adiponectin (Millipore, USA), leptin (Crystal Chem, USA), LBP (Abnova, Taiwan China), L-1b, IL-6, MCP-1, TNF-α, glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) (Millipore, USA), GIP and peptide tyrosine tyrosine PYY (Crystal Chem, USA) were measured by using the corresponding enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4) inhibitor (Millipore, USA) and aprotinin (Tianshuo, China) were added immediately after blood collection to inhibit the degradation of GLP-1 and other gut hormones.

Microbial DNA was extracted from mouse feces by using the QIAamp Fast DNA Stool mini-Kit (Qiagen, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The concentration of bacterial DNA was measured by Nanodrop 2000. The v3-v4 regions of bacterial 16S rRNA genes were amplified at a melting temperature of 56 °C with 30 PCR cycles by using primers 341 F 5’-barcode- ACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAG)−3’ and 806 R 5’-GGACTACHVGGGTWTCTAAT-3’ (Supplementary Data 2). The PCR products were purified using AmpureXP beads (AGENCOURT) to remove the nonspecific products. Purified amplicons were sequenced using the Illumina MiSeq platform to obtain 300-bp paired-end reads. Raw fastq files were demultiplexed and quality-filtered using the BGI internal program. Each sample was not less than 30000 tags after being overlapped using Flash software. The clean tags were clustered into operational taxonomic units (OTUs) at a 97% identity using USEARCH. Taxonomy was assigned using the Greengenes Database. Subsequent statistical analysis was performed using R software (v3.5.1).

The gut microbiome of mice in the MS, MC and MC + DHT groups was investigated using a metagenomic sequencing method. Total genomic DNA was extracted from fecal samples using the QIAamp Fast DNA Stool Mini Kit (Qiagen, Germany), according to the manufacturer’s protocols. DNA was fragmented to an average size of approximately 300 bp using Covaris M220 (Gene Company Limited, China) for paired-end library construction. Paired-end sequencing was performed on Novaseq 6000 platform (Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA, USA) at Majorbio Bio-Pharm Technology Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Adapter and low-quality reads with a length shorter than 50 bp or with a quality value score lower than 20 were discarded. The remaining reads were aligned to the Mus musculus genome using NCBI to remove the host DNA. Megahit was used to assemble the short reads. High-quality reads were mapped to the representative genes with a 95% identity using SOAPaligner and the gene abundance in each sample was evaluated. BLASTP (Version 2.2.28+) was employed for taxonomic annotations by aligning non-redundant gene catalogs against the NCBI NR database with an e-value cutoff of 1 × 10−5.

20 μL plasma was deproteinized with 80 μL of methanol containing internal standards, ALA-d3, 3 μg/mL; PHE-d5, 3 μg/mL; HIS-13C6, 1 μg/mL. The mixture was vortexed for 30 s and centrifuged at 18,407 × g for 15 min. Then 70 μL of the supernatant were freeze-dried. For the analysis, freeze-dried samples were derived using a Waters AccQ-Tag derivation kit (Waters, USA), as per manufacturer’s protocol. Boric acid buffer (70 μL, pH 8.8) were added to the freeze-dried sample and vortexed for 30 s, then 20 μL of derivation reagent were added into the mixture. After vortexing, the sample was heated in a water bath for 10 min at 55 °C.

Quantitative analysis was performed using an AB sciex ExionLC UPLC coupled to QTRAP 6500 MS system (AB Sciex, USA). The QTRAP MS data were processed by MultiQuant software (version 3.0.3, AB SCIEX, Framingham, USA). An ACQUITY UPLC C18 column (100 mm × 2.1 mm × 1.7 μm) was used for separation. Mobile phase A was water/acetonitrile/formic acid (v/v/v = 98.5:1:0.5) with 20 mmol/L ammonium formate. Mobile phase B was acetonitrile/formic acid (v/v = 98.4:1.6). Gradient elution was 1% mobile phase B to keep 1.08 min, then up to 9.1% in 10.4 min, and then to 21.2% for 5.9 min, to 59.6% in the next 0.6 min and kept for 1.2 min. The flow rate was 0.35 mL/min. The column temperature was 55 °C. Ion source parameters were set as Curtain Gas 0.241 MPa, GS1 0.276 MPa, GS2 0.276 MPa, ion source temperature 500 °C, capillary voltage 5500 V. The ion pairs and collision energy of amino acids are shown in Supplementary Data 3.

The subjects were recruited in our previous research, including 33 men (age, 23.27 ± 1.81 years; BMI, 20.32 ± 1.46 kg/m2) and 63 women (age, 23.38 ± 1.75 years; BMI, 20.23 ± 1.12 kg/m2) of Chinese ancestry, who were volunteers in Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine12. The exclusion criteria, clinical phenotypes and fasting biochemistry of these subjects were reported previously12. Matsuda index (10,000/square root of{[fasting glucose (mg/dL) × fasting insulin (μIU/mL)] × [mean glucose (mg/dL) × mean insulin (μIU/mL) during oral glucose tolerance test])} is highly positively correlated with the rate of whole-body glucose disposal during the euglycemic insulin clamp34, and was calculated in the subjects of our study. Serum testosterone was measured using a total testosterone ELISA kit (Crystalchem, USA). This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of the Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine and was performed in accordance with the principles of the Helsinki Declaration II. Each participant provided a written informed consent.

Statistical analyses of metagenomics sequencing and 16S rRNA gene sequencing data were performed as described above. For the animal study, data are presented as mean ± SEM. Unpaired Student’s t-test (two-sided) was performed for the data analysis of the experiments consisting of two groups, and for the quantitative analysis of western blotting. One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and the post hoc test of least-significant difference (LSD) (two-tailed) were applied for the experiments consisting of more than two groups. Two-way ANOVA was used to investigate the interaction effects between sex/castration/DHT and ABX in GTT, ITT or other metabolic parameters (Supplementary Data 1). Data for Weighted Unifrac and Bray-curtis distance analysis were tested by two-tailed Wilcoxon rank-sum test. Data are expressed as mean ± SEM. Partial correlation analysis was applied to examine the correlations of glutamine, glutamate as well as their ratio with glucose metabolism indices and the serum testosterone levels with adjustment for age and BMI in men and women, respectively. Results were considered significantly different at a P < 0.05. Statistical analyses were performed using SAS version 9.2 (SAS Institute, USA). The statistical parameters (i.e., the n numbers) can be found in the figure legends. Each experiment was repeated independently for at least two or three times.

Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.



Source data(111M, zip)

Peer review information Nature Communications thanks Michael Garratt, Natalia Shulzhenko and Robert Quinn for their contribution to the peer review of this work.

Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

These authors contributed equally: Aibo Gao, Junlei Su, Ruixin Liu.

These authors jointly supervised this work: Weiqiong Gu, Jiqiu Wang, Weiqing Wang.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41467-021-27187-7.

