Prolonged Impairment of Short-Chain Fatty Acid and L-Isoleucine Biosynthesis in Gut Microbiome in Patients With COVID-19

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection is associated with altered gut microbiota composition. Phylogenetic groups of gut bacteria involved in the metabolism of short chain fatty acids (SCFAs) were depleted in SARS-CoV-2–infected patients. We aimed to characterize a functional profile of the gut microbiome in patients with COVID-19 before and after disease resolution.

We performed shotgun metagenomic sequencing on fecal samples from 66 antibiotics-naïve patients with COVID-19 and 70 non–COVID-19 controls. Serial fecal samples were collected (at up to 6 times points) during hospitalization and beyond 1 month after discharge. We assessed gut microbial pathways in association with disease severity and blood inflammatory markers. We also determined changes of microbial functions in fecal samples before and after disease resolution and validated these functions using targeted analysis of fecal metabolites.

Compared with non–COVID-19 controls, patients with COVID-19 with severe/critical illness showed significant alterations in gut microbiome functionality (P < .001), characterized by impaired capacity of gut microbiome for SCFA and L-isoleucine biosynthesis and enhanced capacity for urea production. Impaired SCFA and L-isoleucine biosynthesis in gut microbiome persisted beyond 30 days after recovery in patients with COVID-19. Targeted analysis of fecal metabolites showed significantly lower fecal concentrations of SCFAs and L-isoleucine in patients with COVID-19 before and after disease resolution. Lack of SCFA and L-isoleucine biosynthesis significantly correlated with disease severity and increased plasma concentrations of CXCL-10, NT- proB-type natriuretic peptide, and C-reactive protein (all P < .05).

Gut microbiome of patients with COVID-19 displayed impaired capacity for SCFA and L-isoleucine biosynthesis that persisted even after disease resolution. These 2 microbial functions correlated with host immune response underscoring the importance of gut microbial functions in SARS-CoV-2 infection pathogenesis and outcome.



Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection is associated with altered gut microbiota composition. The authors characterized a functional profile of the gut microbiome and examined fecal metabolites in patients with COVID-19 before and after disease resolution.

Patients with COVID-19 displayed impaired capacity for short-chain fatty acid (SCFA) and L-isoleucine biosynthesis in their gut microbiome that persisted after recovery and correlated with disease severity and host immune responses.

It is an observational study without clear cause or consequence effect established. Further studies are required to determine whether these changes to the gut microbiome functions directly affect COVID-19 severity.

These findings indicate perturbations of gut microbial functions including decreased SCFA and L-isoleucine biosynthesis in COVID-19 before and after disease resolution. Strategies to supplement SCFA or L-isoleucine might be developed to improve disease outcome.

In this study, we prospectively recruited 66 antibiotic treatment-naïve patients with COVID-19 and followed them up from hospital admission until 30 days after discharge. We characterized alterations and longitudinal dynamics of the functions of the gut microbiome in association with disease severity and immune response using metagenomic analysis. We further validated our findings using targeted metabolomics analysis to examine alterations in fecal microbial metabolites.

This study was approved by the Clinical Research Ethics Committee (reference number 2020.076), and all patients provided written informed consent. As described in our previous study,6 , 9 COVID-19 subjects were recruited at the Prince of Wales and United Christian Hospitals in Hong Kong. Inclusion criteria included: SARS-CoV-2 reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction positivity based on respiratory specimens, hospitalization, and no probiotics, prebiotics, and antibiotics use within 3 months before enrollment. Patients were classified into 4 severity groups based on symptoms as reported by Wu et al.17 Briefly, patients were classified as mild if there were no radiographic indications of pneumonia, moderate if pneumonia with fever and respiratory tract symptoms were detected, severe if there was respiratory rate ≥30 breaths per minute, oxygen saturation ≤93% when breathing ambient air, or PaO2/FiO2 ratio ≤300 mm Hg, and critical if there was respiratory failure requiring mechanical ventilation or organ failure requiring intensive care. Blood and stools from hospitalized patients were collected by hospital staff, whereas discharged patients provided stools during follow-up visits. Samples were stored at -80°C until processing. The pneumonia controls who were hospitalized with community-acquired pneumonia were recruited. Inclusion criteria included: SARS-CoV-2 reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction–negative status based on respiratory specimens, hospitalization, and no probiotics, prebiotics, and antibiotics use within 3 months before enrollment. The non–COVID-19 subjects were recruited at the Prince of Wales Hospital in Hong Kong from the general population in 2019 before the pandemic as part of a microbiome survey. Inclusion criteria included the following: 18 years of age or older, and had not used probiotics, prebiotics, or antibiotics within 3 months before enrollment.

Detailed methods are described in Zuo et al.6 Briefly, approximately 0.1 g fecal sample was prewashed with 1 mL ddH2O and pelleted by centrifugation at 13,000g for 1 min. The fecal DNA was subsequently extracted from the pellet using Maxwell RSC PureFood GMO and Authentication Kit (Promega, Madison, WI) following the manufacturer’s instructions.

Sequencing libraries were prepared from extracted DNA using the Nextera DNA Flex Library Prep Kit (Illumina, San Diego, CA), and sequenced on an Illumina NovaSeq 6000 System at the Centre for Gut Microbiota Research, Chinese University of Hong Kong. An average of 32 ± 4.6 million reads (6G data) per sample were obtained.

Profiling of bacterial taxonomy and functional composition was extracted using humann2 v0.11.1 19 from metagenomes, which included taxonomic identification via MetaPhlAn2 by mapping reads to clade-specific markers,20 annotation of species pangenomes through Bowtie2 v2.3 21 with reference to the ChocoPhlAn database, translated search of unmapped reads with DIAMOND v2.0.4 22 against the UniRef90 universal protein reference database,23 and pathway collection from the generated gene list with reference to the Metacyc database.24

Laboratory results at admission including blood count test (platelet count, white blood cell count, neutrophil count) and the plasma concentrations of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), C-reactive protein (CRP), albumin, hemoglobin, alkaline phosphatase and aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, total bilirubin, and creatinine, were extracted from the electronic medical records in the Hong Kong Hospital Authority clinical management system. Concentrations of cytokines (interleukin [IL]10, IL12, IL1b, IL6, and tumor necrosis factor–α) and chemokines (CXCL8, CXCL10, and CCL2) in patients at admission were measured using the MILLIPLEX MAP Human Cytokine/Chemokine Magnetic Bead Panel - Immunology Multiplex Assay (Merck Millipore, MA) on a Bio-Plex 200 System (Bio-Rad Laboratories, CA). Concentration of N-terminal B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) was measured using Human NT-proBNP enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay kits (Abcam, Cambridge, UK).

The quantification of fecal metabolites was performed by Metware Biotechnology Co., Ltd. (Wuhan, China). Short chain fatty acids (SCFAs), including acetic, propionic, isobutyric, butyric, isovaleric, valeric, and hexanoic acid, were detected using gas chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis. Agilent 7890B gas chromatograph coupled to a 7000D mass spectrometer with a DB-5MS column (30 m length × 0.25 mm inner diameter × 0.25 μm film thickness; J&W Scientific, Folsom, CA) was used. Helium was used as carrier gas, at a flow rate of 1.2 mL/min. Injections were made in the splitless mode and the injection volume was 2 μL. The oven temperature was held at 90°C for 1 minute, raised to 100°C at a rate of 25°C/min, raised to 150°C at a rate of 20°C/min and held at 150°C for 0.6 minutes, further raised to 200°C at a rate of 25°C/min, and held at 200°C for 0.5 minutes. After running for 3 minutes, all samples were analyzed in multiple reaction monitoring mode. The temperature of injector inlet and transfer line were held at 200°C and 230°C, respectively.

L-isoleucine was detected using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis. Liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry system (ultra performance liquid chromatography, ExionLC AD, https://sciex.com.cn/; MS, QTRAP 6500+ System, https://sciex.com/) was used for analysis. The analytical liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry conditions for L-isoleucine were as follows: high performance liquid chromatography, column, Waters ACQUITY ultra performance liquid chromatography HSS T3 C18 (100 mm × 2.1 mm inner diameter; 1.8 μm); solvent system, water with 0.05% formic acid (A), acetonitrile with 0.05% formic acid (B). The gradient was started at 5% B (0–10 minutes), increased to 95% B (10–11 minutes), and ramped back to 5% B (11–14 minutes); flow rate was 0.35 mL/min, temperature was 40°C, and injection volume was 2 μL. The electrospray ionization source operation parameters were as follows: ion source, turbo spray; source temperature 550°C; ion spray voltage 5500 V (Positive), -4500 V (Negative); declustering potential and collision energy for individual multiple reaction monitoring transitions was done with further declustering potential and collision energy optimization.

Data on the abundance of bacterial taxa and functionality were imported into R v3.5.1. Data on the functionality was normalized based on relative log expression by Deseq2 (v1.26.0). Nonmetric multidimensional scaling analysis were performed based on Bray-Curtis dissimilarities using vegan package (v2.5-3). Differential microbial functional pathway between patients with COVID-19 and non–COVID-19 controls were identified using Deseq2 (v1.26.0). Associations of microbial pathways with disease severity were identified using the multivariate analysis by linear models (MaAsLin) statistical frameworks implemented in the Huttenhower Lab Galaxy Server (http://huttenhower.sph.harvard.edu/galaxy/). Spearman correlations between microbial pathways, metabolites and the patients’ plasma parameters were assessed using cor and cor.test functions. Heat maps were generated using the pheatmap package (v1.0.10).

Sixty-six hospitalized patients with laboratory-confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection (29 males; mean ± standard deviation [SD] age of 42.6 ± 19.0 years) and 70 age- and sex-matched controls (non–COVID-19 controls) were studied. Demographic, clinical characteristics and stool collection schedule are shown in Table 1 and Figure 1 . Median duration of hospitalization for patients with COVID-19 was 24 days (interquartile range [IQR], 4–46 days). Thirty-five patients were followed up after discharge (median [IQR], 28 [18–41] days). All patients were antibiotic-naive and 35 patients (53.0%) received at least 1 anti-viral drug. At admission, 35 patients (53.0%) presented with fever, 8 patients (12.1%) had diarrhea, and 47 patients (71.2%) showed at least 1 respiratory symptom. Patients were stratified as critical (6.1%; n = 4), severe (22.7%; n = 15), moderate (24.2%; n = 16), and mild (47.0%; n = 31), according to the COVID-19 severity classification criteria.17

To understand how SARS-CoV-2 infection influences the gut microbiome in antibiotics-naïve patients with COVID-19, ultra-deep metagenomic sequencing was performed on fecal samples from patients with COVID-19 and controls, followed by taxonomic profiling of the fecal microbiome. We first investigated taxonomic composition of gut microbiota in patients with COVID-19 with mild, moderate, and severe/critical illness at baseline (the first stool sample collected after admission). The taxonomic composition in patients with COVID-19 with severe/critical illness was significantly different from that of non–COVID-19 controls (Supplementary Figure 1 A; permutational multivariate analysis of variance [PERMANOVA] test; P < .001), and their Bray-Curtis dissimilarity to controls was significantly higher than that within non–COVID-19 individuals (Supplementary Figure 1 B; Mann-Whitney U test; P < .05). The patients with COVID-19 were primarily characterized by a depletion of Bifidobacterium adolescentis, Ruminococcus bromii, and F prausnitzii and an enrichment of Bacteroides ovatus, Bacteroides dorei, and Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron compared with non–COVID-19 controls (MaAalin2 adjusting for age, gender, and comorbidities; all adjusted P <.05; Supplementary Table 1). Interestingly, decreased Bifidobacterium adolescentis and F prausnitzii in patients with COVID-19 significantly associated with more severe symptom (MaAalin2 adjusting for age, gender, and comorbidities; all adjusted P <.02; Supplementary Table 2). These results suggest that SARS-COV-2 infection is associated with altered composition of gut microbiome.

Because there was a difference in gut microbial composition between COVID-19 and non-COVID subjects, we examined whether these compositional differences translated into differences at the functional level by profiling the functional capacity of the gut microbiome, including the functional genes abundance and their corresponding pathways. We first investigated composition of microbial pathways of patients with COVID-19 with mild, moderate, and severe/critical illness at baseline (the first stool sample collected after admission). The patients whose first stool sample were collected after clearance of SARS-CoV-2 were excluded. The composition of microbial pathways in patients with COVID-19 with severe/critical illness was significantly different from that of non–COVID-19 controls (Figure 2 A; PERMANOVA test; P < .001), and their Bray-Curtis dissimilarity to controls was significantly higher than that within non–COVID-19 individuals (Mann-Whitney U test; P < .05; Figure 2 B). Among all host factors examined (age, gender, co-morbidities, COVID-19 disease severity, fecal SARS-CoV-2 viral load, antiviral drugs, and diet), both SARS-CoV-2 infection and COVID-19 disease severity significantly impacted composition of microbial functional pathways, with COVID-19 disease severity showing the largest effect size (R 2 = 0.073; P <.001; PERMANOVA test; Figure 2 C). Diet over the course of hospitalization (Supplementary Table 3) did not show significant effect in the variation of microbial functional pathway (PERMANOVA test; R 2 = 0.01; P = 0.23; Figure 2 C). In addition, patients with COVID-19 showed significantly lower richness of microbial pathways in their feces compared with non–COVID-19 controls (Figure 2 D; P < .05). These results suggest that SARS-COV-2 infection is associated with altered functional profile of gut microbiome as well.

We next examined which microbial functions primarily drive the difference in patients with COVID-19 and non-COVID-19 controls. Nineteen microbial pathways were depleted, and 19 pathways were enriched in fecal samples from patients with COVID-19 at baseline compared with non–COVID-19 controls, which were determined using DESeq2 (all adjusted P < .05) and adjusted for age and gender using MaAalin2 (all adjusted P <.05). Seven of nineteen depleted pathways in patients with COVID-19 were related to carbohydrate degradation indicating SARS-CoV-2 infection impaired the gut microbiome’s capacity to degrade carbohydrate. Bifidobacterium shunt pathway involved in biosynthesis of acetic acid showed the greatest reduction (2.4-fold) whereas urea cycle pathway displayed the greatest increase (2.3-fold) in patients with COVID-19 compared with non–COVID-19 controls (Supplementary Table 4). These data suggest that patients with COVID-19 demonstrated impaired capacity for SCFA production and showed enhanced capacity for urea cycle. We then correlated the 38 differential pathways with COVID-19 disease severity via MaAsLin2 analysis adjusting for age, gender, and comorbidities, 11 microbial pathways mainly related to sugar derivative degradation, L-isoleucine biosynthesis, and purine nucleotide biosynthesis, which showed significantly negative correlation with COVID-19 severity (Table 2 ; false discovery rate [FDR] corrected P < .2), and 8 microbial pathways associated with carbohydrate biosynthesis, purine nucleotide biosynthesis, heme biosynthesis, and peptidoglycan biosynthesis, which showed significantly positive correlation with COVID-19 severity (Table 2; FDR corrected P < .2). Sugar derivative degradation was associated with production of pyruvate, which is the key metabolite for SCFA fermentation.25 , 26 L-isoleucine is a crucial mediator in the microbiota-host crosstalk and it plays an important role in regulating host innate and adaptive immunity.27, 28, 29 Alterations in the microbial functions in the gut of patients with COVID-19 may have a significant impact in host physiology and functions.

NOTE. The correlations between pathways and disease severity were determined using MaAsLin2, adjusting for age, gender, and comorbidities. Only the pathways with FDR-corrected P value <0.2 were shown.

To determine whether hospitalization may contribute to changes of gut microbiome, we have also included patients who were hospitalized with community-acquired pneumonia but who were negative for COVID-19 (Supplementary Table 5). We found that patients with COVID-19 had significantly different gut microbiome function compared with pneumonia cases (Supplementary Figure 3; P = .004; PERMANOVA test). Thirty-eight enriched or depleted microbial pathways were identified by comparing COVID-19 and non–COVID-19 controls (Supplementary Table 4). Twenty-one (51%) were also different between patients with COVID-19 and pneumonia cases including pathways associated with fecal SCFA synthesis and isoleucine production (Supplementary Table 6; FDR corrected P < .2). These data suggest that alterations of gut microbiome functions in patients with COVID-19 are unlikely the result of hospitalization.

SARS-CoV-2 infection could induce dysfunctional immune responses and consequently cytokine storm syndrome in a subset of patients with COVID-19 leading to more severe disease outcomes.30 Here, we found increased plasma levels of NT-proBNP, IL10, CXCL10, LDH, CRP, and alanine aminotransferase and decreased levels of platelet count (PLT), albumin, and hemoglobin (MaAsLin2; FDR corrected P < .05) significantly associated with more severe symptoms in patients with COVID-19 (Supplementary Table 7), suggesting SARS-CoV-2 infection could induce those changes consequently leading to more severe disease outcomes. We then link these changes in blood measurements (CXCL-10, IL10, NT-proBNP, LDH, CRP, alanine aminotransferase, PLT, and albumin) to the findings of microbial pathways (Table 2) to assess whether microbial functions play a role in dysregulation of the immune response. Four pathways (D-galacturonate degradation I, superpathway of hexuronide and hexuronate degradation, superpathway of β-D-glucuronosides degradation, and 4-deoxy-L-threo-hex-4-enopyranuronate degradation) involved in SCFA production significantly negatively correlated with NT-proBNP (Rho = -0.41, -0.48, -0.48, and -0.47 respectively; Figure 3 ). Superpathway of L-isoleucine biosynthesis I negatively correlated with plasma levels of CXCL-10 (Rho = -0.35) and CRP (Rho = -0.35) (Figure 3). NT-proBNP is heart failure marker that was associated with more adverse clinical outcomes in patients with COVID-19 and increased significantly during the course of hospitalization in those who ultimately died.31 CXCL10 is a pro-inflammatory chemokine known to be associated with poor outcome in COVID-19.32 CRP levels in plasma increased in response to inflammation.33 , 34 These pathways may be involved in preventing overaggressive inflammation in COVID-19. In contrast, urea cycle pathway exhibited positive correlation with CXCL-10 (Rho = 0.40), and heme biosynthesis II pathway showed negative correlation with PLT (Rho = -0.40) (Figure 3). Low platelet count was associated with increased risk of severe disease and mortality in COVID-19.35 Hence, overexpression of these 2 pathways may be associated with more dysfunctional immune responses. Altogether, our data highlight that the gut microbiome might functionally calibrate host immunity against SARS-CoV-2 infection thereby affecting COVID-19 severity.

To explore whether gut microbiome and their functions was restored in patients after recovery, fecal samples after discharge (postdischarge days, median [IQR], 28 [18–41] days) were collected from 35 patients (15 with mild disease, 17 with moderate disease, and 13 with severe disease; Figure 1). The patients with severe/critical illness still displayed a significantly different microbiome composition and functional capacity from that of non–COVID-19 controls after disease resolution (Supplementary Figure 2 A and B and Figure 4 A and B), although the richness of the microbial pathway increased to a comparable level with non–COVID-19 controls (Figure 4 C). We then investigated whether differential taxa (Supplementary Table 1) or microbial functional pathways (Table 2) were restored in patients with COVID-19 after disease resolution. Seven bacteria taxa, including Bifidobacterium adolescentis, Ruminococcus bromii, and F prausnitzii, which were depleted in patients’ baseline samples, showed sustainable lower abundance after discharge when compared with non–COVID-19 controls. However, Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron and Bacteroides caccae enriched at baseline still displayed a higher abundance in patients with COVID-19 than non–COVID-19 controls, even after disease resolution (Supplementary Figure 2 C). In terms of microbial functions, all over-represented pathways in severe patients’ baseline samples returned to comparable level with non–COVID-19 controls after discharge. In contrast, 9 of 11 pathways, which were involved in SCFA and L-isoleucine biosynthesis, showed persistent depletion in severe patients after disease resolution (Figure 4 D). These data suggest that gut microbiome functionality in patients was persistently impaired after COVID-19 resolution.

Fecal metabolome provides a functional readout of microbial activity and can be used as a medium for mediating host-microbiome interaction.36 Based on targeted analysis of fecal metabolites in patients with COVID-19 and controls, we found that the changes of gut microbial functions were consistent with alterations of gut microbial metabolites. Several pathways associated with production of SCFAs and L-isoleucine were depleted in patients with COVID-19, especially in those patients with severe/critical disease (Supplementary Table 4 and Table 2). We found fecal concentrations of SCFAs, including acetic acid, propionic acid, butyric acid, valeric acid, and caproic acid, were significantly lower in patients with COVID-19 with severe/critical illness at baseline (the first stool sample collected after admission) than that in non–COVID-19 controls (Figure 5 A–G). The concentrations of L-isoleucine in patients with COVID-19 were lower than that in controls as well (P < .05; Figure 5 H). These results further demonstrated SARS-CoV-2 infection may be associated with impaired capacity of the gut microbiome for SCFA production and L-isoleucine biosynthesis. Intriguingly, beyond 30 days after disease resolution, patients who had severe/critical illness still showed a significantly lower concentration of butyric acid, valeric acid, caproic acid, and L-isoleucine, supporting the idea that SARS-CoV-2 infection may cause a long-lasting effect on gut microbiome function. In addition, we found fecal butyrate level in patients with COVID-19 showed significantly negative correlation with plasma IL10, CXCL-10, and CRP, and positive correlation with albumin (all P < .05; Supplementary Figure 4). L-isoleucine negatively correlated with CXCL-10 and positively correlated with PLT (all P < .05; Supplementary Figure 4). These results suggest that microbiota-derived butyrate and L-isoleucine may be involved in preventing overaggressive inflammation in COVID-19.

We further examined which bacterial species contributed most to the changes of these microbial pathways. None of the pathways were dominated by any single species, suggesting that alterations of these pathways were likely accounted for by a community-level shift in their functions (Supplementary Figure 5). Notably, the bacterium F prausnitzii was a primary contributor to SCFA-producing pathways (D-galacturonate degradation I, superpathway of hexuronide and hexuronate degradation, and superpathway of β-D-glucuronosides degradation) (Supplementary Figure 5 A–D) and L-isoleucine-producing pathways (L-isoleucine biosynthesis I and L-isoleucine biosynthesis III) (Supplementary Figure 5 E and F), implicating F prausnitzii may have a beneficial role in combating SARS-CoV-2 infection.

Previous studies identified depleted bacterial taxa including Eubacterium, Faecalibacterium, Roseburia, Bifidobacterium, and Lachnospiraceae in patients with COVID-19 compared with controls and inferred that these bacteria may have a functional role in the treatment of COVID-19.6 , 8 , 9 However, mechanistic insights of such findings were limited until recently. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to delineate the functional potential and metabolic output of the entire gut microbiome community in COVID-19, which helps support development of microbiota-based therapy for COVID-19.

In conclusion, this study showed perturbations of gut microbial functions including decreased SCAF and L-isoleucine biosynthesis and increased urea production in COVID-19. This highlights a potential link between impaired gut microbiome functions and COVID-19 severity and paves the way to understand the role of the gut microbiome in disease onset and progression in COVID-19.

Siew C. Ng, PhD (Funding acquisition: Lead; Supervision: Lead; Writing – review & editing: Lead). Fen Zhang, PhD (Conceptualization: Lead; Data curation: Lead; Formal analysis: Lead; Methodology: Lead; Visualization: Lead; Writing – original draft: Lead). Ya Ting Wan, PhD (Data curation: Lead; Formal analysis: Supporting; Methodology: Supporting; Visualization: Supporting; Writing – original draft: Supporting). Tao Zuo, PhD (Conceptualization: Supporting; Supervision: Supporting; Writing – review & editing: Supporting). Yun Kit Yeoh, PhD (Writing – review & editing: Supporting). Qin Liu, PhD (Methodology: Supporting). Lin Zhang, PhD (Writing – original draft: Supporting). Hui Zhan, PhD (Methodology: Supporting). Wen Qi Lu, PhD (Methodology: Supporting). Wen Ye Xu, PhD (Methodology: Supporting). Grace C.Y. Lui, PhD (Resources: Supporting). Amy Y.L. Li, PhD (Methodology: Supporting). Chun Pan Cheung, PhD (Methodology: Supporting). Chun Kwok Wong, PhD (Resources: Supporting). Paul K.S. Chan, PhD (Resources: Supporting). Francis K.L. Chan, PhD (Resources: Supporting).

Conflicts of interest The authors disclose no conflicts.

Funding This study was supported by a donation from Koon Wah Mirror Group and was additionally supported in part by InnoHK, The Government of Hong Kong, Special Administrative Region of the People’s Republic of China.

Data availability Raw sequence data generated for this study are available in the Sequence Read (archive under BioProject accession PRJNA689961;. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/ PRJNA689961).

Note: To access the supplementary material accompanying this article, visit the online version of Gastroenterology at www.gastrojournal.org, and at http://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2021.10.013.



