Computational Modeling of the Human Microbiome

The impact of microorganisms on human health has long been acknowledged and studied, but recent advances in research methodologies have enabled a new systems-level perspective on the collections of microorganisms associated with humans, the human microbiome. Large-scale collaborative efforts such as the NIH Human Microbiome Project have sought to kick-start research on the human microbiome by providing foundational information on microbial composition based upon specific sites across the human body. Here, we focus on the four main anatomical sites of the human microbiome: gut, oral, skin, and vaginal, and provide information on site-specific background, experimental data, and computational modeling. Each of the site-specific microbiomes has unique organisms and phenomena associated with them; there are also high-level commonalities. By providing an overview of different human microbiome sites, we hope to provide a perspective where detailed, site-specific research is needed to understand causal phenomena that impact human health, but there is equally a need for more generalized methodology improvements that would benefit all human microbiome research.

Interest in microorganisms associated with the human body has a long history dating back to the handcrafted microscopes built by Antonie van Leewenhoek in the 1670s, where bacteria in van Leeuwenhoek’s oral and fecal samples were referred to as “animalcules” [1]. As research techniques and knowledge increased, human-associated microorganisms continued to be studied (e.g., use of Hungate tubes to isolate anaerobic microbes [2] and documented (e.g., book titled “A Flora and Fauna within Living Animals” in 1853). The accumulation of research has led to the current concept of the human microbiome that has been described as an ecological community of commensal, symbiotic and pathogenic microorganisms that literally share our body space and have been all but ignored as determinants of health and disease [3].

Studying the human microbiome is a challenging endeavor, but the connection to human health is becoming clearer as the four major human microbiomes (skin, oral, gut, and vaginal) have their own associated diseases: Crohn’s disease and obesity in gut, bacterial vaginosis and preterm birth in vaginal, periodontitis in oral, atopic dermatitis in skin [40,41,42,43,44]. Therefore, there is a huge need to study the human microbiome at these four anatomical sites in depth. Our review covers the background, high throughput studies, and modeling methodologies employed to study each of the four distinct microbiomes (gut, oral, skin and vaginal). Bringing all of them under one banner will help us to get a holistic view of the global human microbial interactions which can be used in future for the development of effective and novel treatment strategies.

The longest established human microbiome had foundations in early work identifying microorganisms associated with the gastrointestinal tract. Current concepts of the gut microbiome dates back to 1965 when people found that gut microbes are not only present in the large intestine but also in the stomach and small intestine [45]. Early research in this area mainly utilized culturing techniques where researchers isolated the bacteria from the GI tract (Lactobacilli, Streptococci, Bacteroides) and could test effects by feeding germ-free mice with a diet contaminated with isolated bacteria [46]. Zoetendal et al. in 1998 using temperature gradient gel electrophoresis of 16S rRNA proved that every human has their own distinctive fecal microbiome [47]. Yatsunenko et al. showed that gut microbiome is unique for every individual by characterizing the bacterial species from fecal samples of individuals of different ages, living in different locations and also having different cultural traditions, diet and lifestyle [48]. External factors including diet, antibiotics, lifestyle and even occupation alter microbial niches to a great extent. Apart from that, the dynamics of a diseased and healthy microbiome are totally different. Obesity and diabetic patients have often witnessed a different gut microbiome from healthy individuals where diet has been seen to change the microbiome dynamics hugely [49]. Research has also been conducted to understand how geography influences the gut microbiome. For example, a comparison of the microbiomes of Nigeria and UK infants, small children and adults was conducted [50]. Drastic differences in the species composition between these two countries were identified and diet noted as a factor affecting the microbiome composition, however, diet had a minimal effect in altering the microbiome of adults [50]. It was suggested that the microbiome which gets established during childhood by the diet taken at that age will not change hugely as the person grows. A major transition in microbiome composition occurred in the growth of infants to small children that corresponds to the switch from liquid to solid food, thus there are multiple contextual and temporal variables that can affect the microbiome [50].

Shift in the dominant phyla composition in the gut microbiome is an aspect which is very much associated with obesity [66]. The species composition, metabolome, microbial environment all gets altered during obesity. Another interesting property people have witnessed in gut microbiomes associated with obesity is energy metabolism [67] where microbiota associated with obesity have the ability to harvest more energy from the diet than in non-obese individuals. There is a need to understand the complex interplay between host genetics and microbial community gene content to investigate obesity. The biological properties of the ‘superorganism’ which forms when microbes and their genes, enzymes and metabolites and host’s genes, enzymes and metabolites interact together should be explored to get the insights to the obesity biology.

High-throughput approaches, i.e., 16S rRNA sequencing and metagenomics have been used in many studies to identify the species composition in the gut microbiome. One of the ongoing challenges in microbiome work has been the issue of identifying low abundance species [68]. For example, using 16S rRNA sequencing, they found two gut microbes which are in low abundance in the human colon: Lachnospira pectinoschiza and another one similar to Planctomycetes (organism name was not known). Wilson and coworkers using 16S rRNA sequencing identified new species colonizing human colon [68]. Similarly, human intestinal flora diversity have been explored using the same method leading to the identification of many novel species where approximately 400 to 500 different species inhabit [69,70]. Furthermore, 16S rRNA sequencing studies found new metabolic pathways for glycans, vitamins and amino-acids in the gut microbiome [71]. 16S rRNA sequencing has also been used to determine the abundance levels of species in the gut microbiome during obesity. Ley et al. took samples of 12 obese people and observed that relative abundance of Bacteroidetes was high and of Fimicutes was low [72]. These 12 obese people were then given restricted carbohydrate and fat diets. After weight loss, the gut microbiomes of the 12 individuals were examined again using 16S rRNA sequencing and it was found out that the relative abundance of Bacteroidetes decreased and that of Firmicutes increased. Biological dynamics of the normal gut microbiome gets perturbed and altered during diseases like obesity, type-1 and type-2 diabetes and even atherosclerosis [41,73]. However, the limit in the read length in these kinds of studies sometimes misses the detection of some bacterial species and strains [8]. Although, this has been a long standing problem for now, people have already started making efforts to address this issue by utilizing recently developed sequencing technologies [74,75]. These are one molecule real time technologies which have been shown to decrease the short read problems and furthermore, a higher data yield at lower cost can be obtained by using this approach [76].

One of the challenges with metagenomic studies is associated with how to deal with novel species or genes that lack functional annotation. Binning is the principal approach in metagenomics for grouping the contigs to specific operational taxonomic units (OTUs) [79]. Zhu et al. used binning methods to identify the pathogenic species in the gut microbiome causing diarrhea [80]. Miller et al. suggested that conventional metagenomic protocols including assembly and binning which are performed using chemical and physical treatment of multiple tissue samples are unable to find low abundant species [81]. However, they modified and improved the existing metagenomic methods by focusing on single tissue sample without any external treatment and when applied to studying the invertebrate Bugula neritina, seven novel bacterial genomes were identified [81]. Another study has also tried to tackle these limitations of metagenomics by using targeted functional profiling as this experimental approach is known to identify bacterial species and their genes [82]. It was conducted in two manners: immunology based and non-immunology based. In the immunology based approach, bacterial response to IgA was evaluated to identify the species and the genes. In the non-immunology based approach, metagenomic DNA was expressed in a bacterial host and it was seen which genes are expressed and define the functional phenotype. People have predicted the function of the nonribosomal peptide synthetase (NRPS) gene that is serine protease inhibition using this method which they found in the cells of a number of gut microbes including E. coli and B. subtilis.

A number of different computational modeling approaches have been developed to study the gut microbiome to help analyze and understand its function including aspects of network topology, metabolic function, microbe-host interactions, and microbe–microbe interactions. One of the early computational studies of the gut microbiome used a network based approach where topological properties of metabolic networks were examined to analyze obesity and IBD [24]. It was found that the microbiome and associated metabolome has a large impact on host metabolism. Critical host enzymes of the metabolic network were found not on the central part of the network but on the periphery. It was suggested that these peripheral enzymes might be using bacterial metabolites which are unique and the compounds produced by these enzymes will get released to the host environment due to close proximity. Furthermore, these enzymes might be acting on the host metabolites to regulate the host environment.

Modeling and analysis of the gut microbiome has helped gain insight into a variety of diseases as our understanding of the impact of the gut microbiome continues to expand. GEMs of 5 abundant gut microbes and the human small intestine and human brain were combined to study autism dynamics [106]. The model was combined with brain using PBPK transport model. The study was able to capture some biomarkers depicting autism like pyruvate and lactate. Two studies utilized GEMs of gut microbes to gain insights into the progression of colorectal cancer. The first study evaluated hydrogen sulfide production which was higher for tumor cells than normal cells during colorectal cancer [107]. 16S rRNA data was used as input to generate GEMs of the gut microbes Fusobacterium nucleatum, Clostridium perfringens, Filifactor alocis and B. fragilis which showed higher hydrogen sulfide production. GEMs showed higher flux for hydrogen sulfide and the metabolic interactions among these microbes was analyzed to understand the mechanisms of its production. A second study worked in a similar manner but the biological mechanism they focused on was the mismatch repair system (MMR) during colorectal cancer [108]. They created GEMs of gut microbes to understand the metabolic interactions in two types of microbial communities: dMMR (deficient) and pMMR (proficient). B. fragilis and F. nucleatum had higher abundances in dMMR colorectal cancer whereas B. fragilis had low abundance in pMMR colorectal cancer. GEM showed that hydrogen sulfide production was higher in dMMR colorectal cancer and there were amino acid substitutions in place of it in pMMR colorectal cancer produced in higher amounts. Different modeling studies performed on gut microbiome along with the experimental data used in that study during disease and non-disease scenarios is given in Table 1. The table also lists the modeling studies performed on other three microbiomes: oral, skin and vaginal microbiome.

In 1684 Leeuwenhoek wrote a letter to the Royal Society of London stating “The number of animals in the scurf of a man’s teeth is so many that I believe they exceed the number of men in a kingdom” [119]. As many as 700 microbial species reside in the human oral microbiome. The oral cavity is complex because of the different microbial niches allowing for diverse local environments. The different oral sites are teeth, the gingival sulcus, the tongue, mouth floor, cheek, hard and soft palates, tonsils, throat and saliva [119]. People have used different experimental approaches to investigate oral microbiome: culturing, microscopy, gel-based techniques, next generation sequencing (NGS), DNA microarrays, DNA hybridization, 16S rRNA sequencing and PCR [119,120]. The challenges that people face when they are dealing with oral microbiomes is bacteria in this microbiome form biofilms which is a complex microbial community [119,120]. They form stable metabolic interactions in biofilms which help them in their survival and growth. The biofilm formation helps the oral microbes to maintain homeostasis, prevent disease development and protect the oral cavity [120]. Apart from that, researchers have tried to find the reason behind the spatial organization of oral microbes i.e., if an oral microbe is present in a particular location in the oral cavity, why it is actually present there [121]. In a dental plaque microbiome, Corynebacterium is present in the biofilm matrix attached to the tooth as it holds the entire microbiome structure. Streptococcus is present in the periphery where they get an oxygen rich environment with access to sugars.

As with the gut microbiome, there is a large number of novel, unknown species in oral microbiome [120]. Dewhirst et al. created the Human Oral Microbiome Database (HOMD) where they performed phylogenetic analysis for the oral microbes at different locations from teeth to tonsils [123]. 16S rRNA gene sequence analysis identified 1179 taxa of which just 24% were named and 68% were uncultivated from 36,043 16s rRNA gene clones. To further support the scope of the oral microbiome, Benn et al. stated ~700 bacterial species are found in the oral microbiome out of which 50% of them have not been cultivated yet [119]. Of the known species and function, it has been found peptidic small molecules (PSMs) are common in the oral microbiome [124]. Oral microbes secrete and release PSMs and exchange it among themselves with other metabolites which are responsible for giving structure to the microbiome [124]. Even though PSMs can be detected using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), researchers noted that there is a huge “black box” in this area and deeper understanding of the oral microbial interactions is required to identify more PSMs and the processes by which they are differentially produced. These studies show that the oral microbiome is actually highly unexplored with a large number of unknown species and unique molecules, metabolites, metabolic genes and pathways.

16S rRNA sequencing has been the most popular high-throughput approach to identify novel members in the oral microbiome [125]. Rothia are generally found at tongue or tooth surfaces, Streptococcus salivarius colonizes the tongue, Simonsiella colonizes mainly the hard palate and Treponemes can be found only at the subgingival crevice. The oral microbiome diversity is huge as 400–500 different bacterial strains are only found at subgingival crevice [126]. Fusobacteria, Actinobacteria, Proteobacteria, and Cytophagales are the four bacterial divisions mostly seen there but they hypothesized that more unknown taxonomic divisions are expected in this anatomical site.

As one of the major diseases associated with the oral microbiome, periodontitis is a focal point of oral microbiome research. One study used shotgun metagenomic sequencing and phylogenetic diversity to understand periodontitis dynamics [128]. Additional keystone pathogen species like Haemophilus haemolyticus, Prevotella melaninogenica, and Capnocytophaga ochracea were identified which function in a similar way as Porphyromonas gingivalis (the main microbe causing periodontitis) in altering the oral microbiome. These three microbes are less abundant like P. gingivalis and promote inflammation by perturbing host-microbe interactions which try to inhibit the disease. Through the use of deep sequencing, microbes association with periodontitis can be suggested as well as a trend where health oral microbiomes are mainly composed of gram positive bacteria [43]. The shift to a diseased state and dysbiosis happens with accumulation of a broad range of gram negative bacteria, more complex metabolic interactions and increased availability of nutrients to the microbes due to damaged oral tissues. This is also reflected by a decrease in alpha diversity of the oral microbiome which is associated with periodontitis [128].

A small number of studies have used network analysis or genome scale modeling to study the oral microbiome. Network analysis was used to analyze the co-occurence mechanisms among oral microbes and gut microbes [114]. It was found that Neisseria elongata and Granulicatella adiacens were involved in causing metabolic syndrome (MetS). Currently, there are some conflicting results on the effects of external factors like diet, smoking, personal hygiene and medication on the oral microbiome [114,127] and it is expected that additional studies and analysis can help reconcile mechanisms lead to disease states. Another study performed metabolic reconstructions for 456 oral microbial strains using their genomic information [113]. Then, they applied network robustness analysis on the metabolic networks of these microbes to observe the biosynthetic capabilities of them. The function of 97 metabolites across the 456 microbial strains was determined to explore the cross-feeding and metabolic interdependencies among the oral microbes.

A genome scale metabolic model (GEM) of P. gingivalis has been reconstructed containing 679 reactions and 564 metabolites [112]. Analysis of this model indicated that P. gingivalis produces succinate, butyrate and propionate after amino acid catabolism. This is a strategy to harm host cells and feed its oral partners with essential nutrients. Furthermore, succinate produced by another oral pathogen is used to produce ATP. The GEM of P. gingivalis was also used to study synthesis pathways for lipopolysaccharides (LPS) which can potentially be targets for therapeutic applications [112]. P. gingivalis secretes gingipains which perform C5 convertase complement signalling with TLR2 protein leading to dysbiosis and inflammation in the normal oral microbiota [111]. The abundance of microbes present in a healthy microbiome gets disturbed due to the microbial dysbiosis caused by less abundant P. gingivalis. Hence, community metabolic modeling using GEMs involving this pathogen and its other oral partners will give us more answers to the biological dynamics of periodontitis which will help us in defining the therapeutics for this disease.

With constant exposure with the outside world, the skin microbiome has the potential to be highly variable. Skin has different types and each type has its own microbiota composition and associated disease [129]. For sebaceous skin, Corynebacterium and Propionibacterium are found and associated with acne. Atopic dermatitis is found on moist skin and is associated with Staphylococcus and Corynebacterium. Psoriasis is a dry skin disease and species found there are Corynebacterium, Propionibacterium, Staphylococcus and Streptococcus. Given the diversity of skin types, diseases, and associated organisms one of the first needs is to identify and categorize the microbiota present. Bewick et al. tried answering these questions by performing trait based analysis on 971 skin microbial taxa to classify the organisms based upon various enzymatic or biological characteristics [130].

In addition to site specific diseases, the skin microbiome plays a huge role in immunity. It prevents the invasion of the foreign pathogens, so, it is necessary to maintain the skin microbiome properly to live healthy [134,135]. Skin is not an ideal environment for microbes as they get low amount of nutrients, are always attacked by antimicrobial peptides and have an acidic, cool, salty and a desiccated atmosphere. Yet human and skin microbes have shown coevolution for their own benefit [135]. Primary immunodeficiencies (PIDs) are characterized by depleted memory T and B cells, changing eosinophil concentrations, high IgE levels and atopic dermatitis like skin disease [136]. In PID patients, S. epidermidis, S. aureus and S. marcescens were present in high abundance [136]. It was assumed that S. epidermidis may coordinate with S. aureus during PID in a mutualistic or commensalistic way enabling greater resistance by S. aureus to S. aureus antibiotics and other antimicrobial peptides. The skin of PID patients face selective pressures due to which different microbes try to take advantage of local changes such as Serratia marcescens being found on the skin of immunodeficient patients [136]. Another study showed that S. epidermidis can serve as a protective agent by inhibiting S. aureus biofilm formation [137]. The commensal form expresses a serine protease glutamyl endopeptidase (Esp) which degrades the proteins of S. aureus which they use for forming biofilm. This study also showed that S. aureus also switch to commensal form from pathogenic form when it interacts with Corynebacterium striatum [137].

The skin microbiome aids in protecting us from the invasion of the foreign pathogens, so, a great deal of biology is involved in the skin microbiome among the skin microbes and analyzing their metabolic interactions will give us several insights into the various skin diseases [138]. Use of amplicon sequencing and shotgun metagenomic sequencing has identified several fungal species (Malassezia spp., Aspergillus spp) and viral species (Merkel cell polyomavirus and Molluscum contagiosum virus) that are also present in skin microbiome but in very low abundance [137]. Generally, all experimental techniques (culturing, sequencing, etc.) are difficult due to the high variability that is possible in the skin microbiome including intrinsic factors like age, genetic make-up and host immune system and temporal changes in composition due to shifts in environmental exposure [139].

Interestingly, the skin microbiome appears to be temporally stable [141]. This time invariance was demonstrated using shotgun sequence data of skin microbes from 594 samples from 12 healthy individuals that were sampled across 17 skin sites at three time points. External and internal factors may play a crucial role in altering skin microbiome because without these perturbations, skin microbiome did not change at all [141]. There is a need to find how different factors perturb this stability and how the signature microbes in the skin microbiome maintain this stability. The human skin microbiome is very different from not only primates but from other mammals [142] with the human microbiome having dominant species of S. epidermidis, Corynebacterium, and Propionibacterium acnes. These species are not found in the skin microbiomes of other mammals. The reason for this distinction in the human skin microbiome is because of the general human practices which we do every day like clothing, living in a built environment and washing with soap etc. This has enabled the human skin microbiome to have a distinct species composition. This study was conducted using 16S rRNA sequencing targeting hypervariable regions (V3–V4) in the microbial RNA [142].

Network analysis was applied on skin microbiome to understand the topographical distribution of skin microbes at the three skin sites: moist, sebaceous and dry areas [115]. Each of these sites has their own microenvironment with their own set of species and metabolites. Moist skin microbes outnumber sebaceous skin microbes and moist and sebaceous microbe members frequently group together depicting high number of metabolic interactions happening between these two communities [115].

Bottom-up ecology is a biological phenomenon which says that for a microbiome, the metabolic potential of it which is depicted by the ability to use the metabolic resources effectively can be known from genes, metabolites and interactions among them in the species [116]. This study used genome scale modeling (GEM) to investigate this concept in skin microbiome. They found the top 10 metabolites/compounds which are present in higher amount in the skin microbiome. These were the ones which are regularly found in cosmetics and hygiene products like myristic acid, citrate, N-acetyl glucosamine etc. [116]. These results show that external factors somehow do influence the skin microbiome to a great extent.

Vaginal microbiome research is the most new one if compared with microbiome research in the other three anatomical sites; gut, oral and skin. Currently, more than 100 to 200 bacterial species have been found associated with the vaginal microbiome [143]. Lactobacillus (L.) is the dominant genera and is typically associated with a healthy vaginal microbiome. They are responsible for the low pH we usually see in this microbiome, i.e., 3.8 to 4.5 [143] which helps prevent proliferation of nonindigenous organisms and helps in defense against the foreign pathogens that can cause dysbiosis and vaginal infections [144]. Interestingly, even though Lactobacilli are common in the vaginal microbiome, the ethnicity of an individual appears to influence the specific species with L. iners found in White/Caucasian people, L. crispatus in Asian women and L. jenseni found in Black and Hispanic women [143]. However, a significant number of healthy women also have vaginal microbiome which is not dominated by Lactobacillus species with 40% of Black and Hispanic populations having non-dominated lactobacilli vagitypes [144,145]. Even in non-Lactobacillus dominated microbiomes, other bacteria perform homolactic and heterolactic acid fermentations indicating the importance of lactic acid production.

Ethnicity of a person has been associated with a particular type of vaginal microbiome. The microbiomes in African-American women are more diverse and with a higher number of BV-associated bacterial species such as G. vaginalis, L. iners, BVAB1, Mycoplasma hominis, Aerococcus and other anaerobes like Anaerococcus [148]. Caucasian women were more likely to be colonized with L. crispatus, L. jensenii, L. gasseri and Staphylococcus. In a comparison of African-American and European women, it was found that African-American women are 2.9 times more likely to be diagnosed with BV and European women had 25.8% less BV-associated bacteria [148]. Pregnant women who were African-American showed higher risk of preterm birth than European pregnant women [148].

As with most of the human microbiome projects, 16S rRNA sequencing has been used for initial analysis and identification of microorganisms, such as the identification of the dominant Lactobacillus species through measurement of samples from women from different countries [149]. Studies have also been conducted to determine if the vaginal microbiome has variation in composition within the same person. For example, 10 Finnish women had bacterial DNA from 6 different vaginal locations using 4 different sampling strategies tested and generally, the microbial composition was shown to be consistent regardless of sampling site or strategy [150]. Based upon 16S rRNA sequencing, a vaginal microbiome database (Vaginal 16S rDNA Reference Database) has been created containing information of bacterial species in the vagina [151]. This database contains information from 1017 mid-vagina samples and approximately 30 million 16S rDNA reads. Species classification was based on hypervariable regions from V1 to V3 in the 16S rDNA using the STIRRUPS algorithm [151].

Currently, the largest vaginal microbiome study analyzed 597 pregnancies and ~12000 samples [42]. The primary outcome was the identification of the signature vaginal microbes associated with preterm birth (PTB): BVAB1, Prevotella cluster 2 (Prevotella timonensis and Prevotella buccalis), Sneathia amnii, Megasphaera type1 and TM7-H1. PTB signatures were present more in the cohort of African American women and identification of these species early pregnancy may help predict the likelihood of PTB [42]. This large scale data set also analyzed the vaginal microbiome during pregnancy of Caucasian and African-American women [118]. Overall, alpha diversity in vaginal microbiome of non-pregnant women was higher than the pregnant women. In African-American women, the vaginal microbiome shifted towards a more Lactobacillus dominated profile from a highly diverse starting microbiome over the course of pregnancy [118]. Metabolic simplification happens during the transition where diversity decreases and most of the pathway reduction happens in first trimester in African pregnant women [118].

Currently, very few modeling studies exist for the vaginal microbiome. Constraint-based methods were used to reconstruct genome scale metabolic models (GEMs) for the several of the organisms identified in the vaginal microbiome: TM7-H1, BVAB1 and L. crispatus [42,118]. They used functional annotation information of these organisms with Enzyme Commission numbers to describe function and KEGG IDs for nomenclature. Another study has employed a community metabolic modeling approach where species-specific genes are considered based upon metagenomic data in the healthy and diseased state [117]. These genes are then paired with metabolic reactions to find the community metabolic potential (CMP) score for every metabolite in each sample [117]. CMP score variation shows the variation in the metabolite abundances which helped them to identify the crucial metabolites. Then, species, genes and reactions are identified which were responsible in giving that CMP score for a metabolite. Bacterial vaginosis associated species (Eggerthella sp. 1, Megasphaera type 1, and Mageeibacillus indolicus) have a substantial impact on the vaginal microbiome and were designated as “drivers” of species-metabolite dynamics which caused metabolic variation in the vaginal microbiome [117].

The human microbiome is an ecological setting where different microbial species are interacting with each other through metabolite and protein exchange and is dynamic and complex in nature [3]. The diversity of microorganisms currently identified is high (Figure 2) and the relationships between organisms can be either cooperative or competitive where microbes exchange the essential elements for their own benefit or the dominant microbe may try to exploit the maximum resources using its own metabolic network and secrete inhibitory agents against other microbes [154]. These interactions form the basis of the working of the entire human microbiome. From these points, it is clear that human microbiome is not solely characterized or dependent on the working of a single microbe or single species [34,155], but rather it must be studied as an interacting community. One approach that can facilitate studying the human microbiome as an interacting, dynamic community is community genome scale modeling [86]. However, challenges exist to utilizing genome scale modeling (GEM) including the low number of models for human microbiome species and the need for further improvements in computational frameworks for large-scale microbial communities (including appropriate objective functions and compartmentalization issues) [28,35,154]. Ongoing research is working on identifying and annotating novel human microbiome species which is needed as a basis for metabolic modeling. Furthermore, once models are generated, details on material (protein, metabolite) exchange and appropriate community objective functions need to be considered [6,21,36]. Advances in this manner will aid in understanding the integrated function of the microbiome (interactions and temporal dynamics) to give a better perspective of the functional microbiome [26,28,35].

The vaginal microbiome behaves differently than other microbiomes as consensus is starting to identify core species found in the majority of healthy women, i.e., Lactobacillus [143]. However, a diverse microbiome where Lactobacillus does not dominate has also been found in many healthy women so it is still difficult to predict the effects of the microbiome based upon the dominant species. For example, CST3 is a vagitype dominated by Lactobacillus iners, but CST3 is prone to bacterial vaginosis because L. iners interacts with the main causative agent of this disease; BVAB1 [143,147]. Hence, having Lactobacillus dominated microbiome does not mean that person is not at risk, but a high diversity vaginal microbiome almost always has a greater chance to transition to a diseased microbiome [143,144,145]. Specific to the vaginal microbiome, evidence is arising demonstrating that ethnicity may influence the vaginal microbiome composition. For example, the highly diverse vagitype CST4 is found in 40% of black and Hispanic population making them more prone to bacterial vaginosis and preterm birth [42,144,146]. The reason behind this disparity is currently not known. We have a better understanding of what species are present in the vaginal microbiome during pregnancy, preterm birth and bacterial vaginosis [42,118,148], but we need to know what functions individual organisms are performing during these healthy and disease states, what type of metabolite exchanges are happening between them, what kind of relationship, i.e., commensal or cooperative or competitive is shown by them. The answers to these questions can be obtained by performing more GEM studies on multiple vaginal microbes in their CSTs [42,118].

Human microbiome is a vast biological system where a great deal of knowledge is still unknown including novel species and genes. The four main anatomical sites of the human microbiome (oral, skin, gut and vaginal) harbor different sets of species and the species composition and the metabolic interactions among them changes in response to many different variables, both intrinsic and extrinsic. Furthermore, the species composition is also different for different individuals for all the microbiomes. The complexity and variability of the human microbiome make it a potentially daunting area of study, but the significance of the impacts of the human microbiome on human health warrant focused research attention. While we are still at the phase of identifying and understanding the constituent components of the human microbiome, it is necessary to push development of experimental and computational methods that can help understand the large, interconnected, and dynamic system of the human microbiome. Research studies in this direction will definitely help us to make bigger impact on public health by creating effective medicinal strategies. It is expected that computational analyses will be necessary to study the human microbiome to gain insight to the various metabolic mechanisms of the microbe, its interaction partners, and if scaled up, the microbial niche at a particular anatomical site and someday, the whole human microbiome.

