Current understanding of the human microbiome in glioma

There is mounting evidence that the human microbiome is highly associated with a wide variety of central nervous system diseases. However, the link between the human microbiome and glioma is rarely noticed. The exact mechanism of microbiota to affect glioma remains unclear. Recent studies have demonstrated that the microbiome may affect the development, progress, and therapy of gliomas, including the direct impacts of the intratumoral microbiome and its metabolites, and the indirect effects of the gut microbiome and its metabolites. Glioma-related microbiome (gut microbiome and intratumoral microbiome) is associated with both tumor microenvironment and tumor immune microenvironment, which ultimately influence tumorigenesis, progression, and responses to treatment. In this review, we briefly summarize current knowledge regarding the role of the glioma-related microbiome, focusing on its gut microbiome fraction and a brief description of the intratumoral microbiome, and put forward the prospects in which microbiome can be applied in the future and some challenges still need to be solved.

Brain tumor is one of the deadliest cancers, in which glioma is globally recognized as the most common primary brain tumor in the central nervous system (CNS) (1). Gliomas are defined as brain tumors of glial origin (2), which have been divided into 6 different families: (1) Adult-type diffuse gliomas (the majority of primary brain tumors in neuro-oncology practice of adults, e.g., glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), IDH-wildtype); (2) Pediatric-type diffuse low-grade gliomas (expected to have good prognoses); (3) Pediatric-type diffuse high-grade gliomas (expected to behave aggressively); (4) Circumscribed astrocytic gliomas (“circumscribed” referring to their more solid growth pattern, as opposed to the inherently “diffuse” tumors in groups 1, 2, and 3); (5) Glioneuronal and neuronal tumors (a diverse group of tumors, featuring neuronal differentiation); and (6) Ependymomas (now classified by site as well as histological and molecular features) (1). According to the classification of World Health Organization (WHO), glioma can be divided into 1, 2, 3, and 4 grade, and GBM, the most aggressive type of glioma, is classified by the WHO as a grade 4 brain tumor associated with high mortality (1). Currently, the primary treatments for glioma mainly include surgery resection, radiotherapy, pharmacotherapy, etc. (3). Unfortunately, the histological hallmark of GBM include microvascular proliferation, cellular heterogeneity, bilateral invasion, and extensive pseudopalisading necrosis, which are responsible for its invasion, resistance, and recurrence after various therapies (4, 5).In addition, the underlying mechanisms of glioma pathogenesis remain largely unclear.

However, at present, relatively few reports have systematically discussed the role of the gut microbiome and intratumoral microbiome in the initiation, progression, and therapeutic response of gliomas. In this review, we will explain not only the potential relationship between gliomas and the microbiome but also the possible mechanism of the tumor-associated microbiome in the tumorigenesis and development of glioma ( Figure 1 ). It is expected to illustrate the potential mechanism of microbial influence on glioma and provide a new direction for the diagnosis and treatment of gliomas.

The gut microbiome may be involved in the development, progress, and therapy of glioma through metabolic regulation on the epigenetic environments and the immune microenvironment (13, 29, 30). On the one hand, glioma tumorigenesis will change the metabolism of the human body. Glioma cells reprogram metabolism by dysregulating intracellular metabolites, thus glioma cells can proliferate rapidly (31). What’s more, the gut microbiome can regulate the development of glioma by changing the epigenetic landscape of tumor cells (32). On the other hand, the immune homeostasis of the brain requires the gut microbiome to play a role in the function of microglia, T cells, dendritic cells (DCs), and other immune cells (28). In addition, the central nervous system plays a critical role in the microbial composition and function, intestinal barrier, intestinal physiology, and whole-body immune system (33).

Metabolites circulating through blood vessels and lymphatic vessels are one of the important signal molecules produced by the gut microbiome (32), which play an important role in the initiation and development of gliomas ( Table 2 ).

Tryptophan (Trp) has been proved that play a critical role in cell proliferation (50). The metabolism of tryptophan is regulated directly or indirectly by the gut microbiome (51). The metabolites of tryptophan have immune and neuroregulatory functions (52, 53), which may bring new opportunities for the application and transformation of gut microbiome-related research in drug therapy.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor involved in regulating cell metabolism, proliferation, differentiation, cell death, and cell adhesion (34), which is widely and highly expressed in gliomas, especially in GBM (54). The gut microbiome is critically involved in dietary tryptophan metabolism and catalyzes tryptophan to produce AHR agonists. The latter binds to the AHR of astrocytes and gliomas to trigger related effects, including inducing T cell activation, regulating DC function, and recruiting tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) through hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) (55). Currently, a study demonstrated a function of the neomorphic enzymatic product of mutant IDH, R-2-hydroxyglutarate (R-2-HG), in regulating amino acid metabolism in immune cells (56). Paracrine R-2-hydroxyglutarate not only further impaired monocyteto-DC differentiation in IDH-mutant glioma but also delays DC maturation and specifically suppresses MHC class I/II-mediated antigen (cross-)presentation and co-stimulation by IL-6, which translates to reduced T cell activating capacities (57). What’s more, R-2-HG is taken up by myeloid cells to enzymatically induce TDO2-dependent activation of the kynurenine pathway and the AHR (56), which excessively degraded tryptophan resulting in an amino acid starvation-like response that triggers the expression of LAT1–CD98, a key transporter for tryptophan in proliferating cells (58), which was previously linked to T cell activation and differentiation (59). At the same time, AHR in DC and TAM can also act on CD8+T cells to regulate the growth of glioma (60). What’s more, by consuming endogenous tryptophan, glioma cells activate AHR and to inhibit T cell function, induce T cell apoptosis, promote CD39 expression, and induce the differentiation of T cells mediated by interleukin 10 (IL-10) (61). AHR signaling pathway may modify metabolic pathways associated with amino acid, which inhibits the function of immune cells such as glioma-associated macrophages, T cells, antigen-presenting cells, astrocytes, and microglia, resulting in inhibitory changes in the immune microenvironment during the occurrence and development of gliomas, and promoting glioma invasion and migration (60, 62). The key factors for activation of the AHR pathway include IL4 inducible factor 1 (IL4I1), indoleamine-2, 3-dioxygenase 1/2 (IDO1/2) and Tryptophan 2, 3-dioxygenase (TDO). IL4I1 was positively correlated with AHR activity and negatively correlated with patient survival in both high-grade and low-grade gliomas (63). IDO1/TDO activated the Kynurenine-AHR signaling pathway, which was positively correlated with the pathological grade and Ki67 index of glioma as well as negatively correlated with overall survival (64). In conclusion, AHR is an important factor of the gut microbiome affecting the progression of glioma.

Arginine, a semi-essential amino acid in humans, is critical for cell division, healing of wounds, removing ammonia from the body, immune function, and the release of hormones (65, 66). Arginine-derived metabolites, including polyamines and nitric oxide, may affect tumor growth. However, the gut microbiota can absorb dietary arginine to produce polyamines and nitric oxide (67, 68), which are released into the blood circulation system and then transferred to the brain through the blood-brain barrier (BBB). The polyamine may induce tumor cell proliferation and metastasis by up-regulating the expression of ornithine decarboxylase, spermidine, and spermine acetyltransferase, and Akt1 (39). At present, there is still a lot of controversy about the effect of nitric oxide on glioma cells, but its effect may largely depend on the concentration of nitric oxide, exposure time, cell type, and microenvironment (69). In addition, the gut microbiota can produce nitric oxide after reacting with superoxide radicals (70). Nitric oxide can interfere with T cell function by inducing T cell apoptosis (35, 36). Nitric oxide is more likely to cause damage to DNA and mitochondria in tumor cells to enhance the sensitivity of drug-resistant tumor cells to apoptosis during chemotherapy and immunotherapy (71).

In general, arginine starvation may have both beneficial and adverse effects on glioma. On the one hand, the gut microbiome depletes arginine in the tumor microenvironment, which inhibit T cell cycle regulators, thus inhibiting T cell proliferation (72). On the other hand, the consumption of nutritional arginine by the gut microbiome may be beneficial for the eradication of arginine-deficient tumors, which lack the argininosuccinate synthetase converting citrulline to arginine, and therefore can’t meet the high-energy demand in rapid proliferation (37, 38, 73). Arginine depletion in GBM can induce excessive autophagy, which will be toxic to tumor cells and may induce apoptosis (37, 38, 40).

Glutamate(Glu) is the most abundant excitatory neurotransmitter in the brain and plays a crucial role in brain structure and function including learning, memory, emotion, and cognition (74). Alpha-ketoglutarate (αKG), a product of Glu metabolism, is required in DNA demethylation. The gut microbiome can regulate the dynamic balance between αKG and Glu (41), and thus affect DNA methylation. At present, isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) gene mutation has been identified as an important biomarker of glioma. IDH1/IDH2 are NADP+-dependent enzymes that catalyze the oxidative decarboxylation of isocitrate to 2-oxoglutarate in cytosol and mitochondria (75). The mutation of the IDH1 and IDH2 protein leads to enzymes with neomorphic enzyme activity that results in the conversion of αKG to the metabolite D‐2‐hydroxyglutarate (D2HG) inhibiting αKG-dependent dioxygenase (76–78). Thus, the mutation of the IDH1 and IDH2 causes abnormal DNA and histone methylation, ultimately leading to widespread hypermethylation of cytosine-phosphate-guanine (CpG) islands (79, 80). The IDH mutations highlight the interaction between metabolism and epigenetics. Thus, the dynamic interaction between the gut microbiome and epigenetic modifications can contribute to regulating glioma growth and development (81).

Glutamine (Gln) is a crucial energy source for glioma cells In addition, Glu and Gln are both involved in energy metabolism and neurotransmission in CNS (82). Starvation therapy has also been shown to reduce the proliferation activity of GBM cells (42–45). However, more than half of the Glnwas synthesized in situ in CNS (83), as such the influence of Gln in the peripheral blood on the energy metabolism of glioma seems to be very limited. At present, most of the studies concerning energy metabolism of Gln in gliomas are confined to the CNS. Studies have shown that the Gln level in the peripheral blood circulation of glioma patients is lower than that of normal people (84). Gln may be used to compensate for the excessive energy consumption of glioma cells. The majority of Gln in the gut comes from the diet, and the rest is produced by various types of bacteria in the gut (85). In condition of intestinal lesions such as inflammatory bowel disease or irritable bowel syndrome where the permeability of the intestinal barrier and BBB was increased (86), the glutaminergic receptor in CNS is affected by the microbiome-gut-brain axis and in turn alters the energy metabolism of CNS. Moreover, changes in the gut microbiome can directly or indirectly alter the level of glutamine in the brain (41), ultimately affecting the energy supply of gliomas. Restricting calories and the ketogenic diet, which limit energy metabolism of glioma cells and induce metabolic oxidative stress and apoptosis, may be potential metabolic therapies for glioma (87, 88).

Short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), formed by the fermentation of undigested carbohydrates by gut probiotics such as Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium, can influence the glucose and energy metabolism (89, 90). The most common SCFAs included acetate, propionate, and butyrate (91). Studies have demonstrated that SCFAs can enter the circulation through the intestinal mucosa and regulate the maturation process and function of microglia (92). Microglia, known as brain macrophages, are essential for brain development and physiological functions (92). The deficiency of the gut microbiome can lead to defects in the morphology and function of microglia, which can be partly restored by replanting the complex gut microbiome (92). The disturbance of the abundance and composition of the gut microbiome that decreases circulatory SCFAs not only influences microglial maturation and function but also leads to a state of chronic stress, which has a profound effect on the development and prognosis of tumors through stress-related pathways (48).

In general, the role of gut microbiota-derived metabolites in the glioma microenvironment can be demonstrated in Figure 2 . However, it remains to be seen that whether these metabolites produced by the gut microbiome also disrupt the BBB and induce immunosuppression in the brain.

Although glioma seldom metastasize to other parts of the body, they can be seen as a systemic disease affected by and altering the homeostasis of the body’s immune system (28). The formation of a healthy brain and balanced brain immunity requires the gut microbiome, which plays a role in the function of microglia, T cells, DCs and other immune cells (33).

Previously, due to the existence of the BBB and the lack of a classical lymphatic drainage system, the brain has been considered an immune-privileged organ (98). The resultant disruption of BBB during the process of tumorigenesis may permit the entry of peripheral immune cells into the brain microenvironment, such as T cells, macrophages, and B cells (99). Specifically, a major character of the GBM immune microenvironment is the TAMs (100). In the process of gliomagenesis, due to the destruction of the BBB, the resulting bidirectional communication between immune cells and glioma cells creates an immunosuppressive microenvironment that promotes the survival and growth of tumor (101). Then, Glioma-associated microglia and macrophages are recruited to glioma tissues and can be polarized into M2-like cells, which become tumor-supportive and immunosuppressive (102, 103). The increase of M2-like cells in the brain was associated with GBM and negatively correlated with the survival time of glioma patients (104). Besides, previous studies have demonstrated that functional lymphatic vessels link CNS with lymphatic drainage, and that its dysfunction may related with brain cancer (105), further, showing the uniqueness of the brain as an immune-privileged organ (106). The lymphatic outflow of cerebrospinal fluid is reduced in GBM, thus more pro-inflammatory and chemokines can be captured in the glioma microenvironment (107).

Present studies have demonstrated that gut commensal bacteria of newborns can affect the development and function of the immune system (108). Moreover, the gut microbiome plays an indispensable role in the induction, training, regulation, and function of the host immune system (109, 110). In the presence of some gut commensal bacteria, human DCs can induce the differentiation of T helper (Th) cells into Th1 and Th17, promoting the secretion of pro-inflammatory factors (111). Studies suggested that B. fragilis can induce the differentiation of IL10-secreting Tregs, which can impair the anticancer immunity of Th1 and are related to the progression and invasiveness of gliomas (112). Moreover, interestingly, the certain gut microbiome may lead to immunosuppression, which may result in severe local immunosuppression in patients with GBM (113, 114).

Whereas the exact mechanism of the gut microbiome affecting human brain microglia remains unclear,. the structure and function of microglia are closely associated with the diversity and specificity of the gut microbiome. The smallest colonies of three kinds of bacteria (i.e., Bacteroides distasonis, Lactobacillus salivarius, and Clostridium cluster XIV) can maintain the activation and growth of microglia (115). Recently, a study, for the first time, found that two antibiotics that change the distribution of the gut microbiome can promote the growth of gliomas by inducing early damage of NK cells and phenotypic changes of microglia. In conclusion, the regulation of the gut microbiome can induce alterations of microglia and change the immune microenvironment of glioma.

It is reported that the gut microbiome plays a therapeutic role in several types of cancer. Antibiotics may impair the efficacy of chemotherapy and radiation since they upset the balance of the gut microbiome (118). Some gut microbiome can metabolize chemotherapeutic drugs, which leads to drug resistance (119, 120). Currently, temozolomide (TMZ) is a first-choice alkylating agent considered as a gold standard chemotherapeutic drug for newly diagnosed and recurrent GBM (121). Although the new alkylating agent TMZ can improve the outcome of GBM patients and has an impact on the treatment of malignant gliomas, GBM is still an incurable disease. Orally administered TMZ is converted to 5-(3-methyltriazen-l-yl) imidazole-4-carboximide (MTIC) in the blood (122, 123). MTIC is broken down to methyldiazonium cation and 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide (AIC) (122). Subsequently, methyldiazonium cation transfers its methyl group to DNA, RNA, and cellular proteins (123). These methyl groups are transferred to the 6th position oxygen atoms of guanine and O6-methylguanines are formed. Methylation on the O6 position of guanine is a cytotoxic lesion, which stimulates the mismatch of nucleotide bases during DNA replication (124). If O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) mediated repair does not occur, mismatch repair(MMR) proteins identify mispairing in the newly synthesized strand and thymine excision or DNA damage, followed by cell cycle arrest, leading to programmed cell death (125). Besides, MGMT promoter methylation can predict responsiveness to alkylating chemotherapies in glioblastoma. MGMT testing to select patients with glioblastoma for clinical trials is feasible, and withholding TMZ from patients without MGMT promoter methylation is justified in this context.

Other immunotherapies, such as chimeric antigen receptor T cell (CAR-T) therapy, oncolytic virotherapy, and tumor vaccine therapy, have also been widely studied in the treatment of GBM (140, 141). The first CAR-T cell therapy in GBM, interleukin-13 receptor α 2(IL13Rα2), is the target (142). With the deepening ofresearch, more and more targets have been excavated. Three Phase I trials of CAR T cells targeting IL13Ralpha2, Her2/CMV, and EGFRvIII in the treatment of recurrent GBM have shown promising results (143, 144). However, as there is a lack of clinical efficacy in the application, CAR-T therapy has not been used in the clinical treatment of GBM. Moreover, oncolytic virotherapy and tumor vaccine for GBM treatment is still in the clinical trial stage. None of these treatments have been proved clinically. Currently, few studies are showing that the gut microbiome has an effect on these treatments. Interestingly, studies have demonstrated that the regulation of the gut microbiome can enhance PD-L1 therapy (145). What’s more, there are common immunological characteristics between immune checkpoint therapy and these immunotherapies. Consequently, the regulation of the gut microbiome may have the potential to improve the efficacy of these immunotherapies (146). We speculate that the gut microbiome can be used to maximize the effectiveness of existing anti-tumor approaches, and could even be used as a biomarker to predict the prognosis and therapy response of glioma patients (147). However, further studies are needed to determine the detailed functions of certain gut microbiome components in the treatment of gliomas.

The gut microbiome is known to modulate anti-tumor immune responses and can predict the efficacy of treating with immune checkpoint inhibitors in cancer patients (148). Nevertheless, the intratumoral microbiome, which directly interacts with the local tumor microenvironment and tumor immune microenvironment, intuitively, may have an immediate and ultimate effect on the progression and therapeutic effect of cancer (149).

Traditionally, commensal microbiota of tumor-bearing tissues is considered resident only in tumors direct contact with the outside, such as gastrointestinal cancers. However, evidence have been emerging that broader types of cancer, originating from some “sterile” organs, may harbor microbes.

Although there are only a few studies on the existence and roles of intratumoral microbiota in gliomas, we believe that it will become one of the key issues in elucidating the pathogenesis and exploring treatments of glioma, given the emerging blockbuster papers interpreting the important physiological roles of microbiota in tumors such as breast cancer.

Exploring possible origins of intratumoral microbiota is another key point, which will help us find ways to detect their presence, determine the cause and effect with tumors, and explore their physiological roles.

The origins of the microbiome in glioma remain to be clarified. Here are some possible sources of the intratumoral microbiome in the brain. One possibility is that bacteria may already exist in brain tissues before the occurrence of the tumor, which subsequently induce the initiation and migration of gliomas. Alternatively, the gliomas may change the local microenvironment, allowing bacteria to invade the tumor from other places. After tumorigenesis, the destruction of the BBB and cell barriers, coupled with relative immunosuppression, may increase the likelihood of bacteria moving through the circulatory system to the normally sterile sites (151). Furthermore, gut bacteria may enter the brain through the vagus nerve innervating the gut or crossing the BBB (152). Besides, bacteria may gain access into the brain through neuronal retrograde transport via the trigeminal nerve, olfactory nerve, and facial nerve connected to the brain (153, 154). The finding that intracellular bacteria reside in tumors in the aforementioned study also raises the possibility that these bacteria are transported into tumor-bearing tissues along with the migration of immune and cancer cells (11). However, all of these speculations have yet to be verified.

Studies began to demonstrate that there is a non-negligible correlation between intratumoral microbiome and tumor pathological characteristics. A potential carcinogenesis mechanism of pancreatic cancer has been proposed in a report that the inflammation induced by the innate immune response to pathogenic bacteria was associated with pancreatic carcinogenesis (155). LPS has been shown to promote the development of pancreatic cancer by blocking the MyD88-dependent pathway while blocking TLR4 and MyD88-independent pathway has a protective effect on pancreatic cancer (156). Similar mechanisms concerning the inflammatory response of the innate immune system may be implicated in other types of cancer. Recently, Fu et al. demonstrated that the depletion of intratumor bacteria significantly reduced lung metastasis without affecting primary tumor growth in a spontaneous murine breast-tumor model (157). During metastasis colonization, the intratumoral bacteria carried by circulating tumor cells enhance their resistance to fluid shear stress by reorganizing actin cytoskeleton, thus promoting the survival of host cells. Their further study demonstrated that intratumoral administration of specific bacterial strains isolated from tumor-resident microbiota promoted metastasis in two mouse tumor models with significantly different levels metastatic potential (157). These findings suggest that intratumoral bacteria are functional and may be involved in tumor tumorigenesis and development, which provides a research direction for the mechanism of intratumoral bacteria in the future. Moreover, intracellular microbiome may be a potential target for early prevention of many kinds of cancer metastasis.

In general, research regarding the role of the intratumoral microbiome in the occurrence and development of tumors is still limited, let alone gliomas. Whether the intratumoral microbiome is involved in tumorigenesis or if it is only a bystander effect caused by the tumor microenvironment, which has not been fully clarified. Although, some researchers consider that the intratumoral microbiome may be inducing tumorigenesis through related mechanisms results in genetic alterations and initiation of the glioma. In general, the potential roles of the microbiome in glioma requires to be further validation.

There are three types of links between microbiome and cancer, which allows microbiota to be described as potential biomarkers in cancer, including increase or decrease in numbers of specific organisms, the use of a combination model of several organisms as predictors and evaluating their performance, and finally altering in microbial diversity indexes that give an overall landscape of the microbial community (158). These associations can be extended to study and identify specific intratumoral microbiome as biomarkers of gliomas.

So far, there is no evidence in the literature on intratumoral microbiota as a potential biomarker of glioma. And due to relatively low biomass of the tumor microbiome and the possible contamination and interference in the process of sample collection and sequencing, the diagnostic value of the intratumoral microbiome is undermined. Also, due to a requirement of biopsy samples, the diagnostic value of sequencing and analysis-based methods is limited (163). More research is needed to improve experimental methods and procedures if the intratumoral microbiome is to be used to diagnose and predict tumors

In the past few decades, microbiome studies have provided a great deal of evidence linking the human microbiome and cancer. The tumor microbiome is claimed to play a role in regulating tumor progression and affect the therapeutic efficacy, which has also been increasingly attracting attention. Therefore, understanding the relationship between microbiome and gliomas is beneficial to elucidate the pathogenesis and corresponding molecular characteristics of gliomas. Moreover, it may eventually be transformed into useful clinical biomarkers for the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of gliomas ( Figure 3 .). Although the role of the glioma microbiome has not yet been fully determined, mounting evidence and research in these areas are accumulating.

To summarize, tumor microbiology is an exciting field to be explored. It is a desire to find new treatment strategies for glioma, including targeted and individualized therapy, to maximize the effect of anti-tumor therapy. More attention is worth paying to explore the value of the glioma-associated microbiome as a potential biomarker of diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis. The establishment of collaborative multidisciplinary networks will be based on enhancing knowledge and optimizing resources. We should spare no effort to overcome the challenges and ensure that we are ready at all times.

The work presented here was carried out in collaboration among all authors. HS and JL conceived and designed the review; JL wrote the paper. CW and TL helped with literature searching and summarizing. HS and JZ revised the manuscript. All authors read, commented on, and approved this manuscript.

This research was supported by Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (2020A1515010038); Pearl River Science and Technology Nova Program of Guangzhou (201710010047); Presidential Foundation of Zhujiang Hospital of Southern Medical University (No. yzjj2018rc03).

We thank Mr. Jiawen Chen and Miss. Jinyuan Ma for helpful discussions and insightful comments.

Figures in this manuscript were created with BioRender.com.

The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be constructed as a potential conflict of interest.

All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

