Mechanistic insights into the attenuation of intestinal inflammation and modulation of the gut microbiome by krill oil using in vitro and in vivo models

The anti-inflammatory property of ω-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) has been exploited in the management of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) with promising results. However, it remains unclear if PUFA play a significant role in the resolution of inflammation and promotion of mucosal healing. Krill oil (KO) is a natural product rich in PUFA and the potent antioxidant, astaxanthin. In this study, we attempted to understand the mechanisms through which KO modulates the gut microbiome and metabolome using in vitro and in vivo colitis models and a multi-omics based approach.

KO significantly decreased LPS-induced IL1β and TNFα expression in human macrophages in vitro in a dose-dependent manner by regulating a broad spectrum of signaling pathways, including NF-κB and NOD-like receptor signaling, and displayed a synergistic effect with COX2 and IKK2 inhibitors in attenuating inflammatory pathways. Moreover, KO was involved in the resolution of inflammation by promoting M2 polarization and enhancing macrophage-mediated intracellular bacterial killing. Parasite-dependent intestinal mucosal damage and microbial dysbiosis induced by Trichuris suis infection in pigs were partially restored by feeding KO. KO supplementation reduced the abundance of Rickettsiales and several species of Lactobacillus, which were among the important features identified by random forests analysis contributing to classification accuracy for KO supplementation. Several microbial signatures with strong predictive power for the status of both infection and supplementation were identified. The inhibitory effect of KO on histidine metabolism was identified using untargeted metabolomics. KO supplementation reduced several key metabolites related to histamine metabolism by suppressing the expression of a gene encoding l-histidine decarboxylase in the colon mucosa and reducing histamine biosynthesis of microbial origin. Moreover, the pro-resolving properties of KO were validated using a Citrobacter rodentium-induced Th1-dependent colitis murine model. Further, microbial signatures with high prediction accuracy for colitis-related pathophysiological traits were identified in mice.

The findings from this study provided a mechanistic basis for optimizing microbiome-inspired alternative therapeutics in the management of IBD. The microbial signatures identified, particularly those with strong predictive accuracy for colitis phenotypes, will facilitate the development of biomarkers associated with appropriate dietary intervention to manage intestinal inflammation.

Video abstract. video file.(43M, mp4)

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a disease of global concern with a growing prevalence in children and young adults. Numerous intertwined biotic and abiotic factors, including host genetics, immunity, diet, gut microbiome, and environmental variables, play important roles in the pathogenesis of IBD [1]. In spite of the currently available therapeutic options for IBD, which include antibiotics, aminosalicylates, corticosteroids, immunosuppressants, and novel biologics that target TNFα, the medical needs still remain unmet. A range of adverse effects associated with these drugs have been documented [2, 3]. Novel biologics are designed to reduce these side effects. However, limited initial responsiveness and the high cost associated with biologics are a serious concern [1, 2]. Because of these issues, a growing number of IBD patients are turning to complementary and alternative strategies for help.

Chronic inflammation, which likely results from the disruption of pro-resolving pathways [13], is a hallmark of IBD. Intestinal macrophages are known to play an important role during the resolution of inflammation [14, 15]. In helminth-mediated T helper (Th) 2 models, alternatively activated or M2 macrophages [16] are polarized to facilitate tissue repair by inhibiting classically activated macrophages and elevating arginase-1 production. However, excessive M2 macrophage activation may impair intestinal protection against enteric bacterial infection and can aggravate intestinal injury [17]. Infection of pigs with the whipworm, Trichuris suis, induces a protective Th2 immune response and decreases the production of proinflammatory cytokines [4, 18]. Notably, the anti-inflammatory properties of T. suis have been exploited as a complementary therapy in IBD with some success [19–21]. In this study, we investigated the effect of KO on the attenuation of intestinal inflammation and the promotion of the appropriate resolution of inflammation and subsequent mucosal healing, a key therapeutic objective in the management of IBD, in both in vitro and porcine T. suis models using multi-omics approaches. We identified molecular and microbial signatures with high predictive accuracy for indicators of colitis pathophysiology. Furthermore, we validated some key findings using a Citrobacter rodentium inducing Th1-dependent colitis model in mice.

Treatment of differentiated THP1 human macrophages with KO significantly decreased lipopolysaccharides (LPS)-induced IL1β and TNFα mRNA expression in a dose-dependent manner (Fig.
1a, b). No cytotoxicity was detected at a dose up to 320 μg/ml of KO after a 72-h incubation (Fig.
1c). Approximately 53% reduction in LPS-induced IL1β and TNFα mRNA levels could be achieved with 160 μg/ml KO (p < 0.01). The synergistic effect of KO with two anti-inflammatory compounds, celecoxib (COX2 inhibitor, CX) and TPCA1 (IKK2 inhibitor), was investigated using RNAseq-based transcriptome analysis. Treatment of differentiated THP1 cells with LPS, TPCA1, or KO induced unique transcriptomes as indicated by the tight clustering of each group distinct from each other and the control group in a PCA plot (Supplementary Fig. S1 and S2). In contrast, CX clustered near KO suggesting that CX may be inducing similar transcriptomic changes as KO. Furthermore, KO-TPCA1 also clustered near KO and CX and was quite separated from TPCA1 suggesting that treatment with KO had a more dominant influence on the transcriptome than TPCA1. KO inhibited the expression of both COX1 and COX2 (FDR < 0.05), which likely provided a partial explanation of the observed transcriptome patterns between CX and KO. Moreover, KO in combination with either CX or TPCA1 resulted in a further reduction over KO alone in the expression of pro-inflammatory genes, such as IL6, NOD2, and CCL2 (Fig.
1b–g).

The effect of KO on macrophage phagocytosis and intracellular bacterial killing of THP1 human macrophages was also evaluated. The number of C. rodentium cells engulfed by macrophages was slightly increased in response to treatment with KO, compared to that in control untreated cells (Fig. S6). Moreover, the macrophage-mediated intracellular bacterial killing was significantly enhanced by KO (p = 0.0176) as the number of bacterial cells surviving the killing was markedly reduced (Fig.
2f). Together, our in vitro data provided evidence that KO had a modulatory effect in both the initial and pro-resolving phases of inflammation and that it may possess properties to promote mucosal healing.

A Th1/Th2/Th17 imbalance is an important driving force in the pathogenesis of colitis [22]. Recently, the Th2-like propensity of parasite excretory/secretory proteins has been exploited to ameliorate DSS-induced colitis via rebalancing the Th1/Th2 immune response [23]. The findings from our in vitro experiment which showed that KO inhibited Th1 immune responses and appeared to promote M1/M2 macrophage polarization inspired us to utilize a Th2-driven porcine colitis model to investigate anti-inflammatory properties of KO and its role in promoting the resolution of inflammation. Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining shows that colon histological damage induced by T. suis infection was markedly improved by a 28-day KO supplementation (Fig.
3a). The infection resulted in a significant increase in crypt length, from 387.60 ± 40.86 in normal controls to 539.90 ± 113.38 μm (p = 0.0004). KO supplementation resulted in the partial reversal of the infection-induced increase in crypt length to a level observed in uninfected animals (464.00 ± 67.16, p = 0.043) (Fig.
3b). Colon smooth muscle thickness and overall histopathological scores were also marginally improved by KO (Fig.
3c). The number of goblet cells was notably increased by KO, particularly in infected animals (Fig.
3d). Further, there was a moderate reduction in T. suis larvae recovered from the cecum and colon of infected pigs fed KO (724.4 ± 263) versus those fed soybean oil (SO) as a control (861.3 ± 309). Underlying these morphological changes were the alterations in the tissue transcriptome. RNAseq analysis using the STAR-DESeq2 pipeline identified a total of 96 genes that were significantly affected by the infection in the proximal colon (Fig. S7A).

At least three TF binding sites significantly enriched in the purple module were detected using the TRANSFAC_and_JASPAR_PWMs function in the Enrichr pipeline [25]. For example, the potential binding sites for NR5A1 were significantly enriched in this module (p = 0.0022; Fig. S7D). Other two TFs, MZF1 5-13 and LTF, were also significantly enriched in the purple module (p < 0.05).

Trichuris infection significantly reduced various indices for alpha diversity in pigs (Fig.
4a), and feeding pigs with KO significantly increased two richness-based indices (Fig.
4b). For example, Chao 1 was increased from 1557.36 (± 242.78; SD) in pigs fed SO to 1702.13 (± 167.95) in pigs fed KO, regardless of the infection status (p = 0.0172). Phylogenetic diversity (PD) whole tree was also enhanced by KO from 63.86 to 68.23 (p = 0.0439). KO supplementation had no effect on species evenness, such as Shannon and Simpson indices. However, the infection had a more profound effect on gut microbial diversity, resulting in a significant reduction of the number of observed operational taxonomic units (OTU), PD whole tree, Shannon, and Simpson (p < 0.01, Fig.
4a). Unlike the dietary supplement, infection also had a significant impact on beta diversity (Fig.
4c). The results of permutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) suggest that up to 14.7% of the variance in the gut microbial composition can be explained by the effect of infection (permutation based p = 0.0001) while the KO factor only explained 2.4% of the variation. There were no significant interactions between infection and dietary supplementation. Non-metric dimensional scaling (NMDS) analysis based on Jensen Shannon divergence (Fig.
4c, d) also supported the hypothesis that the primary factor affecting the gut microbial composition and structure was the infection status, in agreement with the results obtained using analysis of similarities (ANOSIM, Fig. S8). Notably, feeding KO helped restore the microbial network structure in the infected condition (Fig. S9). While the number of the input OTUs for network construction from various groups were similar, T. suis infection decreased gut microbial interactions, as network nodes were reduced from 675 to 475 in response to infection in pigs fed SO. KO supplementation restored the number of nodes (654) and links (2025) to the normal level. One of the indicators of the infection-induced microbial dysbiosis was altered Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes (F/B) ratios. In the background of SO or KO supplementation, infection resulted in a significant decrease in the abundance of the phylum Firmicutes with a concomitant increase in that of Bacteroidetes. However, the infection-associated reduction in the F/B ratio was significantly improved by KO (Fig.
4e, p < 0.05).

A microbial signature or balance with high accuracy in predicting the infected from uninfected groups was identified using selbal [29]. This balance, consisting of the two genera, Phascolarctobacterium and an unclassified genus in Desulfovibrionaceae, as a numerator and Faecalibacterium as a denominator, had an area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) of 0.953 (mean cross validation or CV-AUC = 0.78) for the infection status (Fig.
5e). A negative balance value in the infected group suggested that the two genera in the numerator had a much lower abundance than that in the denominator (Faecalibacterium). Moreover, a balance consisting of two genera in the phylum Proteobacteria, including an unclassified genus in Rickettsiales (numerator) and an unclassified genus in Deltaproteobacteria (denominator), had high predictive accuracy for the KO supplementation (AUC = 0.812, Fig.
5f). The KO group had a much lower balance than SO, suggesting that the reduction in the relative abundance of the unclassified genus in Rickettsiales by KO played an important role in model performance and may have critical functional relevance. While considering infection as a covariant, a new balance, with the addition of two genera, Cronobacter and [Clostridium] as numerator and denominator, respectively, to the original two genera, resulted in an improved predictive accuracy for the dietary supplementation (AUC = 0.892).

Pigs fed a 4-week KO supplementation had a significant increase in serum EPA and DHA levels (Wilcoxon p < 0.001, Table S3). A slight but nevertheless significant increase in gut acetate concentration was observed in pigs fed KO (p < 0.05), leading to a marginal elevation in total short-chain fatty acid levels. Two balances with strong predictive power for both gut luminal acetate (Fig. S10A) and EPA values (Fig. S10B) were identified. Elevated EPA and DHA levels in the gut luminal contents of pigs fed KO were absorbed into the bloodstream, as indicated by a 2.5-fold increase in these PUFA in the serum (p < 0.001), compared to what was observed in pigs fed SO. Docosapentaenoate (ω-3 DPA) levels were also significantly elevated in the serum in response to KO; however, the serum level of pro-inflammatory ω-6 DPA (22:5n6) was significantly reduced in KO fed pigs (Table S3).

Network module-trait relationships were investigated using a Pearson correlation analysis. In the infected pigs fed SO, module #2 was negatively correlated with both histamine and 1-methylhistamine values (p < 0.05) while module #4 was negatively correlated with the latter (r = – 0.86, p = 0.001; Fig.
7a). A notable attribute of these two modules was that the majority of nodes (OTUs) belong to the order Clostridiales. In the network inferred from the infected pigs supplemented with KO, module #13 was negatively correlated with 1-methylhistamine (r = – 0.72, p = 0.0200). Eight of the nine nodes in this module belong to Clostridiales. Together, these findings suggested that strong microbial interactions of the species in the order Clostridiales may reduce gut 1-methylhistamine values. More intriguingly, module #14 (Fig.
7b) in the infected and KO supplemented network had a strong and positive correlation with both histamine (r = 0.77, p = 0.0090) and 1-methylhistamine (r = 0.82, p = 0.0040). Of note, all OTUs in module #14 belong to the genus Lactobacillus. While further experimental validation is still needed, these findings suggested that promoting strong microbial interactions using pre- and probiotics, among those species in Lactobacillus and Clostridiales, may have important modulatory effects on histidine metabolism.

To validate the importance and involvement of Lactobacillus-related species in regulating anti-inflammatory responses of KO, we used a C. rodentium-induced colitis model in C3H/HeNCr mice. Unlike Th2-inducing T. suis, C. rodentium induced a distinct Th1/Th17 immune response [17]. The mice infected with C. rodentium showed a significant loss in body weight and a notable increase in the spleen index (Fig.
8a, b, p < 0.05). The colon length and colon index, defined as colon weight in a 5.0-cm-long colon cylinder divided by total bodyweight, were also significantly affected by infection. Feeding KO partially reversed the body weight loss and improved the spleen index, compared to mice in the infected group (p < 0.05). The number of mucosa-attached C. rodentium bacterial load (per gram of colon tissue samples) was significantly decreased by KO, from 7.59 ± 0.57 (log colony forming units or cfu/g) in the infected group (CM) to 6.85 ± 0.82 (log cfu/g) (Fig.
8c, p < 0.05). The number of inflammatory infiltrates induced by C. rodentium was reduced in mice fed KO (Fig.
8d). Moreover, KO supplementation resulted in a significant decrease in the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as TNF, IL1β, IL12, IL17A, IL22, and CCL2, from a level elevated by C. rodentium infection (Fig.
8e).

C. rodentium infection had a profound impact on gut microbial composition. A total of 18 genera had altered abundance in the colitis mice as detected by ANCOM, compared to healthy controls. For example, the abundance of Sutterella was significantly increased by ~ 860-fold in the colitis model compared with healthy controls. A microbial dysbiosis index (MDI) was defined as an inverse log ratio of the sum abundance of Coprococcus and Bacteroides to the abundance of SMB53. As Fig.
8f shows, compared to healthy controls, the colitis mice had a significantly higher MDI (Wilcoxon p = 2.20 × 10−5). Feeding KO resulted in a significant improvement in MDI, from 0.74 in the colitis mice to 0.23 in mice fed KO (p = 4.10 × 10−5). KO also affected three of the 18 genera significantly altered by infection, SMB53, Erwinia, and Bifidobacterium. Notably, KO reversed the significant increase (~ 2800-fold) in the abundance of SMB53 induced by infection to the baseline level. All three genera were the most important features contributing to the accuracy in classifying KO from the phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) group by RF (Fig.
8g). Both RF and sPLA-DA algorithms ranked SMB53, Erwinia, and Bifidobacterium, in this order, as the top three important features between KO and PBS groups. KO also had an important impact on the abundance of several OTUs related to Lactobacillus. The abundance of an OTU assigned to Lactobacillus was reversed to the baseline, from the > 2000-fold increase induced by infection. At least three bacterial species, Clostridium perfringens, L. reuteri, and L. vaginalis followed a similar trend (Fig.
8h). Lactobacillus and an unclassified genus in the order Lactobacillales were among the important features in KO classification by RF (Fig.
8g). Further, SFB were present in the gut of normal mice at a low abundance and became undetectable in the infected mice. As a result, Candidatus Arthromitus was ranked as one of the important features contributing to the classification accuracy between the C. rodentium infection status in mice (data not shown).

C. rodentium infection and KO supplementation in mice had a marked effect on several colon pathophysiological parameters, such as colon length, colon index, spleen index, and C. rodentium counts per gram of the colon tissue. A global balance consisting of SMB53 (numerator) and Bacteroides (denominator) accurately predicted KO supplementation from PBS controls (CV-AUC = 1.0, Fig.
9v). The balance values were negative, suggesting that the relative abundance of SMB53 was much lower than that of Bacteroides. Lower balance values indicated that KO supplementation was associated with a significant reduction in the abundance of SMB53 and a concurrent increase in that of Bacteroides. A microbial signature consisting of Bacteroides and Trabulsiella classified the microbial communities of the infected and uninfected mice with high accuracy (CV-AUC = 0.92, Fig.
9b). A microbial signature, consisting of Odoribacter (numerator) and an unclassified genus in RF32 (denominator), had a strong predictive power for colon length (R2 = 0.864) while a microbial signature consisting of Trabulsiella and Lactococcus and Eubaterium had a strong predictive accuracy for the colon index (R2 = 0.888, Fig.
9c). Moreover, a microbial signature of Trabulsiella (numerator) and Coprococcus (denominator) strongly predicted C. rodentium counts in the colon (R2 = 0.687; Fig.
9d). Of note, there were two OTUs assigned to the genus Citrobacter while seven OTUs were assigned to the genus Trabulsiella (and four of them annotated to T. farmeri) using the Greengenes database in this study. The European Nucleotide Archive suggests that the Greengenes assignment of Trabulsiella may be incorrect [31]. The representative sequences of the OTU involved also mapped to Citrobacter in the Ribosomal Database Project database but at a 90% similarity level. Together, these data suggest that the genus Trabulsiella identified in the mouse model may be due to Citrobacter.

Dietary supplements rich in PUFA, such as fish oil, have been widely used in the management of various diseases, including colitis. In recent years, consuming KO has gained popularity due to its advantages over traditional fish oil [32, 33]. Rich in ω-3 PUFA (up to 31.5%), particularly in readily absorbed phospholipid forms, KO is known to have improved bioavailability. Moreover, KO contains a potent antioxidant, astaxanthin, up to 873.0 mg per kg, and has the potential to reduce oxidative stress [11]. In this study, we demonstrated that KO possesses strong anti-inflammatory activities by modulating a broad range of signaling pathways, including the NF-κB and NOD signaling pathways and inhibits pro-inflammatory cytokines in vitro. The findings are in a good agreement with published reports that KO exerts its inhibitory effect at the initial phase or onset of inflammation [11].

In the murine C. rodentium-induced colitis model, the abundance of at least 18 genera was significantly increased, compared to healthy controls. For example, the abundance of Erwinia and Sutterella was > 500-fold higher while that of Ruminococcus and Coprococcus was significantly lower in colitis mice, consistent with previous findings in CD patients [54]. Moreover, several predictive balances for colitis-related phenotypes were identified. A balance consisting of Odoribacter and an unclassified genus in RF32 had a high predictive accuracy for colon length (R2 = 0.864). Odoribacter has been shown to have a decreased abundance in pediatric CD patients, compared to healthy controls [55]. Similarly, two microbial signatures, Trabulsiella and Sutterella and an unclassified genus in S24-7 and Trabulsiella and Lactococcus and Eubaterium, were strongly predictive for colon weight (R2 = 0.922) and colon index (R2 = 0.888), respectively. Sutterella is known to be implicated in several diseases, including IBD [56] and autism [57]. The direct link between increased Sutterella abundance and IBD may involve the gut-brain axis [58]. The role of Sutterella in the pathogenesis of colitis should be examined in future studies. While the relative abundance of a single taxon may be less relevant, balances consisting of a group of taxa can provide a better discrimination for colitis-related phenotypes, and thus may serve as a valuable biomarker for colitis severity.

We examined the effect of KO supplementation on both the initial and pro-resolving phases of inflammation. KO inhibited the expression of Th1 and Th17-related cytokines and promoted the bactericidal activities of macrophages in vitro. KO partially restored microbial dysbiosis in the models of infection-induced colitis by increasing species richness and modulating microbial interactions. Further, the inhibitory effects of KO on key metabolites in histidine metabolism of both host and microbial origin contributed to its anti-inflammatory activities. Future direction will include the exploration of synergistic effect of KO with conventional small molecule drugs with respect to promoting the proper resolution of intestinal inflammation.

Krill oil (KO) samples were provided by Jedwards International (Braintree, MA, USA). The lot used in this study contained 41.0% total phospholipids. EPA and DHA contents were 23.3% and 13.4%, respectively. Moreover, KO contained a potent antioxidant, astaxanthin, at the concentration of approximately 873.0 mg/kg. The detailed KO composition analysis is listed in Table S1.

THP1 cells, an immortalized monocyte-like cell line derived from the peripheral blood of a child with acute monocytic leukemia, were obtained from ATCC (Manassas, VA, USA) and used for in vitro experiments. THP1 cells were differentiated using phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) as a model for human macrophages [59]. Briefly, THP1 monocytes were grown at 37 °C in 5% CO2 with RPMI-1640 medium (ATCC) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and 50 U/ml of penicillin and 50 μg/ml of streptomycin (ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA, USA). Cells were seeded onto T175 flasks at a density of 5 × 105 cells per ml and differentiated with PMA at 25 ng/ml for 48 h with a daily medium change. After PMA differentiation, KO cytotoxicity was determined by a Trypan blue dye exclusion assay at various dose levels, up to 320 μg/ml for 72 h. KO emulsion was prepared according to a published protocol [60] and used for all subsequent experiments. The anti-inflammatory activities of KO and other inhibitors, alone or in combinations, were evaluated on PMA differentiated THP1 cells. The compounds were added to the media for a total of 48 h (fresh compounds were replaced every 24 h) as follows: KO at 160 μg/ml, 20 μM celecoxib (Sigma, St Louis, MO, USA), 1 μM TPCA1 (TP, Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA), KO + celecoxib (KC), and KO + TPCA1 (KT), respectively. After 42-h incubation, LPS (Sigma) was added to the media at a final concentration of 10 ng/ml for 6 h. The equal volume of PBS was used for controls (NC). The assays were conducted with four to five replicates. The media were saved for ELISA assays, and macrophages were harvested for total RNA isolation.

The effect of KO on macrophage phagocytic and bactericidal activities was evaluated using Gentamicin protection assay [61]. PMA-differentiated THP1 cells were incubated in the media containing either KO (160 μg/ml) or PBS (negative controls) for 48 h. The cells were then carefully washed with antibiotic-free media and infected with C. rodentium at a desired multiplicity of infection of 10:1 at 37 °C for 60 min (T0). The C. rodentium culture is described below. After infection, cells were washed three times with cold PBS and incubated with gentamicin containing medium (100 mg/ml) for 2 h (T1). Gentamicin kills extracellular bacteria that are not engulfed by macrophages while intracellular bacteria engulfed are not affected by this antibiotic. The cells at each time point were washed with sterile PBS three times and then lysed immediately in 0.2 ml sterile macrophage lysis buffer. The lysates were mixed with 0.8 ml sterile PBS; and serial dilutions were plated and counted after overnight incubation at 37 °C. The assays were repeated four times. The percentage of intracellular bacterial killing was calculated [61].

A nalidixic acid-resistant C. rodentium strain DBS100 (ATCC# 51459) was used in the experiment as previously described [62]. A frozen stock of C. rodentium was streaked out on a lysogeny broth (LB) agar plate and used to inoculate LB media and incubated overnight at 37 °C with shaking. The culture was expanded and grown to an OD600 of ~ 1.5. The bacteria were collected by centrifugation and then resuspended in LB at a concentration of 1.25 × 1010 cfu per ml the following morning. The dose was later confirmed by retrospective plating. The C. rodentium load in the tissue was determined by plating on LB agar plates with 50 μg/ml nalidixic acid for selection.

Forty pigs (White Yorkshire x Landrace; 9–10 weeks of age, mean bodyweight: 17.9 kg) were purchased from Oak Hill Genetics (Ewing, IL, USA). The pigs were raised with free access to food and water and randomized into four groups using a 2 × 2 factorial design with the parasitic whipworm T. suis infection as the first factor and the dietary treatment as the second factor. The four groups (N = 10 per group) were (1) uninfected and (2) infected fed SO; and (3) uninfected and (4) infected fed KO. The 20 infected pigs received a single oral dose of 5000 infective T. suis eggs while the 20 uninfected pigs received PBS. The infection progressed for 21 days after inoculation. SO and KO dietary treatments started 7 days prior to the infective egg inoculation and lasted for a total of 28 days. Pigs received a single daily dose of 1.5 g of either SO or KO individually mixed in a freshly made sugar-coated cookie dough ball in the morning. Assuming the mean human bodyweight is 60 kg, 1.5 g of daily ingestion of KO in this study is a human equivalent dose of 5.0 g.

For the validation experiment, 30 5-week-old C3H/HeNCr male mice were acquired from Charles River (Frederick, MD, USA) and fed a basal AIN-93M diet throughout the entire experimental duration (Research Diets, New Brunswick, NJ, USA). Two weeks after arrival, the mice were randomly divided into three groups (N = 10 per group): uninfected and supplemented with PBS (NC), C. rodentium infected and supplemented with PBS (CM), and C. rodentium infected and supplemented with KO. After acclimation, the mice in the CM and KO groups were infected with C. rodentium at a single dose of 2.5 × 109 cfu in 0.2 ml PBS by oral gavage. Uninfected mice received 0.2 ml of sterile PBS by oral gavage. The infection was allowed to progress for 12 days after inoculation. The mice in NC and CM groups received a daily dose of 0.2 ml PBS by oral gavage while the mice in the KO group received 0.2 ml KO in water emulsion (1.5 mg KO per mice per day) via oral gavage 5 days prior to the infection, which continued until the end of the experiment (i.e., a total of 17 days including 12 days after inoculation). Mice were monitored and weighed daily. Mice that lost more than 25% of their body weight and/or became moribund were euthanized. Feces were collected at various time points post-inoculation; also, the amount of C. rodentium secreted in feces was monitored. Mice were weighed and euthanized on day 12 post-infection. The spleen tissue was aseptically removed, weighed, homogenized in LB, and plated on LB agar plates with no antibiotic to enumerate the total bacterial load. The entire colon was excised and the length measured. The entire colon contents including fecal pellets were collected, mixed, and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen for metabolite profiling and microbiome analysis. The emptied colon was weighed and subdivided into 1-cm portions. One section was fixed in 10% neutral-buffered formalin (NBF, Sigma) for histology and one snap was frozen in liquid nitrogen for total RNA extraction and subsequent RNAseq transcriptome analysis. The colon section adjacent to the anus was homogenized in LB for bacterial load determination and expressed as log10 cfu/g of colon tissue.

Approximately 1 cm proximal colon tissue was fixed in 10% NBF and sectioned at 5-μm thickness for H&E staining. Goblet cells were stained using Alcian Blue and periodic acid-Schiff (PAS). Surface epithelial cells (0–4), edema (0–2), hemorrhage (0–2), crypt dilation (0–2), thickness of smooth muscle layer (0–3), and the number of inflammatory infiltrates (0–3) were scored based on a previously published system [63].

Total RNA was extracted using Trizol reagents (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Crude total RNA was further purified using a QIAGEN RNeasy Micro Kit with DNase digestion to remove possible genomic DNA contamination. The RNA concentration was measured using a Nanodrop ND-1000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific, Wilmington, MA, USA). RNA integrity was verified using a BioAnalyzer 2100 (Agilent, Palo Alto, CA, USA).

The WGCNA R package (v1.69) was used to generate co-expression networks for the porcine transcriptome dataset. The goodSamplesGenes function was applied to filter samples and genes with too many missing values and those with zero variance. The signed network was derived based on a biweight midcorrelation (bicor) method. The soft threshold power, R-squared, threshold was set to 0.85. The minimum module size was 30. The module preservation was calculated using the modulePreservation function in the package. Both network-based composite preservation statistics, Zsummary and medianRank, were derived. Empirical thresholds, Zsummary < 10 or medianRank > 8 as originally proposed [68], was used as the cutoff for non-preserved modules. The hub genes were defined as those with absolute module membership (kME) values ≥ 0.95. Functional enrichment analysis, such as the pathway and gene ontology (GO) function of the select modules, was conducted using the Enrichr package [25]. Furthermore, the TRANSFAC_and_JASPAR_PWMs section of the EnrichR algorithm was used to identify potential common transcription factors (TF) with p < 0.05 as a cutoff for significance.

ZymoBIOMICS Microbial Community Standard (Cat# D6300) was obtained from Zymo Research (Irvine, CA, USA) as a microbiome standard. In addition, nuclease-free water was used as a non-DNA template (negative) control (NDT). The standard consists of three Gram-negative and five Gram-positive bacteria and two yeasts with a defined composition. Both NDT and the standard were processed along with experimental samples following the same protocol and parameters to validate the entire workflow, from total DNA extraction and sequencing to data analysis.

The hypervariable V3–V4 regions of the 16S rRNA gene amplification and sequencing were performed [64]. The primer sequences were as follows: forward primer, 341/357F, CCTACGGGNGGCWGCAG; reverse primer, 805/785R: GACTACHVGGGTATCTAATCC. A total of 20 cycles of PCR amplification was conducted. The amplified products from individual samples were purified using Agencourt AMPure XP beads (Beckman Coulter, Danvers, MA, USA). The purified PCR products were quantified using BioAnalyzer 2100 DNA 7500 chips and pooled based on an equal molar ratio and their respective samples-specific barcodes. The pooled libraries were sequenced using an Illumina MiSeq Reagent Kit v3 (2 × 255 cycles) as described previously [70].

Feature or OTU tables were generated using the Quantitative Insights Into Microbial Ecology QIIME1 (v.1.9.1) [71] and QIIME2 (v 2019.07) pipelines [72].

Microbial signatures or balances were identified using selbal (R version 3.6.1) with default parameters [29]. The randomForest R package (v4.6-14) was used. Both RF classification and regression models were performed in the study. The OTU table generated from QIIME1 was first collapsed to a genus level count table. The abundance data were then transformed based on total sum scaling. The RF parameters used were as follows: the number of trees in the forest (ntree) was set to 501 and the number of features randomly sampled at each node in a tree (mtry) was 13. The Z-score, or scaled mean decrease accuracy, was calculated and used to rank feature or variable importance.

Short-, medium-, and long-chain fatty acids in gut colon contents were determined using 1290 Infinity II liquid chromatography (LC) Systems (Agilent) coupled to a Sciex 4000 QTRAP mass spectrometer (MS) with an electrospray ion source (ESI). Lipids were analyzed in the multiple-reaction monitoring mode with a negative ion detection. Each sample (100 mg) was carefully weighed, and 1.0 ml of methanol and 5-mm I.D. stainless metal balls was added to the sample and homogenized using an Mixer Mill MM 400 (Retsch, Haan, Germany). Homogenized samples were sonicated at 4 °C for 5 min followed by centrifugation at 21,000 g for 15 min. The supernatant collected (50 μl) was mixed with 25 μl of 200 mM 3-nitrophenylhydrazine (3NPH) and 25 μl of 150 mM 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl) carbodiimide (EDC)–HCl–6% HPLC grade pyridine solution according to a previously reported procedure [75]. These chemicals were obtained from Sigma. After a 40-min reaction at 30 °C, 400 μl of 60% methanol and 50 μl of an internal standard containing the 3NPH derivatives of fatty acid standards were added to the sample. After mixing, 5 μl was injected onto a Waters BEH C18 column for LC separation and subsequent MS analysis. Concentrations of fatty acids in each sample were calculated from internal standards and expressed as nmol per gram of gut contents.

Untargeted metabolomics analysis of gut contents was conducted as described [76]. Briefly, individual samples were accurately weighed. Methanol was added to precipitate proteins. After removing organic solvents, processed samples were characterized by an Ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC)–tandem mass spectrometer (UPLC-MS/MS), consisting of an Acquity UPLC System (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) and a Q Exactive high resolution/accurate mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) interfaced with a heated ESI source. Raw data were extracted, peaks were identified, and then quantified using the area under the curve method. Each compound was corrected in run/day blocks. The peak intensity data were normalized based on the median and log transformed. Normalized data were analyzed using a modified t test or Wilcoxon rank sum test to identify metabolites that may differ significantly among experimental groups. In addition, raw spectral data were analyzed using the XCMS pipeline with default parameters [77].



Publisher’s Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Supplementary information accompanies this paper at 10.1186/s40168-020-00843-8.

