The human microbiome in disease and pathology

This narrative review seeks to examine the relationships between bacterial microbiomes and infectious disease. This is achieved by detailing how different human host microbiomes develop and function, from the earliest infant acquisitions of maternal and environmental species through to the full development of microbiomes by adulthood. Communication between bacterial species or communities of species within and outside of the microbiome is a factor in both maintenance of homeostasis and management of threats from the external environment. Dysbiosis of this homeostasis is key to understanding the development of disease states. Several microbiomes and the microbiota within are used as prime examples of how changes in species composition, particularly at the phylum level, leads to such diverse conditions as inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), type 2 diabetes, psoriasis, Parkinson’s disease, reflux oesophagitis and others. The review examines spatial relationships between microbiomes to understand how dysbiosis in the gut microbiome in particular can influence diseases in distant host sites via routes such as the gut–lung, gut–skin and gut–brain axes. Microbiome interaction with host processes such as adaptive immunity is increasingly identified as critical to developing the capacity of the immune system to react to pathogens. Dysbiosis of essential bacteria involved in modification of host substrates such as bile acid components can result in development of Crohn’s disease, small intestine bacterial overgrowth, hepatic cancer and obesity. Interactions between microbiomes in distantly located sites are being increasingly being identified, resulting in a ‘whole of body’ effect by the combined host microbiome.

Microbiomes exist in every human ecological niche that has been examined, the oral cavity, skin surface, intestinal tract, oesophagus, lungs and other. The microbiota they comprise include bacteria, archaea, viruses, phages and fungi. Bacteria tend to be the most prominent microbiota, particularly in terms of species.

While studies of the microbiota in lung conditions such as cystic fibrosis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and pneumonia are commonplace, the healthy lung microbiota have not yet been extensively examined. Early work by Charlson et al. with 16S rDNA sequencing of bronchiolar lavage (BAL) samples from the lower respiratory tract showed that the main bacterial species were skin commensals from the genera Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, Veillonella, Prevotella and Propionibacterium, but that species from soil and water‐associated genera such as Burkholderia and Comamonada were also present [9], thus demonstrating that species acquisition from the host’s nasopharynx, skin and the external environment were key features of the lung microbiome. This study also established that the healthy lung microbiome comprises members of the phyla Bacteroidetes, Proteobacteria, Firmicutes and Actinobacteria and OTUs from the genera Prevotella, Veillonella and Streptococcus. Questions over sampling techniques and potential bronchoscope contamination of samples led Dickson et al. to undertake a rigorous experimental study minimizing contamination and obtain a topographic outline of lower respiratory tract microbiota [10]. Results were consistent with previous studies showing that airway and lung bacterial communities resemble those of the oropharyngeal tract, with little evidence of site‐specific enrichment by reproducing bacteria.

Microbiome development beings early in life. Current indications are that the womb is not sterile, and the foetus during gestation is exposed to bacteria which do not adversely affect it and likely form the basis for microbiome development [11]. In a longitudinal study of 60 mother–infant pairs (dyads) sampled at birth, 4 and 6 weeks, Chu et al. showed that at all sampled sites (nostrils, skin, oral cavity, stool, vaginal fornix and vaginal opening), microbiome composition and function had diversified to become body‐site specific by 6 weeks of age [12]. There is mounting evidence that this early colonization has a role in the establishment and maturation of developmental pathways within the first 2 years of life [13]. During and immediately after birth, the newborn is exposed to complex microbial communities in the external environment. The forces shaping the development of this early infant microbiota comprise the maternal microbiota, exposure to antibiotics, and whether the infant is breast or formula‐fed [14]. Post‐natal changes in infant diet are the main forces shaping the early microbiome; thus, most studies have centred on changes to the gut microbiome. As solid foods are introduced, the microbiome begins evolving from one that mainly comprises human milk oligosaccharide metabolizers such as Bifidobacterium sp. to a more diverse one that includes Bacteroides spp., to catabolize the starch‐based sugars found in complex diets [15]. Studies of Danish and Spanish birth cohorts of infants demonstrated an increased prevalence with the introduction of solids in the species Atopobium, Clostridium, Akkermansia, Bacteroides, Lachnospiraceae and Ruminococcus while both Escherichia and Staphylococcus spp. decreased in prevalence [16, 17]. However, geographic and societal factors (including breast versus formula feeding) influence early microbiome composition, and studies of more diverse cohorts worldwide are needed to establish a baseline composition.

Thus by adulthood, the microbiome of most healthy adults appears to contain a ‘core’ set of species/OTUs that is present irrespective of diet, ethnic and cultural differences, as determined by both metagenomic [32] and culture isolation studies [33]. Looking at the species overall, more than 160 species have been identified [34]. The dominant gut phyla are the Firmicutes (mainly Gram‐positive Clostridiodes sp.), Bacteroidetes (mainly Gram‐negative species), Actinobacteria, Proteobacteria, Fusobacteria and Verrucomicrobia. Members of the Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes collectively represent around 90% of the bacterial species in the healthy gut microbiome, and this remains relatively stable in most situations [35]. While more than 200 different genera within the Firmicutes have been identified in the gut microbiome, including Lactobacillus, Bacillus, Clostridium, Enterococcus and Ruminicoccus, the vast majority (ca. 95%) belong to Clostridiodes sp. The main genera in the Bacteroidetes are Bacteroides and Prevotella. The Actinobacteria are proportionally less abundant and mainly consist of members of the genus Bifidobacterium.

Examples of biofilm communities where interspecies communication has been investigated include the intestinal tract (gut), the oral cavity and the vaginal tract. The mammalian gut is known to harbour hundreds of different bacterial species that need to co‐exist and interact with each other and with the host. The two phyla Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes are the most predominant phyla in the mammalian gut. A healthy mammalian gut microbiome is composed of an almost equal proportion of these two phyla and changes in the microbial population affecting the balance between them have been associated with several disease states including obesity, inflammation and pathogenic infections [36]. In the oral cavity, the commensal species Streptococcus mitis has been demonstrated to promote cross‐species communication and surface polysaccharide production by the closely related pathogenic species Streptococcus pneumoniae within the oral microbiome [37]. The vaginal microbiome is dynamic and compositional changes in response to pregnancy, menstruation, external influences such as douching and sexual activity and disease states such as bacterial vaginosis. Additionally, compositional changes in microbiome exist between ethnic groups [38]. These differences have led researchers to postulate that no typical ‘core’ vaginal microbiome exists, instead its composition depends on the functional capabilities of specific species [39]. Lactobacillus sp. generally predominate as the normal flora; however, several species and taxon groups are considered to have over‐lapping roles, so that removing or adding species has little effect on the overall function of the microbiome [40].

Most studies have focused on intraspecies communication; however, the roles of interspecies communication and host‐bacterium communication are becoming increasingly better understood. Interspecies communication also requires small molecules secreted by bacteria to communicate with other bacteria or the host. The end‐result is the regulation of virulence factors or bacterial community composition, the regulation of gene expression in the host, or the supplementation of nutrients in the community as a whole [44].

Microbiota within microbiomes have been demonstrated to intervene in host processes, including compound modification and host immunity, and the examples below demonstrate how such interventions can result in development of disease states.

Modification of bile acids may contribute to bidirectional communication between the gut microbiota and the host. Both the host and gut bacteria modify the primary bile acids cholic acid and chenodeoxycholic acid at different stages, with host liver enzymes conjugating bile acids with either taurine or glycine. Upon release, the conjugated acids are deconjugated by gut species using microbial bile salt hydrolase, to remove taurine and glycine and enable their downstream processing in the colon into secondary bile acids by other species [45].

The complex relationship between bile levels and gut microbiota has not yet been fully elucidated. Alterations in bile acid concentration can also alter physiologically significant bacterial species within the gut microbiome, and a reduction in bile acid concentration has been associated with bacterial overgrowth [51].

Gut microbiota constitute a stimulus that drives the development of the immune system in its capacity to react to pathogens. Recent work by Song et al. sought to determine how bile acid‐modifying bacteria regulate colonic regulatory T‐cells expressing the transcriptional factor RORγ+ [52]. Using mouse diet studies, Song et al found that neither dietary alteration (rich or minimal diet) nor bile acid supplementation affected the level of bacteria such as Clostridiodes clusters IV or XIVα involved in secondary processing of bile acid in the mouse colon. Thus, gut bacteria quickly adapt to the dietary change and production of colonic bile acid is not affected.

Specific species within particular host microbiomes are known to modulate the host immune system, indicating that the presence of specific bacteria at a particular time in host development is important for normal functioning of host immunity. Studies comparing germ‐free (GF) and specific‐pathogen free (SPF) mice by Atarashi et al. showed that SPF mice underwent a marked induction compared to GF mice in a T‐regulatory cell commonly found in the intestine. This induction was linked to the presence of Clostridiodes sp. in the mouse gut [57].

Disease states can result from compositional changes in microbiome speciation or abundance changes within microbiome species, both resulting in microbiome dysbiosis, or expression of virulence characteristics by a species within the microbiome. With regard to the third of these, there are studies showing that asymptomatic microbiome species can in certain circumstances express virulence characteristics indicative of pathogenesis. Streptococcus agalactiae is generally considered a part of the normal vaginal microbiome, with reported colonization rates of up to 36%. During pregnancy, however, the foetal transmission of S. agalactiae can be fatal to the newborn and is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in neonates [58]. The exact mechanism that results in this switch to a virulent phenotype is unknown; however, virulence is determined by the capsular serotype and virulence factors such as the polysaccharide capsule, encoded by the cps gene, protein C, which includes the Cα surface proteins (bca gene), Rib (rib gene) and Cβ (bac gene) [59]. Here, we examine a number of disease states resulting from activities within niche‐specific microbiomes.

The adult oesophageal microbiome largely comprises a balance between Streptococcus and Prevotella spp. However, changes related to age and disease state such as adenocarcinoma have been shown to result in enrichment with Gram‐negatives such as Haemophilus, Veillonella and Rothnia spp., particularly in the early stages of adenocarcinoma development [60]. Prior studies had also suggested that the oesophageal microbiome in patients with reflux oesophagitis has high concentrations of Gram‐negative species and that these are likely contributing to the pre‐cancerous stage of adenocarcinoma development [61]. Another oesophageal disease state, Barratt’s oesophagus, has also been investigated with regard to changes in microbiome composition and compared to adenocarcinoma by Lopetuso et al., and results from six Barratt’s oesophagus and 10 adenocarcinoma samples indicated a shift from the normal dominant Gram‐positive Streptococci to Gram‐negatives such as Prevotella, Actinobacillus and Veillonella, though this change was not as marked as that seen in the adenocarcinoma samples [62]. The indications from this study were that the shift to Gram‐negatives in the oesophageal microbiome becomes more prominent as the severity of disease increases.

A study by Harris et al. of microbiome composition and eosinophilic oesophagitis in 70 children (7+ years of age) and adults with a history of oesophageal narrowing, gelatin allergy and conditions leading to endoscopic complications indicating eosinophilic oesophagitis [64] in which 16SrRNA and whole‐genome sequencing were utilized for species determination, pointed to a significant increase in Haemophilus sp. in untreated subjects compared to subjects without eosinophilic oesophagitis. Eosinophilic oesophagitis patients sampled before and after dietary changes were compared by Benitez et al. to a non‐eosinophilic oesophagitis cohort and concluded that while overall bacterial load was significantly increased in eosinophilic oesophagitis, the diversity of species was not significantly greater that of the control group [65]. A recent study by Johnson et al. appears to confirm the lack of association between eosinophilic oesophagitis and microbiome diversity changes in the adult population [66].

The most widely studied human microbiome is that of the gastrointestinal tract (gut). Over the last two decades, studies have reported on the development of the infant gut microbiome and on changes in the gut microbiome in a number of disease states including diabetes and liver diseases, cancer, and more recently, neurodegenerative diseases. In the case of infants, studies have shown that the microbiome development process is affected by the mode of delivery (caesarean or natural), type of infant feeding (breast or formula), gestational age at birth, hospitalization and use of antibiotics [67]. The initial sterile gut is an oxidized environment favourable to colonization by facultative aerobes such as Lactobacillus, Prevotella and Sneathia sp. being amongst the most abundant. As oxygen is consumed, and the environment becomes more reduced, they are followed by anaerobes [67]. The acquisition of Bacteroides and Bifidobacterium sp., which are known to have an important role in the maturation of the immune response, is critical to development of a healthy gut microbiome [68]. A study by Backhed et al. showed that within 5 days of vaginal delivery, a diverse population comprising mainly maternal gut bacteria such as Escherichia, Bifidobacterium, Enterococcus and Bacteroides was evident, whereas infants delivered by caesarean section contained a larger proportion of maternal skin flora at the same time point [69].

There are specific species whose presence/absence has been identified in T2D. The bacterium Faecalibacterium prausnitzii has been shown to be elevated in the microbiota of T2D patients. Conversely, the species A. muciniphila, a mucus colonizer that can use mucin as its sole carbon and nitrogen source in times of caloric restriction, is at low levels within the type 2 diabetes gut microbiome [89].

Studies of niche‐specific colonization in the oral cavity have demonstrated how individual microbiota relate to their specific site. The nostrils (nares) are most likely to be colonized by the proximally located skin colonizer S. epidermidis (a Firmicute), Corynebacterium sp., with S. aureus also present in about 25% of the population. S. aureus carriage in the nares is a risk for both food poisoning (S. aureus toxin) by infected food handlers and is also linked to an increased risk of S. aureus infection elsewhere on the body [90]. With respect to the nasal and oral cavities, an 16SrRNA sequencing study of the microbiota from 12 healthy adults showed that the dominant phyla in the nasal cavity were Actinobacteria (dominated by Corynebacteriaceae and Propionibacteriaceae), Firmicutes and Proteobacteria. A distinct difference in microbiome composition was detected between the nasal and oral cavities Streptococcaceae was the most abundant Firmicute genera in the oral cavity while Staphylococceae were not detected at all [91]. The microbiome of the pharynx is largely composed of benign Streptococcal species; however, the entry of pathogenic species likely leads to infectious disease conditions. These include Streptococcus pneumoniae and Streptococcus pyogenes causative agents for pneumonia, Neisseria meningitidis agent a cause of meningitis, and Corynebacterium diphtheriae causative agent of diphtheria.

Saliva can contain pathogenic bacterial species in the microbiome in sufficient concentrations to cause disease in the host or others. Examples include Group A Streptococci such as S. pyogenes, responsible for a range of serious conditions including necrotizing fasciitis, septicaemia, toxic shock syndrome, erysipelas, cellulitis, acute postinfectious glomerulonephritis, rheumatic fever, tuberculosis and scarlet fever [93]. A comparison of six species of periodontopathic bacteria in whole saliva and subgingival plaque from 202 subjects by Umeda et al. found a clear relationship between the presence of P. gingivalis, Prevotella intermedia, Prevotella nigrescens and T. denticola in whole saliva and in samples taken from sites of periodontal damage, indicating a line of transmission between saliva and these sites [94, 95].

With the knowledge that the healthy lower respiratory tract has an existing microbiome, it is possible to conceptualize the entry of species pathogenic to the lung environment.

COPD is characterized by long‐term airway inflammation, persistent respiratory symptoms and chronic airflow limitation, and sufferers undergo exacerbation due to inflammatory events in a similar manner to CF patients. In COPD, the microbial diversity pattern has been demonstrated to be different in sputum and more distal samples. Therefore, the favoured method of sampling the lung microbiome is one that samples the distal bronchi and alveoli such as BAL fluid. One early study of BAL samples from four COPD patients (two classified as ‘moderate’ and two as ‘severe’) indicated a greater loss of diversity in the severe disease cases compared to the mild; however, a similar loss of diversity was noted in one of three healthy test subjects. It should be noted though that the small number of test subjects here limits the strength of conclusions [102]. A study of 32 BAL samples (14 from moderate COPD, eight from severe COPD and 10 non‐COPD controls) by Pragman et al. showed that members of the anaerobic Gram‐negative phylum Fusobacteria were increased in the COPD samples, and this increase was reflected at all taxonomic levels down to the genera Leptotrichia and Fusobacterium, Prevotella, Haemophilus, Fusobacterium, Pseudomonas, Streptococcus, Veillonella and Porphyromonas [103]. 16S rRNA sequencing, coupled with shotgun metagenomics, was used to demonstrate that the COPD patients’ gut contains an overrepresentation of the Proteobacteria, which include most pathogenic species, and this is coupled to a decline in the relative abundance of the Firmicutes [104].

Differences in microbiome composition between healthy and diseased states are a feature of several skin diseases, as shown in the examples below.

Acne is a skin disease normally associated with puberty and the presence of P. acnes within the lesions is well known. However, P. acnes is present in the microbiome of sebaceous glands in healthy people, where it accounts for nearly 90% of the microbiota but does not cause acne. 16S rRNA sequencing of lesion strains has shown that only certain strains containing genes that likely contribute to their virulence are associated with acne, while other strains are associated with the healthy skin microbiome [109, 111].

The gut–lung axis has been briefly described above, and mounting evidence indicates the existence of what appear to be other axes of regulated microbial activity, including between the gut and the brain, the gut and the skin and the brain and the skin. The influence of bacterial communities in these axes has led to their re‐description as microbiota–gut–brain, microbiota–gut–lung, microbiota–gut–oral or microbiota–gut–skin axes. Further combinations of activity have recently been described between three sites, with the microbiome of the gut interacting with/affecting both brain and skin and interacting with/affecting lung and brain. Diseases including asthma, psoriasis, tuberculosis and neurological disorders have been linked with axes of microbial activity. Here, we examine the evidence for microbiotas within these axes influencing the course of pathology and disease development.

While cross‐talk between the gut microbiome and distant sites via neurons of the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems had long been suspected, a study by Levkovich et al. that showed that feeding certain gut lactobacilli to mice can markedly change the overall skin phenotype provided early firm evidence of the existence of this long‐distance effect [112]. The acquired evidence appears to show that microbes and the metabolites they secrete interact with immunological, neurological and metabolic pathways [113, 114]. In a metagenomic study of gut bacteria from 30 psoriasis patients, Xiao et al. recently found that while the gut microbiota of the patients showed increased proportions in certain phyla and reductions in others, there were no significant changes in species diversity compared to healthy controls. Most interestingly, the gut microbiota of psoriasis patients significantly differentially expressed 15 kyoto encyclopaedia of genes and genomes (KEGG) biosynthetic pathways. These included upregulation of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) biosynthesis, the bacterial secretion and phosphotransferase systems and fructose and mannose metabolism; and downregulation of signalling through cell surface receptors (WNT signalling), apoptosis and sulphur metabolism pathways [115]. LPS contains a potent endotoxin component (Lipid A), responsible for the septic shock caused by circulating Gram‐negative pathogens.

Evidence exists that the gut microbiome influences the lung through histamine secreted by gut microbiota. High levels of lung histamine are an indicator of asthma, and Barcik et al. showed that the highly‐expressed bacterial histamine decarboxylase (HDC) from gut microbiome species was significantly elevated in adult patients with asthma compared to healthy controls (n = 74 for each; p = 0.01). The asthma patients categorized as ‘severe’ (as defined by medication use, medication dose and other parameters) had significantly higher bacterial loads of the histamine secreting species Morganella morganii (p = 0.02) [116]. Histamine is an immune response modulator, and in a subsequent study using E. coli modified to express M. morganii HDC, the group showed that this strain reduced lung eosinophilia and suppressed cytokine secretion from lung cells in a respiratory inflammation mouse model, while the parent bacterium, which does not secrete histamine, had no effect [117].

The gut–lung axis is an evolving area of investigation in the case of Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection. M. tuberculosis utilizes a range of carbon sources during the persistence phase, including short‐chain fatty acids (SCFA) that are the main metabolic products of fermentation of nondigestible dietary fibres by the gut microbiota. These fatty acids act on immune and endothelial cells through activation of G‐protein coupled receptors and also by inhibition of histone deacetylase [118]. Lachmandas et al. found that SCFAs significantly affected cytokine release and decreased production of proinflammatory cytokines TNF‐α, IL‐1𝛽 and IL‐17 in a dose‐dependent manner [119]. The role of gut SCFAs in lung infection was further demonstrated with microbiome studies of tuberculosis patient faeces, which showed a significant increase in the abundance of gut microbiome species producing the SCFAs butyrate and propionate, including Eubacterium, Faecalibacterium, Phascolarctobacterium and Roseburia. On the contrary, the non‐SCFA‐producing gut genera Prevotella and Lachnospira were significantly decreased in both the new and recurrent tuberculosis patients compared with non‐tuberculosis controls [120, 121].

Communication along the gut–brain axis is proposed to occur via the autonomic nervous system (ANS), comprising the sympathetic and parasympathetic systems [122]. Another two systems have also been proposed as additional lines of communication, the immune system and the enteric nervous system [123, 124]. The microbiome–gut–brain axis has been intensively investigated with regard its role in anorexia nervosa (AN) [125, 127], in neurodegenerative disorders such as Parkinson’s disease (PD) [128, 130] and neurodegenerative dementias such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD) [131, 133].

While more evidence is needed, the pattern that is emerging with regard to the gut–brain axis and AD is that microbiome changes in the ageing gut lead to the emergence of species producing proinflammatory metabolites. These can leak out of damaged membranes and barriers to bring about changes in brain tissue resulting in AD pathology.

The significance of a healthy ‘whole of body’ microbiome, both in terms of species composition and species abundance, is most evident in the scale of its involvement in the manifestation of the disease states and syndromes outlined in this review. The bacteria within individual niche‐specific microbiomes communicate both at the intra‐ and interspecies level, and this facilitates their responses to the host. Dysbiosis of the microbiota within niche‐specific microbiomes can result in damage to the host and development of disease.

However as more recent studies have revealed, communication along axes that link host sites is equally important. A number of disease states have now been closely linked to axonal communication, and in some cases such as H. pylori and Parkinson’s disease, the link was quite unexpected. The trend that is emerging with regard to axes of communication is that the links are widespread, and likely involve all or most niche‐specific microbiomes working in concert to effect changes at host sites.

Open access publishing facilitated by The University of Sydney, as part of the Wiley ‐ The University of Sydney agreement via the Council of Australian University Librarians.

The author states that he has no conflict of interest.

