Role of Gut Dysbiosis in Liver Diseases: What Have We Learned So Far?

Accumulating evidence supports that gut dysbiosis may relate to various liver diseases. Alcoholics with high intestinal permeability had a decrease in the abundance of Ruminnococcus. Intestinal dysmotility, increased gastric pH, and altered immune responses in addition to environmental and genetic factors are likely to cause alcohol-associated gut microbial changes. Alcohol-induced dysbiosis may be associated with gut barrier dysfunction, as microbiota and their products modulate barrier function by affecting epithelial pro-inflammatory responses and mucosal repair functions. High levels of plasma endotoxin are detected in alcoholics, in moderate fatty liver to advanced cirrhosis. Decreased abundance of Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, an anti-inflammatory commensal, stimulating IL-10 secretion and inhibiting IL-12 and interferon-γ expression. Proteobacteria, Enterobacteriaceae, and Escherichia were reported to be increased in NAFLD (nonalcoholic fatty liver disease) patients. Increased abundance of fecal Escherichia to elevated blood alcohol levels in these patients and gut microbiota enriched in alcohol-producing bacteria produce more alcohol (alcohol hypothesis). Some undetermined pathological sequences related to gut dysbiosis may facilitate energy-producing and proinflammatory conditions for the progression of NAFLD. A shortage of autochthonous non-pathogenic bacteria and an overgrowth of potentially pathogenic bacteria are common findings in cirrhotic patients. The ratio of the amounts of beneficial autochthonous taxa (Lachnospiraceae + Ruminococaceae + Veillonellaceae + Clostridiales Incertae Sedis XIV) to those of potentially pathogenic taxa (Enterobacteriaceae + Bacteroidaceae) was low in those with early death and organ failure. Cirrhotic patients with decreased microbial diversity before liver transplantation were more likely to develop post-transplant infections and cognitive impairment related to residual dysbiosis. Patients with PSC had marked reduction of bacterial diversity. Enterococcus and Lactobacillus were increased in PSC patients (without liver cirrhosis.) Treatment-naive PBC patients were associated with altered composition and function of gut microbiota, as well as a lower level of diversity. As serum anti-gp210 antibody has been considered as an index of disease progression, relatively lower species richness and lower abundance of Faecalibacterium spp. in gp210-positive patients are interesting. The dysbiosis-induced altered bacterial metabolites such as a hepatocarcinogenesis promotor DCA, together with a leaky gut and bacterial translocation. Gut protective Akkermansia and butyrate-producing genera were decreased, while genera producing-lipopolysaccharide were increased in early hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients.

A comprehensive PUBMED literature search including gut microbiome, dysbiosis, alcoholic liver disease, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, liver cirrhosis, liver transplantation, primary sclerosing cholangitis, primary biliary cholangitis, and hepatocellular carcinoma was performed. This review introduced all valuable clinical research works in the world.

At first, this chapter highlights the importance of endotoxin, short chain fatty acids and bile acids because these three items are important, common bases for the entire review text. These three items surely take an important role in the relations between gut microbiome and various forms of liver injury.

In patients with liver diseases, various gut bacteria and their cell components frequently enter into the portal circulation through the disrupted intestinal barrier and reach the liver. The passage of viable bacteria from the intestinal lumen through the mesenteric lymph nodes and other sites are defined as bacterial translocation (BT). The concept of BT was later broadened to microbial products, including endotoxin, peptidoglycan and bacterial DNA [1].

Well-known bacterial endotoxin (i.e., lipopolysaccharide: LPS) is a component of the bacterial wall of gram-negative bacteria and acts as one of the pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) for Toll-like receptor (TLR) 4. Translocated microbial products activate KCs in the liver through pattern recognition receptors, such as TLRs and NOD-like receptors [2]. TLRs thus recognize structural components unique to bacteria, fungi, and virus and induce innate immune responses such as cytokine production in the liver [2,3,4]. Hepatic non-immune cells, including hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) and endothelial cells, also have TLRs and respond to bacterial products [2] and proceed pro-inflammatory and profibrotic pathways through various cytokines such as IL-1, IL-6 and TNF [1].

Human colonic microbiota breaks down substrates such as resistant starch and non-starch polysaccharides (major components of dietary fiber), which are not completely hydrolyzed by host enzymes in the small intestine [5]. The main fermentation products are short chain fatty acids (SCFAs), acetate, propionate, and butyrate [5]. Butyrate acts as an energy source for the colonic epithelium, whereas acetate and propionate serve as substrates for lipogenesis and gluconeogenesis [6,7]. The bacterial short chain fatty acids (SCFAs) thus work as additional sources of energy, constituting 3%–9% of our daily caloric intake [8]. SCFAs additionally exhibit a wide range of functions from mucoprotection, immune regulation to metabolism in variable tissues [9,10], thus having a direct and indirect effect on our bodies. The predominant bacteria that produce SCFAs are described as Ruminococcaceae and Eubacterium [10].

Bile acids (BAs) are saturated, hydroxylated C-24 cyclopentanophenanthrene sterols synthesized from cholesterol in hepatocytes [11]. Cholesterol 7α -hydroxylase (CYP7A1) produces both the dihydroxy BA chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA) and the trihydroxy BA cholic acid (CA). These primary BAs are conjugated to glycine or taurine in hepatocytes and stored in the gallbladder. Eating induces gallbladder contraction to induce emptying the contents into the small intestine [12]. Bile salts solubilize fats and fat-soluble vitamins enhancing their uptake. BAs are mostly (~95%) absorbed in the terminal ileum through the sodium-dependent BA transporter (ASBT) and are transported to the liver through the portal vein, thus forming portal enterohepatic circulation (EHC). The rest escapes the EHC and becomes substrate for microbial transformation in the right colon [11]. Conjugated primary bile acids (CDCA and CA) undergo microbial modifications (e.g., deconjugation, dehydroxylation, and hydrogenation) to form secondary bile acids lithocholic acid (LCA) and deoxycholic acid (DCA), respectively [7]. The colonic 7α-dehydroxylating bacteria (e.g., Lachonospiraceae, Ruminococcaceae, and Blautia) play a key role in this conversion.

BAs are recognized as signaling molecules that activate specific nuclear farnesoid X receptor (FXR) and membrane BA-activated G protein-coupled receptor (GP-BAR1) TGR5 in the intestine [13,14,15,16]. CDCA is the most potent endogenous FXR ligand. DCA and LCA, can also activate FXR. TGR5 is activated by nanomolar concentrations of LCA and micromolar concentrations of CA, DCA, and CDCA [17,18]. By activating various signaling pathways after binding to FXR in the enterocytes and the hepatocytes and to TGR5 in the non-parenchymal hepatocytes, BAs regulate various metabolic processes, such as triglyceride, cholesterol, and glucose metabolism and inflammatory reactions [18,19]. BAs on the other hand, exert negative selection pressures on gut bacteria directly through antimicrobial properties and indirectly through activation of FXR-induced anti-microbial peptide synthesis in the small intestine [19].

The following sections introduce most of the outstanding research in various clinical settings that suggest an important role of gut dysbiosis in the development of various liver diseases. The sections were divided into alcoholic liver disease, non-alcoholic liver disease, liver cirrhosis, primary sclerosing cholangitis, primary biliary cholangitis and hepatocellular carcinoma. I avoided my private comments on the methodology or the main results to any investigations. Although it seems rational to show a high-level study using intestinal mucosa and the newest method, I tried to introduce all clinical studies thus far.

Alcoholic liver disease (ALD) is an important cause of chronic liver disease in the world and encompasses fatty liver (hepatic steatosis), alcoholic steatohepatitis, and the more severe entities such as alcoholic hepatitis, fibrosis, cirrhosis, and hepatocellular carcinoma [20,21]. In the case of persistent drinking, the fatty liver can proceed to fibrosis and cirrhosis, which can finally develop portal hypertension and liver failure [20,21]. Chronic alcohol ingestion leads to bacterial overgrowth and dysbiosis in small and large intestines in humans [21,22,23,24]. Alcohol drinking further induces changes in the composition of gut microbiota and translocation of bacterial products into the portal blood, which appears to play a cardinal role in alcohol-induced liver damage [25]. A pioneering study by Bode et al. [22] disclosed that Coliform microorganisms were cultured much more abundantly in jejunal aspirates of 27 alcoholics including 10 patients with alcoholic cirrhosis compared with that of control patients without liver disease and alcohol abuse. Subjects with long-lasting alcohol consumption, as well as patients with alcoholic liver cirrhosis were reported to present small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO) [21], a condition in which colonic bacterial translocate into the small bowel due to impaired microvilli function [26]. SIBO has been defined as ≥ 105 total colony-forming units per milliliter of proximal jejunal aspirations. At the same time, plasma endotoxin levels are elevated in chronic alcoholics from the early stages of ALD [27]. SIBO and gut dysbiosis are likely to provoke increased intestinal permeability, pathological BT and endotoxemia. All of these are considered to impact the progression of ALD.

* Mutlu EA, et al. Resluts on alcoholics with dysbiosis; † Leclerq S, et al and Bajaj JS, et al. Resluts on alcoholics with increased intestinsl permeability.

Recently, Yang et al. [50] reported that alcohol-dependent patients displayed reduced intestinal fungal diversity and a dramatic overgrowth of Candida, with concomitant decreases in Epicoccum, Galactomyces and Debaryomyces. Patients with alcoholic cirrhosis seemed to have increased systemic exposure and immune response to mycobiota compared with healthy subjects and patients with non-alcoholic cirrhosis [50]. Moreover, the levels of extraintestinal fungal exposure estimated by serum anti–Saccharomyces cerevisiae IgG antibodies correlated with mortality [50], which suggest intestinal micobiome may affect the clinical course of alcoholic cirrhosis in addition to gut microbiome.

In a study on the intestinal permeability by way of a 51Cr-EDTA absorption test [51], non-cirrhotic alcoholic patients abstaining from alcohol for less than four days invariably showed higher intestinal permeability than controls, and the abnormality persisted for up to two weeks after cessation of drinking in many patients. In another study by a sugar test such as urinary lactulose/mannitol ratio [52], alcoholics with chronic liver disease exhibited a marked and significant increase in intestinal permeability, although those without liver injury had also a small increase in permeability. The liver receives portal blood containing microbial products and acts as the initial site of their filtration and detoxication [1]. BT is initiated when the intestinal epithelium is destructed and the intestine becomes more permeable [21,53]. Alcohol is known to disrupt the gut epithelial barrier integrity [54], resulting in the translocation of potentially harmful bacteria and their products such as endotoxins [22,55]. The intestinal dysbiosis and dysregulated bile acid metabolism in alcohol drinking might trigger tight junction dysfunction by inducing subclinical intestinal inflammation [49].

Alcohol-induced intestinal dysbiosis may be associated with intestinal epithelial barrier dysfunction [17,58] as microbiota and their products modulate barrier function by affecting epithelial pro-inflammatory responses, protein expression, and mucosal repair functions [58]. Dysbiosis-induced intestinal inflammation and tumor necrosis factor (TNF) α receptor I signaling in intestinal epithelial cells were proved to mediate a disruption of the intestinal barrier in alcohol-fed mice [59].

Fukui et al. [27] found high levels of plasma endotoxin in alcoholics, not only in those with advanced cirrhosis but also in those with moderate fatty liver, suggesting alcohol abuse causes endotoxemia irrespective of the severity of liver disease. There are strong evidences supporting that gut-derived bacterial endotoxin plays a key role in the initiation and progression of alcoholic liver injury and the development of organ failure in some cases [33,60]. Once it reaches various organs, it strongly stimulates TLR4 in macrophages (e.g., Kupffer cells in the liver), which activates downstream signaling activation of the nuclear factor-kB pathway and induction of proinflammatory cytokines (e.g., TNF-α, IL-6, IL-8) and chemokines [61]. In addition, it indicates that gut microflora-derived endotoxin and TLR4 contribute to the progression of liver fibrosis [4]. Alcohol induces LPS binding protein (LBP) and TLR4, thus enhancing responsiveness to endotoxin. The binding of LPS to CD14/TLR4 on Kupffer cells (KCs) stimulates production of cytokines, chemokines and reactive oxygen species, which leads to T lymphocyte and neutrocyte recruitment, hepatic stellate cell (HSC) activation, and collagen production in patients with alcoholic steatohepatitis [1,3]. It is important that hepatic non-immune cells, such as HSC and endothelial cells, also respond to bacterial products through TLRs [2].

The pathophysiological role of endotoxemia is further essential in patients with severe alcoholic liver injury. Plasma endotoxin levels were elevated with the progression of alcoholic liver injury and reached the maximal level in patients with alcoholic cirrhosis and severe alcoholic hepatitis who exhibited marked hypercytokinemia [62].

Bajaj et al. [41] reported that stool metabolomics showed widespread alteration in active cirrhotic drinkers. On the analysis by GC/MS, metabolites focused on bioenergetics (citrate, malate, phosphate) and amino acids (threonine, ornithine, serine) were significantly depressed in actively drinking cirrhotic patients compared with those of abstinent cirrhotic patients [41]. The decrease in these metabolites might be due to increased consumption by the gut microbiota, because they are shared between the host and the microbiota [41]. An experimental study reported that chronic ethanol administration results in a decrease in SCFAs except for acetic acid, a reduction of almost all amino acids including three branched-chain amino acids, perturbations of the steroid, lipid and carnitine metabolism in the rat GI tract [36]. Cirrhotic patients with active alcohol drinking present higher total bile acids, elevated secondary bile acids (lithocholic acid and deoxycholic acid) in duodenal fluid and stool, and an enriched glycine-conjugated BAs in duodenal fluid [21,39,42]. The shift of bile acids profile toward potentially toxic secondary bile acids is related to enhanced expression of inflammatory cytokines in colonic mucosa [39], and may lead to intestinal and systemic inflammation together with widespread dysbiosis [41]. BAs-related receptors such as FXRα, FGF-19, ASBT, and SHP in the terminal ileum of these patients were appropriately activated in response to the augmented BA load [41]. It is unclear why these reactions failed to suppress the continuous BA secretion and its enterohepatic cycling in this situation. On the other hand, serum FGF19 and bile acids were reported to be increased in patients with alcoholic hepatitis, where de novo bile acid synthesis marker (CYP7A1 gene expression and C4 serum levels) were decreased [63]. The same study group reported FXR activity and FGF15 protein secretion were rather depressed despite increased intestinal unconjugated BA in mice with chronic ethanol feeding [64]. In this experiment, targeted interventions to improve bile acid-FXR-FGF15 signaling reduced ethanol-induced liver injury by modulation of hepatic Cyp7a1 [64]. Taken together, the discrepancies between these clinical and experimental studies should be appropriately fixed. The literature thus far is conflicting regarding efficacy. It is tempting that this BA dysregulation related to gut dysbiosis could become an innovative therapeutic target for alcoholic liver disease, however it deserves future studies.

Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the hepatic manifestation of the metabolic syndrome. It includes a spectrum of pathological changes ranging from the simple steatosis (nonalcoholic fatty liver: NAFL) in the liver through nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) to fibrosis, cirrhosis, and finally hepatocellular carcinoma [65]. In addition, data show that NAFLD correlates with increased cardiovascular risk and most of the clinical surrogates of cardiovascular diseases [66]. It is important to bear in mind that an increased consumption of fructose may result in an increased lipid accumulation in the liver, which was related to insulin resistance and increased plasma triglycerides [67]. There is strong evidence for the relation of gut microbiota and bacterial endotoxin in the mechanisms of hepatic steatosis and its progression to NASH.

Bacterial overgrowth, immune dysfunction, alteration of the luminal factors, and altered intestinal permeability are all recognized to be implicated in the pathophysiology of NASH and its complications [67]. Most controlled trials using breath tests demonstrated higher prevalence of SIBO (50%~77.8% vs. 9.1%~31.2%) in NAFLD patients compared with healthy subjects [65,68,69,70,71,72]. In contrast to these data, total bacterial counts in the feces estimated by real-time PCR, did not differ between healthy controls and patients with NAFLD or NASH [73]. Further studies are needed to determine whether fecal bacterial counts actually reflect the amounts of microbes present in the small intestine [74].

Sobhonslidsuk et al. [94] also noted enriched fecal Prevotella in NASH patients in Thailand. The increase in fecal Prevotella was further reported in Chinese cirrhotic patients [98]. These contradictory results may be partly explained by the differences in dietary factors, age or stages between the studies. However, it should be noted that emerging human studies have linked the increased abundance of fecal Prevotella species to intestinal and systemic inflammatory diseases. Except for abundant healthy strains, the genus Prevotella may include certain pathogenic strains that thrive in an inflammatory environment and stimulate Th17- mediated inflammation [99]. In this sense, future studies on Prevotella should be directed to characterize properties at the species level and to evaluate these species in different disease stages.

Shen et al. [91] reported that Chinese NAFLD patients with moderate fibrosis (F≥2) had a higher abundance of genus Escherichia, Shigella and the corresponding Enterobacteriaceae family than those with F0/F1 mild fibrosis. Özkul et al. [100] found increased Enterobacteriaceae and decreased Akkermansia muciniphila (A. muciniphila) in their Turkish NASH patients and reported that those with moderate F ≥ 2 fibrosis also had a higher abundance of Enterobacteriaceae than those with F0/F1 fibrosis. A low abundant mucous bacteria A. muciniphila is known to elevate the intestinal endocannabinoids levels and to control inflammation, increase gut barrier and peptide secretion [101]. This microbiome is also known to reverse high-fat diet-induced metabolic disorders, such as fat-mass gain, endotoxemia, adipose tissue inflammation, and insulin resistance [101].

Salzman et al. [104] thought that the hepatotoxic consequences of intestinal dysbiosis are mixed with intestinal microbiota-mediated inflammation of the local mucosa that encourages mucosal immune dysfunction, thus presenting important plausible insight in NAFLD pathogenesis.

In addition to microbial cells or microbial structural components, microbial metabolites also have the ability to affect the health and disease of the host. Contradictory findings on the bacterial taxonomic composition of patients in relation to the development of NAFLD may support the importance of metagenomic analysis combined with metabolomics [74]. However, this kind of study is still scarce.

The effect of the gut microbiome on host metabolism is also exemplified by the relation of high-fat diets and choline deficiency. High-fat diet leads to the formation of intestinal microbiota that convert dietary choline into methylamines [128]. This microbiota-related reduction of choline bioavailability may provoke the inability to synthesize phosphatidylcholine, which is necessary for the assembly and secretion of very-low-density lipoprotein (VLDL) [129], inducing the accumulation of triglycerides in the liver. The high-fat diet thus mimics the effect of choline-deficient diets, causing NAFLD [128].

Miele et al. [65] presented the first evidence of increased intestinal permeability and decreased tight junction protein zonula occludens-1 (ZO-1) expression in biopsy-proven NAFLD patients compared with healthy subjects. Intestinal permeability is increased in children with NAFLD, and correlates with a degree of hepatic involvement [130], as well as blood ethanol and endotoxin levels [131].

The alcohol hypothesis of NASH could explain the similarity of liver histology observed in patients with alcoholic steatohepatitis and NASH and may partly explain the observation of increased gut permeability [65] and endotoxemia [132,133] in NASH patients, because alcohol is known to increase gut permeability [71]. The gene expression of all three major pathways for ethanol catabolism in NASH liver is proved to be highly elevated [139]. Although Volynets et al. [71] observed increased blood ethanol as well as endotoxin levels also in NAFL patients, Zhu et al. [84] found that the blood ethanol concentration was elevated only when obese individuals had NASH.

Mice deficient in PAMPs or downstream signaling are resistant to NASH [140,141]. Dietary habits, by increasing the intestinal gram-negative endotoxin producers, may accelerate liver fibrosis, introducing dysbiosis as a cofactor enhancing chronic liver injury in NAFLD patients [142]. The pathogenetic mechanism of NASH has been recently elucidated from the pathway of gut-liver axis. Rivera et al. [141] first reported the importance of TLR4 signaling in the NAFLD liver. They observed typical steatohepatitis, portal endotoxemia, and increased TLR4 expression in wild-type mice fed MCDD. In contrast, injury and lipid accumulation were significantly lower in TLR4 mutant mice. The destruction of KCs with clodronate liposomes blunted histological evidence of steatohepatitis and inhibited increases in TLR4 expression.

In addition to TLR4, TLR2, and TLR9 are now recognized to play a role in NAFLD pathogenesis [150,151]. TLR9 recognizes DNA containing an unmethylated-CpG motif, which is rich in bacterial DNA [152] detectable in the blood and liver. TLR9 expression is increased in experimental NASH models. [140,150], while TLR9-deficient mice on the CDAA diet showed less steatosis, inflammation, and liver fibrosis compared with the wild type (WT) counterparts [140]. TLR2 reacts components of gram-positive bacterial cell walls such as peptidoglycan and lipoteichoic acid [152]. TLR2-deficient mice are known to resist to CDAA-induced steatohepatitis, showing lower expression of proinflammatory cytokines [153].

Liver cirrhosis is a frequent consequence of the long-lasting clinical course of all chronic liver diseases characterized by tissue fibrosis and the conversion of normal liver architecture into cirrhotic nodules [154]. Portal hypertension underlies most of the clinical complications of the disease [154]. Bacterial infections account for significant morbidity and mortality [155] and infections increase mortality four-fold in cirrhotic patients [156]. Although urinary, respiratory, ascitic fluid infections and bacteremia are common infectious complications, spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (SBP) occurs most frequently in these patients. A vast majority of such infections are attributable to enteric gram-negative bacteria, mainly Enterobacteriaceae [157]. The investigation of the gut microbiome in cirrhotic patients is important because of the key roles of BT and endotoxemia in the pathogenesis of the above various complications [158].

Early study using Limulus amebocyte lysate (LAL) test revealed increased incidence of systemic endotoxemia in patients with liver cirrhosis compared with those without liver diseases (48.4%; 15/31 cases vs. 9.5%; 2/21 cases) [159]. The LAL test further detected portal venous endotoxemia in 42.9% (9/21) patients without liver diseases [159]. Subsequent quantitative endotoxin assays disclosed elevated systemic endotoxin levels with the progression of liver cirrhosis [160,161]. Lumsden et al. [162] and Tachiyama et al. [163] found elevated endotoxin levels in the portal blood from cirrhotic patients, which suggested an increased intestinal production and/or absorption of endotoxin in cirrhotic patients, which later opened the discussion on bacterial overgrowth and leaky gut in cirrhosis [164]. Accumulating results have suggested close relations of endotoxemia to cirrhotic complications such as hyperdynamic circulation, portal hypertension, renal, cardiac, pulmonary and coagulation disturbances [1].

The passage of viable bacteria from the intestinal lumen through the intestinal wall and their translocation to mesenteric lymph nodes and other sites is the accepted pathologic mechanism for the development of spontaneous infections, including SBP or bacteremia [165]. Bacterial products, including endotoxin or bacterial DNA can translocate to extra-intestinal sites and promote an immunological response similar to that provoked by viable bacteria in patients with advanced cirrhosis and ascites [172]. Cirrhotic patients with translocated bacterial DNA of gram-positive taxa show increased pro-inflammatory cytokine levels unrelated to endotoxemia [173]. Pathological BT is thus a contributing factor in the development of complications in cirrhosis, not only in infections, but by exerting a profound inflammatory reaction and exacerbating the hemodynamic derangement [17,165].

SIBO was diagnosed in 59% of cirrhotic patients by the culture of proximal jejunal aspirations, which was associated with systemic endotoxemia [174]. Although the glucose breath hydrogen test is an alternative method, it shows a limited sensitivity with a positive test ranging from 30 to 38% in cirrhotic patients [56,175,176]. Anyway, the breath test frequently detects SIBO in cirrhotic patients with ascites and advanced liver dysfunction and in those with a history of SBP [175,177]. Delayed gut transit time may be associated with the development of SIBO [56]. Orocecal transit time (OCTT) and small-bowel residence time in cirrhotic patients with SIBO were significantly longer than in those without it [178,179]. Acceleration of orocecal transit by cisapride is reported to abolish bacterial overgrowth in cirrhotic patients [180]. Although the precise mechanism of delayed intestinal transit remains unclear, multiple factors such as the autonomic neuropathy, metabolic derangements, and hyperglycemic state could be implicated [178]. In addition, SIBO itself may lead to delayed intestinal transit [178], for antibiotic therapy has been found to reduce the OCTT in cirrhotic patients [181]. SIBO in cirrhosis showed a high correlation with the presence of bacterial DNA fragments in peripheral blood, suggesting that SIBO could be a major risk factor of BT, especially in ascitic patients [182].

Dysbiosis with reduced autochthonous taxa and increased potentially pathogenic families (Enterobacteriaceae, Enterococcaceae) is found in saliva of cirrhotic patients, especially those with previous history of HE or hospitalizations [197]. The salivary microbiome also has been correlated with liver-related 90-day hospitalization independent of MELD score and HE state [198]. Qin et al. [98] reported that most bacteria found in the feces of cirrhotic patients was of buccal origin, suggesting invasion of the gut by oral bacterial species. Interestingly, the above-mentioned, presumably pathogenic Streptococcus spp. and Veillonella spp. are recognized to be of oral origin [98]. The invading bacteria are found not only in the colon but also in the ileum and duodenum, which may potentiate SIBO in patients with liver cirrhosis [98]. The mechanism of this invasion has not been fully clarified but may be related to impaired bile acid (BA) and gastric acid output in cirrhosis [199]. It is well known that gastric acid and bile acids act to control bacterial colonization, attachment, and infiltration into the host [200]. In patients with decompensated cirrhosis, an administration and a withdrawal of proton pump inhibitor omeprazole were reported to result in an increase and a decrease in oral-origin microbial taxa (i.e., the relative abundance of Streptococcaceae) in the feces, respectively [201]. As for oral infection, the patients with periapical radiolucency, a sign of apical periodontitis and radicular cysts, had a higher prevalence of cirrhosis-related complications such as ascites, HE, and variceal bleeding [202,203].

Several studies have highlighted the changes in gut microbiome in patients with liver cirrhosis and HE. Liu et al. [183] studied patients with liver cirrhosis (mostly attributed to HBV and HCV infection) with minimal HE and reported an evident fecal overgrowth of potentially pathogenic Escherichia coli (E. coli) and Staphylococcus spp. in the feces. A non-culture analysis revealed that urease containing bacteria Streptococcus salivarius, absent in the feces of normal subjects, significantly increased in the feces of cirrhotic patients with mild HE [204]. The amount of this bacteria was positively correlated with circulating ammonia levels in cirrhotic patients [204]. Bajaj et al. [188] on the other hand showed that American patients with cirrhosis and HE had a higher fecal abundance of Enterobacteriaceae, Streptococcaceae, Fusobacteriaceae, Leuconostocacea, and Alcaligenaceae compared with control subjects. They additionally found Veillonellaceae was the only significantly increased taxa in the feces of cirrhotics with HE compared with those without HE [188] In their cirrhotic patients, Alcaligeneceae and Porphyromonadaceae were positively correlated with cognitive impairment [188]. With regard to the pathogenesis of HE, accumulating evidence indicates that hyperammonemia, systemic inflammation and neuroinflammation related to endotoxemia and gut dysbiosis play cardinal roles.

The microbiota inside the mucus layer adherent to the mucosal epithelium is more stable than the luminal counterpart and constantly cross-talks with the host [213]. Bajaj et al. [214] examined the recto-sigmoidal mucosal microbiome and the fecal microbiome, as the former may reflect the intestinal barrier condition more precisely. They found that the recto-sigmoidal mucosal microbiome in cirrhotic patients had a lower abundance of autochthonous bacteria (Subdoligranulum, Dorea, and Incertae Sedis XIV other) and a higher abundance of potentially pathogenic bacteria (Enterococcus, Clostridium, Burkholderia, and Proteus) compared with healthy controls. They further noted that cirrhotics with HE had lower Roseburia and higher Enterococcus, Veillonella, Megasphaera, and Burkholderia in the mucosa compared with those without HE, whereas fecal microbiome composition was not different between the two groups in this study [214]. This mucosal dysbiosis is also recognized to imply a disease-associated reduction in the autochthonous bacteria and the increased pathogenic genera in cirrhotic patients with HE [214]. On a correlation network analysis, these overrepresented genera were linked to poor cognitive performance, disease severity (MELD scores), enhanced systemic inflammation (serum IL-17 levels), and endothelial activation (serum soluble intravascular adhesion molecule (sICAM-1) levels) [214]. Concomitant evaluations of microbiome in the cecal mucosa, feces, and peripheral/portal blood from patients with liver cirrhosis by another study group revealed that the portal blood had a bacterial community composition similar to that of the colonic mucosa, but not to that of the feces, strengthening the importance of mucosa-associated microbiota for studying pathophysiological meanings in liver cirrhosis [215]. Chen et al. [216] examined the duodenal mucosal microbe and reported that Veillonella, Megasphaera, Dialister, Atopobium and Prevotella were increased in cirrhotic patients compared with healthy subjects whose duodenal mucosa enriched with Neisseria, Haemophilus and SR1 genera incertae sedis. This deviation of duodenal microbiota may impact on the inflammatory changes, because SIBO in possible association with duodenal dysbiosis has the greatest potential for promoting BT in patients with liver cirrhosis [216]. The enriched microbiota in duodenal mucosa, commonly found in the oral cavity, are consistent with the oral microbiota, which produce high levels of methanetiol (CH3SH), an important factor in the pathogenesis of HE [216].

Cirrhotic patients, compared with controls, had a higher Enterobacteriaceae (potentially pathogenic) but lower Lachonospiraceae, Ruminococcaceae, and Blautia (7α- dehydroxylating bacteria) abundance. The gut 7α-dehydroxylating bacteria are known to convert primary BAs (CDCA and CA), into secondary BAs (LCA and DCA, respectively). Kakiyama et al. [217] analyzed fecal microbiota together with BAs and found that CDCA was positively correlated with Enterobacteriaceae and DCA was positively correlated with Ruminococcaceae. They further showed a positive correlation between Ruminococcaceae and DCA/CA and a positive correlation between Blautia and LCA/CDCA. These relations suggest that a decreased conversion of primary to secondary BAs is linked with an abundance of key gut microbiome in advanced liver cirrhosis. BT induces inflammation, which suppresses synthesis of total BAs in the liver via the inhibition of CYP7A1. BAs prevent BT and attenuate the passage of bacterial products from the lumen of the intestine [165,218,219]. A decrease in BAs entering the intestines favors overgrowth of pathogenic and proinflammatory microbiome including Porphyromonadaceae and Enterobacteriaceae [12]. Kakiyama et al. [39] further reported that actively drinking patients with cirrhotic exhibited increased expression of FXRα mRNA in the ileum and sigmoid colonic mucosa together with increased expression of TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6 and MCP-1 mRNA in the colonic mucosa.

In contrast to these studies, Wei et al. [224] surprisingly noticed increased bacterial metabolic activities of carbohydrate, branched-chain amino acid, pantothenate and CoA with the worsening of cirrhosis from Child-Pugh class A to class C by their metaproteome analysis. They thought that the changes in intestinal microenvironment in patients with liver cirrhosis enhanced the growth and the protein expression of gut microbiome. The findings suggested that the fecal microbiome could have adaptability to the intestinal microenvironment and worked to compensate for the innutritious body of cirrhotic patients [224]. In line with their concept, the kind of bacteria responsible for the supposed metabolic compensation is of utmost importance. Their results are contradictory to the prevailing concept that gut dysbiosis cause metabolic disturbances in liver cirrhosis and arouse a question of whether we can really improve the metabolic state of advanced cirrhosis by correcting gut dysbiosis [116]. This hypothesis is interesting but needs to be further explored. Changes in intestinal microbiota associated with clinical studies on liver cirrhosis. Intestinal microbiota in patients with liver cirrhosis is summarized in Table 3.

† Patients with minimal HE group; # Patients with HE group.

An early study [225] reported that the liver transplantation (LT) recipients with HBV-related cirrhosis had fecal dysbiosis characterized by the decreases in Bifidobacterium spp., Lactobacillus spp., and Faecalibacterum prausnitzii and the increases in Enterobacteriaceae and Enterococcus spp. after LT and that the microbiota was tended to restore normal pattern except for Enterococcus spp. over time [225]. Bajaj et al. [226] noted a significant improvement in cognition with increase in fecal microbial diversity, increase in autochthonous and decrease in potentially pathogenic genera belonging to Enterobacteriaceae (Escherichia, Shigella, Salmonella), and reduced endotoxemia were seen in cirrhotic patients with good clinical course at 7 ± 3 months after LT compared with baseline. In the meanwhile, potentially beneficial, autochthonous genera belonging to Ruminococcaceae and Lachnospiraceae were increased. Sun et al. [227] reported reduced fecal abundance of Actinobacillus, Escherichia, and Shigella and increased abundance of Micromonosporaceae, Desulfobacterales, the Sarcina genus of Eubacteriaceae, and Akkermansia after LT. Improvement of gut microbiota was accompanied by favorable changes in gut microbial functionality corresponding to BAs (higher secondary, oxo and iso-BAs), ammonia, endotoxemia, lipidomic, and metabolomic profiles in LT recipients [228].

However, modulation of gut microbiota by antibiotics with pre-/probiotics to prevent post- LT complication management requires further investigation [230].

Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) is a cholestatic liver disease characterized by stricture of the intra- and/or extrahepatic bile ducts [233]. Approximately 70% of patients with PSC also have inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), mainly ulcerative colitis, whereas only 2% to 8.1% of patients with IBD have PSC [233]. PSC-associated IBD is associated with a higher risk of colorectal cancer [234].

Butyrate-producing bacteria Blautia is also important in converting primary BAs to secondary BAs in the intestine by its 7α-dehydroxylation activity. Its impact on the pathogenesis of PSC should be further evaluated. The authors discussed that unexpectedly low abundance of Veillonella in their PSC-IBD patients could be explained by the earlier stage of disease [246]. As described in former sections, increased abundance of Veillonellaceae and Veillonella have been associated with higher systemic inflammation, endotoxemia and HE in patients with liver cirrhotics [188,214,216,246]. It is noteworthy in this study that the amount of Veillonella showed strong correlations to multiple bile acid profiles in the feces (e.g., total primary and secondary BAs levels, primary BAs/secondary BAs ratio, and sulfo-conjugates) [246]. Veillonella is also known as a 7α-dehydroxylating bacteria, promoting secondary BA formation in the intestine [253]. The serum bile-acid pool was increased, but the stool bile-acid pool was decreased in patients with PSC-IBD compared to patients with IBD alone [231,246]. Further studies should focus on a more comprehensive analysis of Veillonella and BA composition in different disease stages. Intestinal dysbiosis in patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis is summarized in Table 4.

# Bajer L et al. Resuls in patients with PSC (both with and without IBD.); # Iwasawa K, et al. Reslts in patients with PSC. # Rossen NG, et al. Reslts in patients with PSC compared with those with IBD and control. § Quraishi MN, et al. Results in patients with PSC compared with IBD and control. # Kummen M, et al. Results in patients with PSC compared with those with IBD and control.

Primary biliary cholangitis (PBC) is an immune-mediated hepatobiliary disorder characterized by progressive non-suppurative destruction of small bile ducts, resulting in intrahepatic cholestasis, fibrosis, cirrhosis and ultimately end-stage liver failure [254,255]. PBC affects mostly middle-aged women, clinically with symptoms of fatigue and pruritus in the context of chronically elevated alkaline phosphatase (ALP) levels [256]. At present, the standard treatment for PBC is ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) [254], which has been reported to delay the progression of liver fibrosis and even relieve fibrosis of cirrhotic patients [257].

A first case-control study [259] reported that the fecal microbiome of Chinese patients with early PBC were depleted of potentially beneficial bacteria, such as Acidobacteria, Lachnobacterium sp., Bacteroides eggerthii and Ruminococcus bromii compared with healthy controls. The feces of patients were conversely enriched in bacteria containing opportunistic pathogens, such as gamma-Proteobacteria, Enterobacteriaceae, Neisseriaceae, Spirochaetaceae, Veillonella, Streptococcus, Klebsiella, Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae, Anaeroglobus geminatus, Enterobacter asburiae, Haemophilus parainfluenzae, Megasphaera micronuciformis and Paraprevotella clara [259]. On the other hand, another Chinese study on treatment-naive PBC patients compared with healthy controls demonstrated that the patients were associated with altered composition and function of gut microbiota, as well as a moderately lower level of diversity [260]. Their 16S rRNA sequence analyses of fecal microbiota revealed that Bacteroidetes spp were decreased, whereas Fusobacteria and Proteobacteria spp were enriched in PBC [260]. At the genus levels, Haemophilus, Veillonella, Clostridium, Lactobacillus, Streptococcus, Pseudomonas, Klebsiella and an unknown genus in the family of Enterobacteriaceae (Enterobacteriaceae,g) were enriched, while Sutterella, Oscillospira and Faecalibacterium were decreased in PBC patients compared with healthy controls [260]. As serum anti-gp210 antibody has been considered as an index of disease progression, relatively lower species richness and lower abundance of Faecalibacterium spp. in gp210-positive patients compared with gp210-negative patients are interesting [260].

The insight on the role of gut microbes in hepatocarcinogenesis mainly comes from animal experiments [261,262,263,264], suggesting that the intestinal microbiota and the TLR4-LPS pathway seem to be important for HCC promotion [213,262,264]. Accumulating evidence further support that the promoting mechanisms include dysbiosis-induced altered bacterial metabolites such as DCA, a known promotor of hepatocarcinogenesis, as well as a leaky gut and resulting BT, which enhances chronic hepatic inflammation via TLR-mediated signals just as in the progression of various chronic liver diseases [265].

The clinical studies suggesting the linkage of gut dysbiosis with HCC are scarce and inconclusive [266]. In a culture-based study, Grat et al. [267] compared fecal microbiome between 15 patients with HCC and 15 non-HCC patients who received LT and reported that the presence of HCC was associated with a greater abundance of fecal Escherichia coli (E. coli). E. coli is reported to produce potent endotoxin and to deconjugate conjugated BAs thereby enhancing the formation of secondary BAs. Animal studies indicate that endotoxin and secondary BAs are probable key players to promote HCC in these situations [266]. In patients with NAFLD-associated liver cirrhosis, Ponziani et al. [268] found that the fecal microbiota of patients with HCC was enriched with Bacteroides, Ruminococcaceae, Enterococcus, Phascolarctobacterium, and Oscillospira and deficient in Bifidobacterium and Blautia compared with those without HCC. The cirrhotic patients both with and without HCC showed enriched fecal Enterobacteriaceae and Streptococcus and reduced Akkermansia compared with healthy controls [268]. In their study, the increase in fecal Bacteroides, which had been reported in NAFLD patients with marked fibrosis [95], was related with increased levels of the proinflammatory cytokines IL8 and IL13, circulating activated monocytes, and monocytic myeloid-derived suppressor cells, suggesting a co-factorial role in hepatocarcinogenesis [268]. They also reported that Akkermansia and Bifidobacterium were negatively correlated with fecal calprotectin concentration, a surrogate marker of intestinal inflammation in cirrhotic patients [268]. In a trial to evaluate the potential of fecal dysbiosis as non-invasive biomarkers for detecting HCC in patients with HBV-related liver cirrhosis, Ren et al. [269] reported that phylum Actinobacteria and 13 genera including Gemmiger and Parabacteroides were enriched in early HCC versus cirrhosis. Interestingly, gut protective Akkermansia and butyrate-producing genera such as Clostridium IV, Ruminococcus, Coprococcus, Oscillibacter, Alistipes, Butyricoccus and Eubacterium were decreased, while genera producing-lipopolysaccharide such as Klebsiella and Haemophilus were increased in their patients with early HCC versus healthy controls [269,270], the phylum Verrucomicrobia and the genera Alistipes, Phascolarctobacterium and Ruminococcus were decreased substantially while Klebsiella and Haemophilus were increased in early HCC patients involved in a clinical study [270,271]. They also added that obesity induces changes in the composition of the gut microbiota and its metabolites (LPS and PAMPs) [271].

Accumulating evidence supports that gut dysbiosis may relate to various liver diseases. Dietary factors seem very important in this new developing, interesting clinical field.

Alcoholics with high intestinal permeability had intestinal dysmotility and altered immune responses. Alcohol-induced dysbiosis may be associated with gut barrier dysfunction. Microbiota and their products modulate intestinal barrier function by affecting epithelial pro-inflammatory responses and mucosal repair functions. Gut dysbiosis frequently causes endotoxemia in alcoholics. This also affects many NAFLD patients. Gut dysbiosis may facilitate energy-producing and proinflammatory condition for the progression of NAFLD. Close relations of endotoxemia is also related to cirrhotic complications where a shortage of autochthonous non-pathogenic bacteria and an overgrowth of potentially pathogenic bacteria are common. The lower ratio of beneficial autochthonous taxa to potentially pathogenic taxa was associated with early death and organ failure for cirrhotics. Cirrhotic patients with decreased microbial diversity have poor prognosis after liver transplantation. Cirrhotic patients with decreased microbial diversity before liver transplantation. Patients with PSC also had marked reduction of bacterial diversity. Treatment-naive PBC patients has marked dysbiosis. The gut dysbiosis-induced deranged gut liver axis may further induce hepatocarcinogenesis. Although the notion that gut dysbiosis may provoke increased IP and the following various liver injuries still a hypothesis based on various clinical and experimental investigations. Although dysbiosis- induced altered bacterial metabolites may still have much problems to be solved, best answer will be found about gut dysbiosis and clinical hepatology after persisting research activities in the near future.

