Microbiome alterations in women with gestational diabetes mellitus and their offspring: A systematic review



Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) is a metabolic disorder that might predispose pregnant women to develop type 2 Diabetes Mellitus or lead to severe adverse outcomes in their offspring. One of the factors that have been thought to be involved in the pathology behind this disorder is the microbiome. In this systematic review, we comprehensively review the documents regarding the microbiota alterations in different tracts of pregnant women with GDM and their offspring.

A comprehensive search was conducted in major databases including MEDLINE (PubMed), Scopus, and Web of sciences up to August 2021. Data on the demographics, methodology, and microbiome alterations were extracted and classified according to the type of microbiome in pregnant women with GDM and their offspring. The quality of studies was assessed using the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (NOS).

In 49 articles which were retrieved, the findings were variable on the level of changes in alpha and beta diversity, enrichment or depletion in phyla, genera, species and OTUs, in each microbiome type. Although there were some inconsistencies among the results, a pattern of significant alterations was seen in the gut, oral, vaginal microbiome of women with GDM and gut, oral, and placental microbiome of their offspring.

Even though the alteration of the microbiome of the different tracts was seen in the cases of GDM, the inconsistency among the studies prevents us from identifying unique pattern. However, the results seem promising and further studies that overcome the confounding factors related to the demographics and methodology are needed.

Pregnancy is a complex phenomenon in which different metabolic, hormonal, and physiological changes occur in the woman’s body, ensuring the optimum environment for fetal development and subsequently causing various responses in the female body. One of these changes is the transient state of hyperglycemia that usually develops during pregnancy (1). The increase in the pro-inflammatory cytokines and metabolic hormones while the pregnancy progresses, mostly during the third trimester, induces a decrease in insulin sensitivity. In some cases, this might lead to the development of a pathological state of glucose intolerance during pregnancy, known as Gestational Diabetes Mellitus (GDM) (1).

This correlation ignites many questions regarding the association between GDM and microbiota, and whether there is enough evidence to develop management strategies to prevent or treat GDM using the human microbiome modulating approaches. This systematic review aims to determine the current evidence regarding the association of the maternal and neonatal microbiota composition with gestational diabetes mellitus and to discuss the possibility of the management of GDM using the microbiome.

We conducted a systematic review in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) statement.

MEDLINE/PubMed, Scopus, and Web of Science databases have been searched using free texts and MeSH terms in titles and abstracts, including studies published till august 2021. The reference list of relevant reviews was screened manually.

After removing the duplicates of the obtained articles, the abstracts of the articles were screened based on the inclusion and exclusion criteria.

The articles were included in the study if they (1): were observational studies including cohort or prospective, cross-sectional, and case-control studies, (2) investigated the microbiota in pregnant women with GDM and/or their offspring as participants, (3) were conducted on humans, (4) were published in English language.

The oral, vaginal and gut microbiome changes in pregnant women who developed GDM, as well as the oral, placental and gut microbiome changes in their offspring.

The following data items will be recorded: first author, study year, study type and setting, country in which study was conducted, time of analysis, ethnicity of participants, recruitment sample and its size, sample site, the type of analyzed microbiome and the technique used, criteria used to determine the presence of GDM in mothers, and the increase or decrease in microbiota profile (phylum, order, family, genus) in comparison to the healthy control group.

The quality of the studies was assessed taking the risk of bias into consideration using the New castle Ottawa Scale (NOS) checklist that contains three parameters of quality: (1) Selection of population, (2) comparability of groups, (3) exposure and outcome in case-control and cohort studies (15). Each study was assigned a score from 0 to 9. The NOS adapted for cross sectional studies was used for the quality assessment of the cross sectional studies. Each study was assigned a score from 0 to 10. Studies with scores equal to or above 7 were considered as high quality articles.

After searching the databases, a total of 532 articles were obtained. 164 articles were obtained from PubMed, 160 from Web of Science, and 208 from Scopus. After removing the duplicates, 233 remained for the initial screening of the title and abstract, from which 142 were excluded for not meeting the inclusion criteria and the remaining 91 were further assessed. Then 42 of these articles were excluded for not meeting the inclusion criteria after whole-paper examination, and therefore 49 articles were included for data extraction as summarized in the PRISMA flowchart ( Figure 1 ).

The 49 included studies were classified for data extraction according to the type of the studied microbiome and were included in the Supplementary Tables 1–7 . In some studies, the microbiome of more than one organ or microbiome of both women and their offspring were included, and the data of these articles was mentioned separately in each corresponding table, hence some articles might be listed in more than one table (16–24). The microbiome types were classified into the following categories: gut (30 articles), oral (8 articles), and vaginal (5 articles) microbiome of women with GDM in Supplementary Tables 1, 2 and 3 , respectively; and gut (9 articles), oral (3 articles), and placental (4 articles) microbiome of offspring to women with GDM in Supplementary Tables 4, 5 and 6 , respectively. The postpartum changes in microbiome of women with GDM were listed in Supplementary Table 7 .

All of the studies used the 16S rRNA sequencing method to determine the composition of the microbiome.

30 articles were suitable to be included in this category as shown in the Supplementary Table 1 . Although the timing of analysis in each study was variable at both early and late stages of pregnancy, a specific pattern of microbiome alterations was witnessed among the different groups of women who developed GDM during pregnancy when compared to the women who did not develop it in the control groups.

It should be noted, however, that some of these studies were not qualified as high-quality according to the NOS checklist (21, 28, 41, 44, 46, 50, 51, 56), which might affect the efficacy of these results.

The oral microbiome of women with GDM was assessed in 7 studies as well, and a pattern of alteration was observed as shown in Supplementary Table 2 .

Although not very specific, this pattern of alteration demonstrates a correlation between GDM and the composition of the oral microbiota.

5 studies assessed the vaginal microbiome of women with GDM and their results appear in Supplementary Table 3 . While the number of articles might not be sufficient to draw a conclusion, it still reflects the fact that the vaginal microbiome is affected by the status of GDM in the mother.

Additionally, changes in microbial composition for the oral, vaginal, and rectal compartments in the women with gestational diabetes when compared with healthy pregnancies were seen in a study conducted by Solt et al., manifested by a skewed prevalence for multiple genera (16).

As it was mentined in the microbiome of the women with GDM, alterations of the offspring gut microbiome was seen in some studies as well, from which 9 articles are included in our systematic review as shown in Supplementary Table 4 . The phylum Proteobacteria was increased in the offspring gut in two articles (31, 59), while it was decreased in two others (33, 42). As for Bacteroidetes, it was seen to be both decreased (59) and increased (31, 33), and the Genus Prevotella and parent family Prevotellaceae that belong to this phylum were decreased according to Crusell et al. and Su et al. (25, 59). The frequency of Firmicutes was also assessed where it was found to be decreased in Hu et al. (33), increased in Chen et al. (42) and Crusell et al.’s study (25). Regarding Actinobacteria, its expression was increased in 2 studies (31, 59). Furthermore, Koren et al. demonstrated an increased beta-diversity in infants of age 1 month and 6 months, but by 4 years of age, children had a beta-diversity similar to mothers at T1 (at 13.84 ± 0.16 weeks of gestation) (17). Some genera correlated with GDM in another study such as Blautia, Coprococcus, Roseburia and Sutterella (18), and a decreased expression of Lactobacillus, Flavonifractor, Erysipelotrichaceae and unspecified families in Gammaproteobacteria was reported in Soderborg et al. (32). However, Sililas et al. have not observed any alterations in the meconium of the offspring (24).

All these studies were qualified to be of high-quality, except for 1 study (33) that was not qualified according to the New Castle Ottawa Scale.

According to our review, there were only few studies that assessed the oral microbiome of the offspring to women with GDM, but alteration of the microbiome was seen in all of them, as manifested in Supplementary Table 5 . For instance, consistency of microbial variation across mothers with GDM and their neonates in bacterial abundance was seen according to Wang et al. (18). Moreover, in the study of He et al. (60), higher alpha diversity was witnessed in the group of offspring to women with GDM especially in the Bacteroidetes phylum.

Furthermore, some genera were specific for this group as well as it was described in the study of Singh et al. (37), including Alistipes, Streptococcus, Faecalibacterium, Prevotella, Bacteroidetes, Bifidobacterium, Corynebacterium, Ureaplasma and Weissella. Nevertheless, it should be taken into consideration that two of these studies were not qualified to be of high-quality according to the NOS checklist (37, 60).

We found 4 studies based on our search that evaluated the placental microbiome alterations of the offspring ( Supplementary Table 6 ), one of which could not assess the samples due to an inaccurate detection (47). A distinguished pattern of microbiome in the group of offspring to women with GDM,where more operational taxonomic units in GDM group was seen in Tang et al., although this study was not considered to have a high-quality according to the NOS checklist (61). Additionally, and based on the study of Zheng et al., Proteobacteria was increased while the other phyla including Bacteroidetes, Actinobacteria, Firmicutes were decreased in placental microbiome (62).

In the study of Bassols et al. (39), some families were enriched including Coriobacteriaceae, Lachnospiraceae and Bradyrhizobiaceae from the phyla Actinobacteria, Firmicutes and Proteobacteria phyla, respectively.

Few studies evaluated the postpartum gut microbiome of women who were diagnosed with GDM during pregnancy. We summarized their findings in Supplementary Table 7 . Although there is heterogeneity among these studies regarding the exact timing in which the study was conducted, a clear changing in the gut microbiome was observed.

A summary of all the microbiome changes in both women and their offspring in the phylum, class, gender, order, family, genus, and species is presented in the Tables 1 – 6 .

The quality assessment of the articles was mentioned in a separate table according to the New castle Ottawa Scale (NOS) checklist. The studies that had a score of 7 were considered to have a high quality and were marked in blue color. The quality score describes the strength of the studies in investigating the effect of GDM on the microbiome of women with GDM and their offspring in comparison to the non GDM cases.

The results of the quality assessment of the case-control, cross-sectional, and cohort studies are shown in the Supplementary Tables 8–10 respectively. The studies that were assessed as high-quality studies are highlighted. All the 22 cohort studies had a good quality according to our assessment (17–20, 23–25, 27, 29–32, 35, 40, 44, 47, 48, 53–55, 59, 63). One cohort study did not meet the NOS criteria and was labeled as unsatisfactory (16). 8 case-control studies had a high quality with a score equal to 7 (22, 26, 43, 45, 52, 57, 64, 65). These studies had matched or adjusted controls regarding some possible confounding factors such as age and BMI. However, other studies that did not adjust the confounding factors acquired lower scores (33, 37, 41, 44, 49, 51). Only 2 cross sectional studies were assessed as high quality with a score equal to 7 (39, 42). The remaining cross sectional studies had a score lower than 7 (21, 36, 38, 46, 50, 56, 60, 61). Three of these studies were pilot studies (28, 60, 62).

The microbiome is one of the systems that undergo some alterations during pregnancy. Although it is still not very clear whether these changes are a normal consequence of the physiological reactions that take place during pregnancy, or are an independent manifestation that has its own role in contributing to the physiological state, it appears that the microbial communities express a unique pattern during the gestational period. In our study, we are mainly focusing on the microbiome alterations in GDM, where it was found to express a specific signature in GDM cases when compared to the normal groups.

Since vaginal dysbiosis is known to make the affected women vulnerable for pathological conditions that might lead to adverse pregnancy outcomes such as preterm birth and premature preterm rupture of membranes (PPROM) (67), it is perhaps possible that these changes that occur concurrently with GDM presence might have an effect on the health of women with GDM and their offspring, especially those who are delivered by normal vaginal delivery, which needs to be investigated in future studies.

Although it was once believed that the fetal microbial communities are absent before birth and that it is formed at the time of amniotic sac rupture, it was later demonstrated that the fetal microbiome is highly related to that of the mother’s, and that many species of the mother’s microbiome was seen in their offspring tracts including placenta, meconium and fetal membranes (75). Whether the microbiome is transmissible between the mother and the infant is important to better understand the alterations that might occur in the offspring microbiome in pathological states such as GDM. Many hypotheses were proposed to explain the method by which the mother’s microbiome is transferred to their infants, and it was suggested that this process occurs through the placenta and lactation by breastfeeding in later stages. Indeed, the diet of the mother during pregnancy would affect their offspring’s microbiome as well since it will be transmitted to them by placenta (76). The cesarean section mode of delivery was found to lead to a reduced Bifidobacteria and Bacteroides and an increased C. difficile expression, in comparison to the vaginally delivered babies, who were seen to acquire the vaginal microbiome traits of their mothers (77, 78). However, many controversies still surround the effect of delivery mode on the microbiome. It is thought that this effect is only minor and the environmental factors at birth time in addition to the quick conversion to breastfeeding lactation override the initial microbial signature (31). The microbiome takes a role in the future pathophysiological state of the infant (5, 27, 79), and the fact that the initial microbiome species might accompany the infant for quite a prolonged period in the first year shows us the important effect exerted by the microbiome on the gut health not only at the time of birth but in later stages as well (33).

Assessing all these changes is of special importance due to the fact that the infants of mothers with GDM are predisposed to a two- to eightfold increased risk to develop metabolic disorders including impaired insulin sensitivity and type 2 diabetes in addition to obesity later in their life (82), and preventing this from happening is an important concern for clinicians.

Although the altered signature pattern was significantly observed in our comprehensive systematic review, some limitations prevent us from reaching to a clear defined relationship between GDM and the pattern of microbiome changes. This is in part due to the notable heterogeneity among the studies on different levels. For example, the included ethnicities in most of the studies were from China and Finland, and to a lesser extent from some other countries, which does not allow us to generalize the outcomes, especially that the microbiome is known to be affected by the different genetic, lifestyle and environmental factors that varies among different regions of the world. Another reason is the difference in the criteria used to diagnose GDM, although the diagnosis was mostly given according to IADPSG criteria. The different criteria used to diagnose GDM affected the comparability of the results. Even though the studies mostly included women who had a determined BMI, age, metabolic status and excluded women with specific chronic diseases or medication use, the characteristics of the participants were sometimes different among the studies, which might have affected the final results. This especially applies to the use of antibiotics that leave compositional changes on the microbiome, where the recovery period that is needed after antibiotics treatment is at least 1.5 months, which was variable among the studies included in this review (83). The timing at which the microbiome was analyzed was also different among the articles, especially when the postpartum microbiome was assessed. Regarding the used specimen, the source of the specimen was sometimes different especially in the assessment of the oral microbiome. The number of the included participants was also heterogeneous, where the larger sample size belonged to the studies that assessed the gut microbiome, while lesser studies evaluated the microbial communities in the other tracts. Furthermore, the method of microbial analysis and extraction, amplicon primers and sequencing methods were different among the studies, which led to heterogeneous results.

Regardless of these limitations, all the findings tell us that the correlation between GDM and the microbiome in both women and their offspring is an existing fact. This fact was also addressed in previous studies that proved a GDM-associated microbiota (84, 85), and an increase in Collinsella and Blautia genera was observed in GDM cases according to Rold et al. (85). However, consistency was not observed among the results and no GDM-specific microbiome patterns could be determined (85). The development of modulating approaches that target the microbiome might have an effect on the prophylaxis and preventing the possible consequences of GDM. Such methods are already being implemented such as using probiotics and prebiotics in women with GDM and assessing their outcome on the metabolic status, and so far the results seem to be promising (1, 86), although we still need more evidence and ongoing studies should further address this outcome in their future researches.

Gestational Diabetes Mellitus is a common disorder that is getting a special attention recently due to the unwanted outcomes that it leaves on the health of both the women and their offspring. New approaches are being applied in order to develop strategies that prevent GDM and its consequences on the metabolic and physiological state. One of these approaches is through assessment of the alterations of the microbiome in women who had GDM during their pregnancy as well as their offspring. In our systematic review, we concluded a clear existing correlation between GDM and the microbial communities, where specific patterns of alterations in the microbiome was observed in the gut, oral and vaginal tracts of the pregnant women, and in the gut, oral and placental tracts of the offspring as well. These findings, although having some limitations, are promising and encouraging to develop strategies that target the human microbiome in order to develop novel therapeutic plans to treat or prevent GDM using next generation probiotics and parabiotics. Future studies should assess the outcomes and the efficacy of such therapeutic methods.

The original contributions presented in the study are included in the article/ Supplementary Material . Further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding authors.

SF, H-SE and NS have made substantial contributions to conception and design, acquisition of data, and analysis and interpretation of data. MH was involved in drafting the manuscript and revising it critically for important intellectual content. BL gave the final approval of the version to be published. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fendo.2022.1060488/full#supplementary-material

