Cholesterol Metabolism by Uncultured Human Gut Bacteria Influences Host Cholesterol Level



The human microbiome encodes extensive metabolic capabilities, but our understanding of the mechanisms linking gut microbes to human metabolism remains limited. Here, we focus on the conversion of cholesterol to the poorly absorbed sterol coprostanol by the gut microbiota to develop a framework for the identification of functional enzymes and microbes. By integrating paired metagenomics and metabolomics data from existing cohorts with biochemical knowledge and experimentation, we predict and validate a group of microbial cholesterol dehydrogenases that contribute to coprostanol formation. These enzymes are encoded by ismA genes in a clade of uncultured microorganisms, which are prevalent in geographically diverse human cohorts. Individuals harboring coprostanol-forming microbes have significantly lower fecal cholesterol levels and lower serum total cholesterol with effects comparable to those attributed to variations in lipid homeostasis genes. Thus, cholesterol metabolism by these microbes may play important roles in reducing intestinal and serum cholesterol concentrations, directly impacting human health.

Cholesterol is a key biological molecule that functions as a structural component of all animal cell membranes and is a precursor of steroid hormones, vitamin D, and bile acids (Goldstein and Brown, 2015). Two main sources of cholesterol are thought to influence concentrations of this metabolite in serum: endogenous cholesterol synthesized in the liver and exogenous cholesterol derived from dietary components of animal origin (Figure 1) (Bays et al., 2008). The cholesterol synthesized in hepatocytes is transported to the gallbladder and is then secreted into the small intestine along with other bile salts. In the intestine, biliary cholesterol (~1–2 g/day) mixes with dietary cholesterol (~0.2–0.4 g/day in the average American diet), and both sources are eventually transported into enterocytes for packaging into lipoprotein particles and secretion into the plasma (Bays et al., 2008, Chiang, 2009, Cohen, 2008, Xu et al., 2018). Hypercholesterolemia, or high circulating cholesterol, is strongly associated with the development and progression of cardiovascular disease (CVD), which is the cause of one-fourth of all deaths in industrialized countries (Goldstein and Brown, 2015, Nordestgaard and Varbo, 2014, Rader and Hovingh, 2014). Notably, reducing cholesterol transport in the intestine is a clinically validated strategy for lowering serum cholesterol levels as demonstrated by ezetimibe, an FDA-approved small molecule inhibitor of the intestinal cholesterol transporter (Figure 1) (Bays et al., 2008).

While efforts to elucidate how gut microbial metabolism of cholesterol affects human serum cholesterol levels span over 100 years, mechanistic support for this connection has remained elusive due to a limited understanding of the gut microbes, genes, and enzymes responsible for coprostanol formation. Here, we describe a multi-disciplinary strategy for enzyme discovery used to identify and characterize a widespread family of cholesterol dehydrogenase enzymes from a clade of uncultured gut bacteria that mediate the metabolism of cholesterol to coprostanol in the gastrointestinal tract. We find that the presence of these intestinal sterol metabolism A genes (ismA) in a microbiome is associated with the presence of coprostanol in stool and reduced stool cholesterol levels. Finally, to demonstrate the potential for these cholesterol-metabolizing bacteria to influence human health, we show that the presence of ismA genes in human metagenomes is significantly associated with a decrease in total cholesterol concentrations in serum that is on par with the effects observed from variants in human genes involved in lipid homeostasis. Together, our findings support a role for gut bacterial metabolism in modulating host cholesterol levels and lay the groundwork for microbiota-targeted interventions.

We set out to discover the putative gut organisms and enzymes responsible for converting cholesterol to coprostanol in the human gut microbiota. To do so, we used a three-tiered, multi-disciplinary analysis consisting of (1) integration of large-scale human stool microbiome and metabolomics datasets, (2) mining genomes of previously proposed coprostanol-producing microbes, and (3) employing biochemical knowledge to prioritize enzymes with catalytic capabilities needed to metabolize cholesterol (Figure 2).

The final class of enzymes we considered was the hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases (HSDs), which belong to the short-chain dehydrogenase (SDR) enzyme family (PF00106). These enzymes are found in many gut microbes and can oxidize hydroxyl groups of bile acids to ketones in a NAD(P)+-dependent, oxygen-independent manner (Devlin and Fischbach, 2015). However, no characterized gut microbial HSDs are known to accept cholesterol as a substrate. Using 6 biochemically characterized bile acid-metabolizing HSDs from gut microbes (E. lenta, R. gnavus, and E. coli) as a query, we found 1,310 clusters of homologous proteins in the human microbiome gene catalog. Four of the HSD clusters contained homologs of E. coprostanoligenes proteins, including a cluster of 25 proteins associated with coprostanol formation in stool with 0.92 specificity and 0.68 sensitivity (Figures 2D and S1D; Table S2). In summary, our metagenome-wide search combined with metabolomics-, genome-, and enzyme-guided bioinformatics distilled 6M microbiome genes into 4 protein clusters that we prioritized for experimental validation.

To test whether proteins from these prioritized clusters could oxidize cholesterol (1) to cholestenone (2), we expressed each of the four putative HSDs encoded by E. coprostanoligenes in E. coli and evaluated the reactivity of cell lysates toward cholesterol (Figure 3A). ECOP170 (WP_078769004.1), the E. coprostanoligenes HSD with the highest specificity toward coprostanol in stool metabolomes, oxidized cholesterol to cholestenone, completing the first step in cholesterol metabolism. ECOP170 also catalyzed the oxidation of coprostanol (4) to coprostanone (3), but did not transform the primary bile acids cholic acid and chenodeoxycholic acid, which have 3α-OH groups rather than 3β-OH groups, suggesting it may be specifically responsible for both the first (oxidation of cholesterol to cholestenone) and last (reduction of coprostanone to coprostanol) steps of this pathway (Figures 3B, 3C, S4B, and S4C).

Since there are currently no available human gut microbial isolates encoding any of the IsmA homologs, we selected six homologs of diverse sequence that were prevalent in the studied datasets for heterologous expression in E. coli and in vitro biochemical characterization. All six IsmA homologs examined oxidized both cholesterol to cholestenone and coprostanol to coprostanone in E. coli lysates (Figures 3C and S4). A multiple sequence alignment of the 25 protein sequences within the IsmA-containing cluster revealed the strictly conserved catalytic triad of Ser-Tyr-Lys required for HSD activity (Figures 3D and S2G). Mutating any of these three amino acids in Eubacterium coprostanoligenes IsmA led to complete loss of cholesterol-oxidizing activity in lysates (Figures 3D, S2H, and S2I). These data suggest that the homologs of Eubacterium coprostanoligenes IsmA found in uncultivated human gut bacteria are also cholesterol dehydrogenases involved in the first and last steps (Figure 1) of coprostanol metabolism in human gut microbiotas.

Because the 25 ismA genes found in human microbiomes could not be mapped back to any publicly available isolate genome, and 10 of those genes were associated with metagenomic species (Nielsen et al., 2014), we wanted to determine if the other ismA genes could also be assigned to uncultivated microbial species. To do this, we binned the assembled human gut metagenomes into metagenomic species (MSPs) using MSPminer and searched these species for the 25 ismA genes (Plaza Oñate et al., 2019). Using this approach, 19 of the 25 homologs were successfully assigned to individual MSPs. Similarity based taxonomic annotation of these MSPs at the species level using a comprehensive collection of microbial isolates was unsuccessful, confirming that these cholesterol-metabolizing human gut bacteria have not been previously characterized.

To understand the distribution of the 20 IsmA-encoding species in the human gut, we stringently mapped the metagenomic datasets against the non-redundant gene catalog to calculate the prevalence and relative abundance of the individual species in each dataset. Across the six cohorts used to make the initial assembly, IsmA-encoding species had an average relative abundance of 1.4% (Figure S5B), while the percentage of samples containing an IsmA-encoding species varied from 37% of samples in the human microbiome project 2 (HMP2) cohort to 92% of samples in the CVON cohort (Figure 4C). The two cohorts with the lowest percentage of encoders were PRISM and HMP2, both of which contain significant numbers of samples from inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) patients. In these two IBD cohorts, Crohn’s disease was significantly associated with decreased abundance of IsmA-encoding species, suggesting that these bacteria may be sensitive to terminal ileum inflammation (Figure 4D) (Santoru et al., 2017, Sundqvist et al., 2019). The IsmA homologs we characterized in vitro were encoded by the most prevalent MSPs found in all six cohorts (Figure 4C); msp_0205, msp_0238, and msp_0196 were also present in the coprostanol-producing stool cultures (Figure 4B). Together, these data support the idea that IsmA-encoding bacteria are prevalent constituents of the human gut microbiome where they convert cholesterol to coprostanol.

With a census of IsmA-encoding bacteria completed, we wanted to evaluate the extent to which the presence of these bacteria in complex microbial communities is associated with coprostanol formation in vivo (Figure 5A). Returning to the two independent cohorts with paired metagenomic and metabolomic data, we categorized samples as either coprostanol positive (converters) or coprostanol negative (non-converters), as determined by the presence of coprostanol in their fecal metabolomes (see STAR Methods for details) (Franzosa et al., 2019, Lloyd-Price et al., 2019). In both cohorts, converter samples were strongly enriched in IsmA-encoding species (PRISM: OR = 42.73 [95% confidence interval, CI: 11.28, 283.54]; HMP2: OR = 28.94 [95% CI: 13.64, 61.41]) (Figure 5B; Table S5). This supports the hypothesis that the presence of IsmA-encoding bacteria within a gut microbiome confers the community with the ability to metabolize cholesterol to coprostanol. Interestingly, we also observed that in a subset of microbial communities without a known IsmA-encoding microbe, coprostanol was still present (Figure 5B). This observation might be explained by the limit of detection associated with metagenomic sequencing, especially with low abundance microbes, or the possibility that other, more distantly related microbes and their cholesterol dehydrogenases can also perform this reaction.

In order to determine the extent of cholesterol metabolism in stool samples where coprostanol is being formed, we re-ran a subset of 26 samples from the PRISM cohort using a quantitative liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) method. Our concentration values for the three metabolites measured (cholesterol, cholestenone, and coprostanol) correlated well with their respective relative abundances determined by previous metabolomic methods in the same samples, validating the quantitative nature of the fecal metabolomics data for our metabolites of interest (Figure S6A). Using the determined concentrations of each compound within a stool sample, we calculated the relative proportion of coprostanol, cholestenone, and cholesterol in each sample (Figures 5C, S6B, and S6C). In the 11 coprostanol-containing human stool samples, the percentage of coprostanol to total measured cholesterol and cholesterol metabolites (cholesterol, cholestenone, and coprostanol) ranged from 7.4% to 95.6%, indicating a wide range of activity for this metabolism in vivo (Figure 5C). Coprostanol comprised greater than 50% of the cholesterol metabolites in 7 of the 11 samples; in 3 of these 7 samples, coprostanol accounted for greater than 90% of the cholesterol metabolites. These data suggest that in some people, this pathway has the potential to convert most of the intestinal cholesterol to coprostanol in vivo.

Because IsmA-encoding bacteria are highly associated with both coprostanol formation in human stool samples and decreased fecal cholesterol levels, we next examined whether the presence of these coprostanol-forming bacteria is associated with variation in serum lipid levels in human populations, specifically high-density lipoprotein (HDL)-C, low-density lipoprotein (LDL)-C, and total cholesterol (TC). As a comprehensive approach, we used three studies (Framingham heart study [FHS], CVON, and Jie et al.) with paired stool metagenomics and serum cholesterol measurements, comprised of participants from three different countries (USA, the Netherlands, and China, respectively) (Table S6). CVON (n = 292) and Jie et al. (n = 384) were previously published, while stool metagenomics data from 623 subjects in the FHS cohort were generated by our lab to aid in answering this question. The chosen studies also included participants with prevalent CVD. Participants whose microbiome harbored any of the identified IsmA-encoding bacteria were classified as encoders, while those without these species were considered non-encoders.

In a meta-analysis of these studies, while no statistically significant effects were observed for either LDL-C or HDL-C, we did observe a pooled difference of −0.15 mmol/L in TC (95% CI: −0.27, −0.03) between encoders and non-encoders (Figure 6; Table S6), with directional consistency across all three studies and low between-study heterogeneity (I2 = 0). To put the magnitude of the observed decrease in serum cholesterol levels into perspective, the effect sizes of the IsmA-encoding bacteria (0.15 mmol/L for TC) slightly exceed the largest effects of lipid-associated host genes, such as HMGCR (0.068 SD units per allele for TC, which corresponds to 0.063 mmol/L for the FHS study; see STAR Methods for details) or PCSK9 (0.054 SD units per allele for TC, which corresponds to 0.050 mmol/L per allele for TC for the FHS study) (Willer et al., 2013). Since the presence of these IsmA-encoding bacteria significantly correlates with a biologically meaningful decrease in total serum cholesterol, it suggests that cholesterol metabolism by the human gut microbiota decreases host cholesterol levels.

The idea that gut bacterial metabolism of cholesterol to coprostanol may lower serum cholesterol levels was proposed over 100 years ago, yet relatively few studies have investigated this connection. The paucity of information about this process is especially striking considering the abundance of information regarding other gut microbial metabolic activities, such as secondary bile acid formation and short-chain fatty acid biosynthesis. Efforts to understand the biological implications of gut bacterial cholesterol metabolism have been hindered by the difficulty of culturing microbes responsible for this activity in humans and a lack of knowledge regarding the biochemical and genetic basis for this metabolic process (Ooi and Liong, 2010). By combining large-scale sequencing efforts, reference-free microbiome analysis, and a suite of in vitro biochemical and culture-based assays, we have identified and characterized gut bacterial enzymes responsible for the first and last step in coprostanol formation. Our work shows that the majority of coprostanol formation in diverse human populations can be attributed to a clade of highly prevalent, IsmA-encoding bacterial species. These species were previously uncharacterized and currently remain uncultured, potentially explaining the past difficulties in studying this metabolic pathway. We observed that the presence of coprostanol-forming bacteria in stool samples is associated with lower levels of fecal cholesterol, providing a plausible mechanism by which these bacteria may decrease host serum cholesterol levels. This concept is supported by the results of our meta-analysis of three geographically diverse human cohorts, which shows that subjects with coprostanol-forming microbes have lower total serum cholesterol.

The discovery of enzymes involved in cholesterol metabolism from the gut microbiome was accomplished using a multi-disciplinary strategy integrating high-throughput readouts (de novo gene assembly and metabolomics) and biochemical knowledge. This same discovery strategy can also be applied to other pathways/metabolites of interest and will enable further identification and characterization of enzymes involved in biological processes contributed by the microbiota, regardless of whether the microbe responsible for this metabolism is known. This is especially important for microbiome studies as computational methods continue to reveal uncharacterized microbes and enzymes that exist in microbial communities across the globe (Almeida et al., 2019, Pasolli et al., 2019). While characterizing “microbial dark matter” still presents significant challenges, combining bioinformatic and biochemical approaches has the potential to grant access to this largely untapped source of biologically relevant metabolic transformations (Marcy et al., 2007, Rinke et al., 2013).



Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Ramnik J. Xavier (rxavier@broadinstitute.org).

All plasmids generated in this study are available upon request from the Lead Contact.

PRISM and HMP2 metabolomics data (accession number PR000677 and PR000639 respectively) are available at the NIH Common Fund’s Metabolomics Data Repository and Coordinating Center (supported by NIH grant, U01-DK097430): Metabolomics Workbench (http://www.metabolomicsworkbench.org). Framingham Heart Study metagenomics data is available in the Sequence Read Archive (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra) (SRA): PRJNA559860. Stool culture sequencing data can be found in SRA: PRJNA559861.

E. coprostanoligenes ATCC51222 was obtained from the American Type Culture Collection. E. coprostanoligenes and stool cultures were grown in basal cholesterol medium (BCM), which contained (per liter) 10 g of casitone (Difco Laboratories, Detroit, Mich.), 10 g of yeast extract, 2 g of cholesterol, 1 g of lecithin, 0.5 g of sodium thioglycolate, 1 g of calcium chloride dihydrate, and 1 mg of resazurin. E. coprostanoligenes was grown on modified lecithin agar medium (MLA) plates, which was prepared as described by Freier et al. (1994).

Cultures were grown and handled in an anaerobic chamber (Coy Laboratory Products) with an atmosphere of 20% CO2, 5% H2, and 75% N2 at 37°C.

The Framingham Heart Study (FHS) is an observational longitudinal epidemiological investigation of the development of disease as it evolves in a community-based population sample. The design involves serial examination of all Framingham cohorts. The examinations include laboratory testing, physical examination, and interviews. For this study, participants were part of the Generation 3/Omni 2 Cohorts who agreed to participate in the microbiome analysis at exam 3 (2016-2019).

The study protocol was approved by the Massachusetts General Hospital/Partners Human Research Committee and the Institutional Review Board of the Boston University Medical Center. All experiments adhered to the regulations of these review boards. All study procedures were performed in compliance with all relevant ethical regulations. Each participant signed an informed consent prior to participation.

Candidate cholesterol dehydrogenase genes were amplified from genomic DNA (for E. coprostanoligenes) and cloned into pET28b. DNA was extracted from stool samples (DNeasy PowerSoil Kit, Qiagen) (for the ismA genes from msp_0238, msp_0205, msp_0421, Table S3) or purchased from Genewiz (Ordered sequences are listed in Table S2). Site-directed mutagenesis of residues in ECOP170 was accomplished using primers listed in Table S3. PCR reactions were performed with Phusion High Fidelity polymerase, and PCR products were purified (Zymoclean gel DNA recovery kit, Zymo research). The resulting gene products were assembled into pET28b using Gibson assembly and transformed into Stellar Competent Cells. The identities of the constructs were confirmed with DNA sequencing and transformed into E. coli BL21 strains for expression. All constructs were grown in LB with kanamycin (50 μg/mL) with the exception of the strain expressing the homolog from CAG:180 which required growth in TB for protein expression. All constructs were induced at an OD600 of 0.5–0.6 with 500 μM isopropyl β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside, and the induced cells were incubated at 20°C for 20 h.

500 mL of a culture of E. coli BL21 expressing one of the cholesterol dehydrogenase homologs were pelleted by centrifugation (20 min at 7,000g and 4°C), resuspended in 10 mL of ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline containing one cOmplete Protease Inhibitor cocktail tablet (Roche Diagnostics) and lysed by a cell disruptor (EmulsiFlex-C3, Avestin). Cell debris was removed by ultracentrifugation (30 min at 20,000g and 4°C). Protein expression was confirmed by SDS-PAGE analysis using 4–20% Mini-PROTEAN TGX gels (Bio-Rad Laboratories). Gels were stained with Coomassie Blue for visualization. The clarified supernatant was used directly in the cell lysate assay described below. Cholesterol or coprostanol (5 μL of a 10 mM solution of cholesterol or coprostanol in methanol) was added to 500 μL of clarified supernatant with 100 μM of NADP+ and NAD+. After incubation at 37°C for 12 h, the reaction mixtures were frozen until being analyzed using LC-MS.

Eubacterium coprostanoligenes was grown under anaerobic conditions for 48 hours in basal cholesterol medium (BCM) without cholesterol in order to remove background cholesterol metabolites. 250 mL of a culture of E. coli BL21 expressing one of the cholesterol dehydrogenase homologs were pelleted by centrifugation anaerobically (20 min at 7,000g and 4°C), resuspended in 10 mL of ice-cold lysis buffer (50mM Hepes, 300mM NaCl, pH=7.5) containing one cOmplete Protease Inhibitor cocktail tablet and Lysonase Bioprocessing Reagent (Millipore Sigma) at the recommended concentration. Lysis was accomplished by sonication under anaerobic conditions and clarified by ultracentrifugation (30 min at 20,000g, 4°C, anaerobic conditions). Experiments were all set up under anaerobic conditions in an anaerobic chamber. For experiments under oxygen conditions, reactions were brought out of the chamber and opened to air.

Total RNA was purified by chloroform-phenol extraction from cell pellets of triplicate cultures of E. coprostanoligenes grown in BCM with or without cholesterol for 48 h. RNA was DNase treated, and cDNA was prepared using the High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Applied Biosystems). Transcripts of interest were quantified by real-time PCR carried out using iTaq Universal SYBR Green Supermix (Bio-Rad). All qPCRs were normalized to 16S rRNA gene expression. Primers used are listed in Table S3.

Proteins were overexpressed using the procedure described above. Cells from 200 mL of culture were pelleted by centrifugation, resuspended in 10 mL of ice-cold lysis buffer (300 mM NaCl, 10 mM imidazole, 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.5) containing one cOmplete Protease Inhibitor cocktail tablet, and lysed by 4 min of continuous passage through a cell disruptor (EmulsiFlex-C3, Avestin) at 15,000 lbs per square inch. Cell debris was removed by ultracentrifugation (20 min at 20,000 X g and 4°C), and the cell-free extract was applied to 0.5 mL of HisPur Ni-NTA Resin (Thermo Scientific) pre-equilibrated with lysis buffer by gentle rocking at 4°C for 2 h. Non-absorbed materials and weakly bound proteins were removed by washing the column with 2 × 25 mL of wash buffer (300 mM NaCl, 20 mM imidazole, 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.5). His6-tagged protein was eluted with 5 mL of elution buffer (300 mM NaCl, 200 mM imidazole, 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.5). After SDS-PAGE analysis, eluent containing pure protein was dialyzed (Spectra/Por Dialysis Membrane, 6 – 8 kDa molecular weight cutoff; Spectrum Labs) against 500 mL of extraction buffer (300 mM NaCl, 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.5) for 12 h at 4°C. The proteins were immediately used in enzymatic assays.

Approximately 100 mg of frozen stool sample was suspended in 20 mL of pre-reduced PBS and vortexed for homogenization. 500 μL of stool slurry was added to 5 mL of pre-reduced basal cholesterol medium and cultured in an anaerobic chamber at 37°C.

Samples (either stool cultures, reaction mixtures with purified enzymes or lysates) were diluted 1:10 in methanol. Insoluble debris was removed by centrifugation (10 min at 5,000 x g and 4°C) and the supernatant was injected onto a Kinetex 2.6 μm, C8 100 Å 100 x 3 mm (Phenomenex) column for LC-MS analysis. For the re-analysis of PRISM stool samples (Figure 5C), samples post centrifugation were additionally diluted 1:1 in methanol.

Analysis of the sterols in samples was performed using an ultra-high performance liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (UHPLC-MS/MS) system model Xevo TQ-S (Waters). The mass spectrometer system consists of a triple quadrupole equipped with an atmospheric pressure chemical ionization (APCI) probe. The chromatographic separation was performed on a Kinetex 2.6 μm, C8 100 Å 100 x 3 mm (Phenomenex) column. The LC elution method was as follows: 0–4.5 min (93% B) at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min at 40°C. Solvent A was water with 0.1% formic acid, and solvent B was acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid.

For the targeted metabolomics method developed for the re-analysis of samples from the PRISM cohort, fecal slurries from 26 stool samples were obtained from the metabolomics platform at the Broad Institute (Franzosa et al., 2019). Samples chosen had a large range of relative abundances for coprostanol as determined by untargeted metabolomics. The only difference in analysis was the LC elution method used: 0–23 min (50% B to 100% B), 23–25 min (100% B), 25-29 min (100% B to 50% B), 29-30  min (50% B), at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min at 40°C. Solvent A was water with 0.1% formic acid, and solvent B was acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. To measure cholesterol, cholestenone and coprostanol, the retention times and mass transitions listed below were monitored for each compound: Cholesterol (rt 17.573, 369.332 → 147.021), cholestenone (rt 17.652, 385.244 → 108.988), coprostanol (rt 18.899, 371.304 → 95.011). Molar ratios of each metabolite were calculated by taking the concentration for each metabolite of interest and dividing by the sum of the concentrations for each of the 3 metabolites measured within a sample. Concentrations of each of the metabolites in a fecal slurry were determined by a standard curve with reference standards.

For samples used in Figure 4C, 1 mL of stool culture (described above) at day 3 was centrifuged at 5,000 x g for 10 min. Supernatant was removed and the pellet was frozen until further processing. DNeasy PowerSoil Kit was used to isolate DNA (Qiagen).

For metagenomic library construction, DNA samples were first quantified by Quant-iT PicoGreen dsDNA Assay (Life Technologies) and normalized to a concentration of 50 pg/μL. Illumina sequencing libraries were prepared from 100-250 pg of DNA using the Nextera XT DNA Library Preparation kit (Illumina) according to the manufacturer’s recommended protocol, with reaction volumes scaled accordingly. Prior to sequencing, libraries were pooled by collecting equal volumes (200 nL) of each library from batches of 96 samples. Insert sizes and concentrations for each pooled library were determined using an Agilent Bioanalyzer DNA 1000 kit (Agilent Technologies). Libraries were sequenced on HiSeq 2500 2x101 to yield ~10 million paired end reads per sample. De-multiplexing and BAM and FASTQ file generation were performed using the Picard suite (https://broadinstitute.github.io/picard).

Cultures of E. coprostanoligenes were grown for two days in BCM. Cells were pelleted at 5,000 x g for 10 min and DNeasy PowerSoil Kit was used to isolate DNA (Qiagen). Two different sequencing methods were used to generate sequencing reads for this genome: Nextera XT DNA Library Preparation kit (Illumina) and Oxford Nanopore MinION. For Illumina library construction, see methods above. The second complementary approach used was Oxford Nanopore MinION sequencing using the 1D approach following default Oxford Nanopore protocols for library preparation. Sequencing of E. coprostanoligenes on the MinIon was performed with a R9 flow cell resulting in 9527 reads with an N50 length of 2593. Prior to assembly, the Illumina reads were trimmed with Trimmomatic 0.36. Spades 3.9.0 was used to perform a hybrid assembly with the Illumina and Oxford Nanopore MinIon reads using the --nanopore option. The Oxford Nanopore MinIon reads were passed to Spades without correction.

Cholesterol (rt 7.21, m/z 369.3519), cholestenone (rt 7.00, m/z 385.3465), and coprostanol (rt 7.50, m/z 371.3583) could be identified in published metabolomics datasets (PRISM and HMP2) using peak picking software (Progenesis QI). For more information detailing the generation of the two fecal metabolomics datasets, see Franzosa et al. (2019) and Lloyd-Price et al. (2019).

Raw sequencing data for PRISM (Franzosa et al., 2019), HMP2 (Lloyd-Price et al., 2019), CVON (Kurilshikov et al., 2019), 500FG (Schirmer et al., 2016) and a study by Jie et al. (2017) were downloaded from Sequence Read Archive (SRA): PRJNA400072 (PRISM), PRJNA398089 (HMP2), PRJNA319574 (500FG), from European Genome-Phenome Archive: EGAS00001003508 (CVON), or European Nucleotide Archive (ENA): PRJEB21528 (study by Jie et al).

The high-quality draft genomes are available for download from NCBI Genomes Bioproject PRJNA559861.

We studied the relationship between converter status and blood concentration of total cholesterol, LDL-C and HDL-C in three studies with publicly available shotgun metagenomic sequencing datasets: CVON (Kurilshikov et al., 2019), a study by Jie et al. (2017) and one newly sequenced FHS study. Detailed characteristics of studies are provided in Table S6.

Inverse variance-weighted random-effects meta-analysis implemented in meta R package was used to obtain pooled estimates for relationship between converter status and lipid concentrations across all three studies with between-study heterogeneity calculated using I2 statistics (Higgins and Thompson, 2002) (also meta R package).

Relationships between stool metabolites and converter status were investigated in the PRISM (Franzosa et al., 2019) and HMP2 (Lloyd-Price et al., 2019) studies. In PRISM and HMP2, data for cholesterol, cholestenone and coprostanol was available. We performed log10 transformation (with pseudo count of 1e-5 for zero values) of metabolite data followed by calculation of z-scores by subtracting the mean from each individual value and dividing by the standard deviation. For coprostanol we also created dichotomous variables indicating presence or absence of this metabolite in stool samples.

Given that in the HMP2 study longitudinal metabolite measurements were available, we utilized mixed effects models to study relationships between converter status and stool metabolite concentrations. Transformed metabolite values were fitted as outcomes and converter status was specified as predictor while subjects were included as random effects to account for correlation between repeated measures (lme function from nlme R package). For the dichotomous coprostanol variable we fitted a logistic mixed effects model including subjects as random effects variable (glmer function from lme4 package in R). Age, gender, antibiotic usage (yes/no) and disease status (non-IBD, CD or UC) were included in all models as covariates (fixed effects) in HMP2 study.

We selected two loci that are known drug targets (HMGCR and PCSK9) and extracted respective effect sizes from the largest GWAS meta-analysis (Willer et al., 2013) to compare with the effects of the studied ismA microbial genes. To make GWAS estimates in SD units comparable with reported effect sizes, we have multiplied beta values from GWAS by SD from FHS study. For example, SD of lipid of interest from the FHS cohort (e.g., 0.92 mmol/L for TC) was multiplied by the effect size per allele in SD units (e.g., 0.068 in SD units for HMGCR) to give the effect size in mmol/L (e.g., 0.063 mmol/L per allele in FHS study for HMGCR).

D.J.K., H.V., E.P.B., and R.J.X. conceived of the project. D.J.K., N.K., and B.F. performed the biochemical experiments. D.J.K. performed culture-based experiments and analysis by mass spectrometry. D.R.P. analyzed sequencing data from culture-based experiments and performed bioinformatics analyses of stool metagenomic data from human cohorts. D.R.P. assembled and analyzed high-quality genomes for IsmA enzyme-encoding species. D.S. performed association analysis of stool metabolomics and serum lipids with IsmA homolog status. A.B.H. sequenced, assembled, and annotated the E. coprostanoligenes genome. R.S.V. and S.Y.S. provided samples from the FHS cohort. H.V. and R.J.X. generated metagenomic data for the FHS cohort. D.J.K., D.R.P., D.S., H.V., R.J.X., and E.P.B. provided critical feedback on experiments. D.J.K., D.R.P., D.S., H.V., R.J.X., and E.P.B. wrote the manuscript.

E.P.B. has consulted for Merck, Novartis, and Kintai Therapeutics. She is on the Scientific Advisory Boards of Kintai Therapeutics and Caribou Biosciences and is an Institute Member of the Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard. R.J.X. is a consultant to Novartis and Nestle.

Supplemental Information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2020.05.013.

