The intestinal and biliary microbiome in autoimmune liver disease—current evidence and concepts

Autoimmune liver diseases are a group of immune-mediated liver diseases with three distinct entities, including autoimmune hepatitis, primary biliary cholangitis, and primary sclerosing cholangitis. The interplay of genetic and environmental factors leads to the breakdown of self-tolerance, resulting in hyper-responsiveness, and auto-aggressive immune activation. Emerging evidence links autoimmune liver diseases with alterations of the commensal microbiome configuration and aberrant immune system activation by microbial signals, mainly via the gut-liver axis. Thus, the microbiome is a new frontier to deepen the pathogenetic understanding, uncover biomarkers, and inspire innovative treatments. Herein, we review the current evidence on the role of the microbiome in autoimmune liver diseases from both clinical and basic research. We highlight recent achievements and also bottlenecks and limitations. Moreover, we give an outlook on future developments and potential for clinical applications.

The term autoimmune liver disease (AILD) comprises three different idiopathic progressive disorders: primary biliary cholangitis (PBC), primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC), and autoimmune hepatitis (AIH). The etiologies are unexplained, and the pathogenesis is poorly known [1].

This review focuses on the interactions between the commensal microbiota and autoimmune liver diseases. We propose the importance of the microbiome-gut-liver triangle in autoimmune and cholestatic liver injury. Moreover, we will give an outlook on the diagnostic and therapeutic potential targeting this triangle.

A systematic search was performed for abstracts cited on PubMed, CINAHL, EMBASE, Cochrane Library, and Trip Pro up to November 2021. The only restriction imposed on the literature search was for English language abstracts only. After identifying relevant titles, the abstracts of these articles were surveyed to decide if the study contained material pertinent to the review. A manual cross-reference search of bibliographies was also performed to identify potentially relevant articles.

AIH is a chronic inflammatory disease with a female predominance that affects all age groups and ethnicities. The condition can lead to cirrhosis and liver failure with the subsequent need for liver transplantation or death [16]. The diagnosis of AIH is based on the presence of circulating non-organ specific autoantibodies, hypergammaglobulinemia with a selective elevation of serum IgG levels, compatible liver histology, and the exclusion of other causes, especially viral hepatitis and drug-induced liver injury [17]. Elevated aminotransferases are typical but may spontaneously normalize, despite histopathological evidence of persisting inflammatory disease [18]. Cirrhosis is present in one-third of adult patients at diagnosis [17]. Standard treatment includes corticosteroids and azathioprine, the only approved agents for AIH treatment [18]. The main treatment goals are normalization of IgG and transaminase levels (biochemical remission) and lack of inflammatory activity on liver histology (histological remission). Liver-related morbidity and mortality significantly increase among patients without a proper response to first-line treatment [1]. Several drugs are used off-label for second- or third-line treatment of patients with incomplete remission or intolerance to first-line therapy, including mycophenolate mofetil, calcineurin inhibitors, anti-TNF-antibodies, and B cell depleting monoclonal antibodies. Large multicenter trials on salvage therapies are urgently required [1, 17]. Since diagnostic tests lack specificity and sensitivity, new biomarkers for diagnosis and treatment response monitoring are warranted [1].

PBC affects mainly women over the age of 40 years [1]. PBC should be suspected in patients with chronic cholestasis, especially with alkaline phosphatase elevation, after exclusion of other causes of liver disease [19]. The diagnosis can be made based on the basis of elevated alkaline phosphatase and the presence of antimitochondrial antibodies (AMAs) [20]. AMAs can be found in 95% of PBC patients, and the majority of AMA-negative PBC patients have specific antinuclear antibodies [19]. Diagnostic liver biopsy is, therefore, no longer required for the majority of patients [21].

UDCA (ursodeoxycholic acid) is recommended as the first-line treatment of PBC. Several criteria for treatment response, including liver biochemical values, have been suggested [19, 21]. Depending on the response criteria, 25–50% of patients suffer from UDCA treatment failure. Insufficient response after 1 year of treatment is associated with an increased risk of disease progression, including the development of hepatocellular carcinoma and end-stage liver disease [1]. For patients with insufficient response to UDCA, combination therapy with obeticholic acid is licensed second-line treatment, and those intolerant to UDCA can be treated with obeticholic acid as monotherapy [21]. Off-label treatment with bezafibrate in patients with inadequate response to UDCA alone has favorable therapeutic efficacy, including relief of itching [1, 19, 22]. Several novel agents are currently under investigation. The goal of current trials is to maximize response in insufficient responders to UDCA while maintaining an acceptable safety profile. New biomarkers to predict inadequate response to UDCA and stratify the risk of disease progression are needed [1].

PSC is a rare chronic cholestatic liver disease characterized by inflammation, fibrosis, and obstruction of intrahepatic or extrahepatic bile ducts [4]. The pathogenesis of PSC remains elusive. The condition frequently reduces health-related quality of life and increases morbidity and mortality [1]. Chronic cholestatic liver test abnormalities, mainly alkaline phosphatase elevation, are typical for PSC but may be absent in early disease in up to 20% of patients [4]. The noninvasive magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography is the preferred method to establish the diagnosis and typically shows multifocal strictures of intra- and extrahepatic bile ducts and prestenotic dilatations. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography, associated with a risk for complications such as pancreatitis, is mainly reserved for a diagnostic sampling of new or progressing strictures or therapeutic interventions for mechanical bile duct obstruction [23]. Liver biopsy is recommended in patients with suspected PSC but normal cholangiography to diagnose small duct PSC. The pathognomonic histological sign is a concentric periductal “onion-skin” fibrosis, which, however, is seen infrequently [19].

Patients with PSC have a poor long-term prognosis, with up to 40% requiring liver transplantation and 20–30% developing cholangiocarcinoma [4]. About 70% of PSC patients suffer from associated inflammatory bowel disease and require surveillance colonoscopies due to the highly increased risk of colorectal cancer [4]. Liver transplantation is the only curative treatment option, but 20–40% of patients suffer from recurrence of PSC. There are no effective drugs to prevent disease progression, liver transplantation, cholangiocarcinoma, or death [1]. Ursodeoxycholic acid is widely used, but its use remains controversial. There was no clinical benefit for several immunosuppressive agents, antibiotics, and other drugs [1, 9, 20]. Thus, medications for PSC that improve survival and transplant-free survival are urgently needed. Furthermore, new biomarkers for diagnosis, outcome prediction, and monitoring of PSC are urgently required [1, 9].

Virtually, all human body surfaces are colonized by complex communities of microorganisms (microbiome); these microbes are predominantly of bacterial origin, and the most densely populated human habitat is the intestine. Rapid developments in culture-independent molecular microecology methods have facilitated a rapidly growing body of research on the role of the human microbiome in health and disease [24, 25]. The mammalian immune system features an intricate network of innate and adaptive components. Both the innate and adaptive immune system elements are present in all tissues and synergistically protect the organism’s homeostasis from external threats and internal danger signals [26]. A disruption of the intestinal microbiome through interference with the environment (such as the use of antibiotics, diet, or geographical adjustments), impairment of the interfaces between host and microbiome, or changes in the immune system can lead to a systemic spread of commensal microorganism, susceptibility to infection, and aberrant immune responses [27]. Germ-free animals were indispensable to understanding the mechanisms underlying microbiome-immunity interactions. Microbial colonization of the mammalian host’s body surfaces is a milestone event profoundly shaping and educating the immune system. It is hypothesized that most events in the context of colonization and immune system development occur during a limited “window of opportunity” in the first years of life; this creates simultaneously a chance to establish immune homeostasis as well as a susceptibility towards perturbation and maladaptation with potentially long-term consequences for immunity-related health [28, 29]. Several modulators affect initial microbial colonization, including the mode of delivery [30]. In the past years, research on microbiome-immunity interaction has burgeoned. More comprehensive reviews on that subject matter can be found elsewhere (e.g., [27]). Herein, we give a concise overview we deem relevant to this review’s main subject.

The innate immune system and the commensal microbiome are intricately linked. Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) belong to the phylogenetically oldest components of innate immunity. Intestinal AMPs are mainly produced by Paneth cells and shape the microbiome’s configuration [31]. Pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), notably toll-like receptors (TLRs), are innate immune sensors responding to microbial signals. TLRs facilitate immune signaling by recruiting certain adapter elements (e.g., MyD88) and by activating transcription factors (e.g., NF‐κB); together, these processes result in inflammatory cytokine expression and type I interferon production [32]. Recent evidence shows that PRR ligands are derived from eternal pathogens and abundantly produced by commensal microbes [33]. The TLR expression in intestinal epithelia displays a high degree of spatial, cell-subtype-specific, and temporal diversity [34]. The role of TLR5 in shaping the intestinal microbiome has been studied comprehensively [35, 36]. TLRs are also abundantly expressed by various cells within the liver, including Kupffer cells, dendritic cells, hepatic stellate cells, endothelial cells, and hepatocytes [37]. Animal studies have shown that hepatic TLR4 signaling induced by the bacterial cell wall component lipopolysaccharide leads to liver inflammation and fibrosis [38]. Other PRRs proposed to shape the gut microbiome composition are NOD-like receptors (NLRs). Nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-containing protein 1 (NOD1) serves as an innate sensor aiding adaptive lymphoid tissues and maintaining intestinal homeostasis [39]. Some NLRs assemble into cytosolic multiprotein complexes called inflammasomes; their pleiotropic immune functions are reviewed in detail elsewhere [40]. Inflammasomes activate caspases through cleavage. Activated caspases promote the maturation of the pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-1β and IL-18 and induce a lytic type of cell death termed pyroptosis [40]. An extensive array of microbial signals originating from pathogens and commensal bacteria can influence inflammation assembly and activation. Different inflammasomes have been implicated in the regulation of intestinal microbiome composition, notably the NLRP6 inflammasome [41]. Emerging research links inflammasome signaling within hepatocytes, macrophages, and Kupffer cells with inflammatory liver injury [42, 43]. The liver is host to a wealthy population of innate immune cells stimulated by commensals. Macrophages in the liver comprise subsets of different cell populations such as Kupffer cells, accounting for 80–90% of all resident macrophages in the body, and recruited monocyte-derived macrophages [44]. Besides macrophages, hepatic innate immune cells include natural killer cells, natural killer T cells, and γδ T cells [45]. Myeloid and lymphoid resident immune cells concentrate around periportal regions of the hepatic lobule. This asymmetric immune zonation results from sustained MYD88-dependent signaling induced by commensal bacteria in liver sinusoidal endothelial cells [46].

Microbiota and adaptive immunity interlace in far-reaching bidirectional interaction. Recent research provides a detailed depiction of the crosstalk between the gut microbiome and CD4 + regulatory T cells. Notably, a subset of colonic regulatory CD4 + T cells lacks differentiation in GF mice resulting from the absence of bacterial consortia capable of fermenting dietary fiber into short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) [31]. The CD4 + subset of Th17 cells is subject to intensive research due to its ambiguous roles in protective immune responses and chronic inflammation [32]. The intestine harbors different Th17 cell populations. The particular bacteria eliciting their differentiation define their inflammatory inclination. Th17 cells induced by SFB are non-inflammatory, while Th17 cells stimulated by Citrobacter rodentium are a source of pro-inflammatory cytokines [33]. Contemporary research has shed light on the impact of the microbiota on CD8 + T cell memory. The microbiota promotes CD8 + T cell long-term survival as memory cells guided by microbial metabolite-induced metabolic rewiring of activated CD8 + T cells [34]. A part of primary bile acids secreted into the intestine escape enterohepatic circulation into the colon. Here, they are converted by gut bacteria into bioactive secondary bile acids [35]. In the colon, secondary bile acids modulate a vital population of colonic FOXP3 + regulatory T (Treg) cells expressing the transcription factor RORγ, a population crucial for the host’s immunological homeostasis [36].

Some bile acid metabolites seem to affect adaptive immunity. Derivatives of lithocholic acid (LCA), 3-oxoLCA, and isoalloLCA, directly modulate T helper cells. While 3-oxoLCA inhibits Th17 cell differentiation, isoalloLCA seems to enhance Treg differentiation. In mice, administration of 3-oxoLCA and isoalloLCA reduced Th17 and increased Treg cell differentiation in the intestinal lamina propria [37]. Interestingly, Odoribacteraceae strains seem to produce isoalloLCA, which has been suggested to inhibit Gram-positive pathogen expansion in vivo [38].

The intestinal epithelium is the principal barrier to preserve intestinal compartmentalization and safeguard the host from enteric bacteria. Intestinal barrier dysfunction contributes to diseases affecting the liver and other internal organs [39]. The intestinal barrier incorporates physical, immunological, and microbial elements. The physical barrier consists of epithelial and mucus components. The intestinal epithelial layer’s integrity is stabilized by occlusive intercellular molecular joints termed “tight junctions” (TJs) [40]. Commensal microbes reinforce the gut barrier through various mechanisms [41]. Under normal physiological circumstances, intestinal goblet cells continuously produce mucins to replenish the mucus layer. Commensals stimulate microbe recognition receptors (such as TLRs) in intestinal cells, thereby triggering mucins and AMPs [42]. Many commensal bacteria produce short-chain fatty acids, such as butyrate, from the fermentation of insoluble fiber. Among butyrate’s many functions, TJ barrier maintenance has recently been described [43]. In the intestinal barrier’s failure, even bacteria beneficial under normal physiological conditions can kindle inflammation and elicit organ injury [44]. Increased gut permeability leads to an influx of microbe-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs; also termed pathogen-associated molecular patterns [PAMPs]) into the systemic circulation, stimulating an immune response. PAMPs originating from the gut, such as lipopolysaccharide or microbial RNAs, can reach the liver via the portal circulation and induce liver inflammation and fibrosis, e.g., mediated by TLR4 [45–47]. Various mechanisms are causing a leaky intestine; they are still incompletely understood and subject to vibrant research. Such mechanisms include physical trauma and toxins such as alcohol, TJ severance, altered epithelial stem cell turnover, and alterations to the mucus layer texture [48, 49]. Emerging research points towards a close relationship between gut microbiome alterations, intestinal leakiness, and autoimmunity [50]. The molecular mechanisms underlying this connection are mostly unclear. Tools to identify molecular agents of microbial origin impacting the intestinal barrier are emerging [51].

Infections are thought to play a significant role in the development and exacerbation of autoimmune diseases. Autoimmunity following infection can result from several mechanisms, including molecular mimicry [52]. Recent epidemiological data suggest that antibiotic intake during childhood can lead to gut dysbiosis and seems to be associated with autoimmune disorders in adulthood [53].

Environmental factors including antibiotics, alcohol consumption, and diet have a profound impact on the intestinal microbiome. Microbiota communities resulting from specific environmental modifiers such as antibiotics might increase the susceptibility to develop AIH [54]. In a study including 72 AIH patients and 144 healthy controls, exposure to antibiotics within 12 months before AIH diagnosis was an independent risk factor for AIH manifestation [55].

Up to 20% of AIH patients present specific autoantibodies to soluble liver antigen/liver-pancreas (SLA/LP) protein. Structural similarity between a region of the surface antigen PS 120 from Rickettsia spp. and immunodominant regions of SLA/LP autoepitope has been detected in an in silico study, supporting the hypothesis that molecular mimicry might trigger AIH [56]. Future studies should assess the frequency of memory B and T cells specific to PS 120 protein epitopes in AIH patients and healthy controls to conclude that the suggested peptides are authentic immunodominant T cell epitopes. Furthermore, the potential association of infections with other bacteria and AIH development should be investigated in future studies [57].

Several genetic and environmental factors are assumed to play a role in the onset and perpetuation of bile duct injury in PBC, including infectious and chemical exposures leading to molecular mimicry or modification of autoantigens [58]. Bacterial infections seem to constitute a pivotal environmental risk factor for PBC, especially in female patients [59]. Molecular mimicry and immunological cross-reactivity between several bacteria and human mitochondrial antigens have been suggested to contribute to the pathogenesis of PBC. The disease-specific antimitochondrial autoantibodies are directed against members of the 2-oxo-acid dehydrogenase complex family of enzymes. The pyruvate dehydrogenase complex E2 subunit (PDC-E2) represents a significant autoantigen, and more than 95% of patients with PBC show serologic immune responses to PDC-E2 [60].

Another study demonstrated significant alterations of circulating bile acids in treatment-naïve PBC patients that were strongly associated with disease progression. PBC patients showed gut dysbiosis that correlated with the bile acid profile compared to healthy controls. UDCA treatment reversed the bile acid profile and dysbiosis in PBC patients. Thus, bile acid profiling could contribute to PBC patients’ diagnosis and disease status assessment. Altering gut microbiota might allow modulation of the bile acid profile and, subsequently, be harnessed for PBC patients’ treatment [62].

The intestinal and biliary microbiome are increasingly thought to play a pathogenetic role in PSC. The involvement of the gut microbiota in the pathogenesis is supported by the fact that bacterial RNA was found in liver tissues, and bacteria and fungi were detected in most bile duct cultures of PSC patients. Moreover, an increased T cell response to microbial antigens was observed in PSC patients independent of IBD presence [63]. In another study, the persistence of biliary candidiasis was associated with markedly reduced transplantation-free survival in PSC patients [64].

Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) may alter the host microbiome. A pilot clinical trial examined the efficacy of FMT in PSC. This study was small and enrolled only ten patients, of whom only six underwent FMT. Three patients showed a significant (50% or more) decrease in serum alkaline phosphatase by week 26. Microbiome diversity increased in all PSC patients receiving FMT 1 week after the start of FMT. This increase remained stable in most participants [78]. This preliminary trial allows the conclusion that FMT is safe in PSC and shows potential for clinical improvement. However, the limited number of patients and time frame do not qualify for further findings or recommendations.

Although both conventional microbiological and next-generation sequencing–based studies (see below) emphasized the triggering role of bacteria in AILDs, substantial evidence suggests that viral infections may elicit the manifestation of AILDs in vulnerable individuals as well [79].

To summarize, various studies have linked AIH, PBC, and PSC to viral triggers. However, so far, none of these studies has consistently and unequivocally satisfied the Henle-Koch postulates to prove viral pathogenesis in AILDs. The viral infection hypothesis in the pathogenesis of AILDs merits further research.

Next-generation sequencing’s availability and affordability have reinvigorated the interest in studying the role of commensal microorganisms in autoimmune liver diseases. The past 5 years saw a surge of human case–control microbiota studies in this field. While interpreting microbiome studies in clinical populations, it is paramount to acknowledge the variation and biases introduced by different experimental protocols and the multiple sources of confounding in human cohorts [91]. It is furthermore critical to understand that microbial communities differ substantially between the gut lumen and mucosal surfaces. At the same time, mucosal surfaces of different segments of the digestive tract vary considerably as well. Differing sampling methods, such as biopsies, brushing, or luminal washes, may explain the higher variability of results observed in mucosal studies than luminal studies.

The microbiome may serve as a reservoir of antigens initiating or maintaining autoimmune responses in AIH [57]. Several studies have investigated the microbiome configuration in patients with AIH compared to either healthy or diseased controls (Table
1). All studies published so far were cross-sectional and relied on sequencing the 16S gene to the best of our knowledge.

Although converging evidence from the studies summarized above is encouraging, the disparate and sometimes contradictory results warrant direct comparisons of larger international cohorts to validate disease‐specific microbial signatures in AIH independent of varying dietary and geodemographic circumstances. Evidence from metagenomic shotgun sequencing and functional characterization using functional metagenomic profiling, metatranscriptomics, proteomics, or metabolomics is still lacking in AIH patients. It may unveil a picture more complex than the one gained by way of 16S gene sequencing. Likewise, no analysis of viral or fungal communities has been published to date. Moreover, profiling the intestinal mucosal microbiome is still lacking and may complete the account of intestinal microbial alterations associated with AIH.

Li and colleagues have characterized the gut microbiome using 16S sequencing in a Chinese cohort of patients with early-stage PBC. Most patients received UDCA [98]. The gut microbiome of PBC patients was depleted of some potentially beneficial bacteria, such as Ruminococcus bromii. On the other hand, taxa such as phylum Proteobacteria, family Enterobacteriaceae, and the genera Veillonella, Streptococcus, and Klebsiella, potentially entailing pathogens, were enriched [98]. Tang et al. recruited a large Chinese cohort of treatment-naïve PBC patients and healthy controls. A prospective trial was conducted in a subgroup of patients with PBC with microbiota-profiling before and after 6 months of treatment with UDCA [99]. A significant reduction of within-individual microbial diversity was observed in untreated PBC patients. Potential pathogens such as Klebsiella, Haemophilus, Streptococcus, and Veillonella were enriched in UDCA-naïve PBC patients compared to controls. The altered abundance of six PBC-associated genera was restored after 6 months of treatment with UDCA. In particular, Faecalibacterium, enriched in controls, was decreased in gp210-positive compared to gp210-negative patients [99]. In a recent cross-sectional study including 23 PBC patients, fecal microbiota and metabolic profiles were investigated. Fecal acetate and SCFAs were found higher in PBC patients with advanced fibrosis [100]. Furukawa et al. have studied the relationships between clinical profiles, biochemical response to UDCA, and gut microbiome composition in a cohort of Japanese patients with PBC treated for at least 1 year with UDCA [101]. Altered gut microbial composition with loss of Clostridiales commensals was observed in patients with PBC. Among UDCA non-responders, Faecalibacterium (a butyrate-producing and potentially beneficial taxon) showed confounder-robust significantly lower relative abundance. The authors conclude that a decrease in Faecalibacterium abundance might predict the prognosis of patients with PBC [101]. Table
2 summarizes the findings from NGS case–control studies in PBC.

To conclude, the gut microbiome is altered in PBC patients and may be critical for the onset, progression, and prognosis by interacting with metabolism and immunity. Attempts towards prospective study designs and integrative analyses utilizing several data domains shed new light on the pathophysiology of PBC. However, studies relying on metagenomic shotgun sequencing and large-scale multi-omic integration are still lacking. No analysis of commensal viral or fungal communities has been published so far. Also, we are not aware of any studies investigating the intestinal mucosal or biliary microbiome in PBC, which may yield interesting results aiding the findings from fecal profiling.

There has been a bustle of studies in the past 5 years to characterize the gut microbiota in PSC/PSC-IBD compared to healthy controls (HCs) and IBD patients [102–111]. These studies covered the fecal and mucosal microbiome and reinforced the importance of the intestinal microbiome in PSC. Most reports focused on the bacterial microbiome. We have summarized the bacterial alterations unveiled by those publications in adult PSC patients in Table
3.

To sum up, the stage of a cross-sectional description of intestinal taxonomic microbiome alterations in clinical PSC populations can be considered approximately completed. However, more extensive studies, ideally relying on shotgun sequencing and integrating multiple international cohorts, will reveal subtler changes. Now, prospective studies are warranted combining more functional information (through metagenomics, proteomics, metatranscriptomics, and metabolomics). The research of the bile microbiota in PSC is a promising though challenging area, and no knowledge is available on the mucosal microbiota of bile ducts. The study of viral communities in PSC will complete the picture of perturbations of the microecology in PSC.

As of the time, microbiota studies in autoimmune liver diseases have been mainly correlational. Even so, over recent years, researchers have yielded mechanistic support for a link between intestinal pathobionts and liver injury in autoimmune and cholestatic liver diseases. Together these studies support the concept of microbiome community alterations, bacterial translocation across the gut barrier, and amplified immune response in autoimmune liver diseases, though more nuanced pathophysiological aspects now come to light as well.

In an elegant study, Manfredo Vieira et al. have demonstrated that translocation of the pathobiont Enterococcus gallinarum from the gut to the liver triggers autoimmune responses in humans and mice predisposed to autoimmunity. E. gallinarum DNA was detected in liver biopsy specimens from AIH patients. Coculturing E. gallinarum with human hepatocytes induced the autoantigens endogenous retrovirus glycoprotein 70 and β2-glycoprotein I, which are considered autoimmunity-promoting components [126]. Another recent study has shown that Bifidobacterium animalis ssp. lactis 420 (B420) alleviates S100-induced experimental autoimmune hepatitis (EAH) and modulates the gut microbiota configuration in mice. B420 decreased circulating endotoxin levels, suppressed the RIP3 signaling pathway in hepatic macrophages, and mitigated the proliferation of Th17 cells [127]. Zhang et al. reported that AIH patients feature increased gut permeability and RIP3 activation of hepatic macrophages. In mice, intestinal barrier dysfunction led to intestinal bacterial translocation, thus amplifying the hepatic RIP3-mediated innate immune response. Furthermore, GSK872 attenuated RIP3 activation and thus decreased the activation and accumulation of macrophages in the liver. Broad-spectrum antibiotic treatment resulted in reduced RIP3 activation and ameliorated liver injury [128]. Certain neurotransmitters have recently been proposed to regulate immune responses and play a critical role in autoimmunity. Xue et al. have shown that depletion of dopaminergic neurons promotes activation of hepatic iNKT cells and promotes concanavalin A (Con A)-induced liver injury (a mouse model of AIH) [129]. Ablation of the gut microbiota by an antibiotic mix reduced intestinal dopamine synthesis, and in turn, aggravated liver injury. The liver damage could be reversed by either restoring the gut microbiota or supplementation of a D1-like receptor agonist. These results point towards a regulatory axis encompassing the gut microbiome, nervous system, and immune system, which plays an essential role in autoinflammatory liver injury [129]. Moreover, dysfunctional bile acid synthesis and reduced farnesoid X receptor (FXR) activation were reported in AIH [130]. A recent study demonstrates that reduced commensal butyrate synthesis is implicated in hepatitis in FXR KO mice. Butyrate supplementation reversed dysregulated BA synthesis and mitigated liver inflammation in this mouse model [130].

The E2 component of the mammalian pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDC-E2) displays a remarkable structural similarity with its bacterial counterpart. Therefore, it has been hypothesized that bacterially triggered breach of tolerance to PDC-E2 may be the first step in the pathogenesis of PBC [131]. Non-obese diabetic (NOD).B6 Idd10/Idd18 mice infected with Novosphingobium aromaticivorans or E. coli manifest liver lesions similar to the PBC’s pathology in humans [131, 132]. In mice, frequent injections with the bacterium Streptococcus intermedius resulted in PBC-like non-putrid cholangitis and an increase of circulating anti-gp210 (a crucial antibody in a subgroup of PBC patients); in the same mouse model, portal inflammation was induced in RAG2(− / −) mice by transferring splenic cells from S. intermedius–inoculated C57BL/6 wild-type mice [133].

Isaacs-Ten et al. have demonstrated that murine cholestasis alone does not cause liver injury in germ-free mice [135]. The authors have shown that endotoxin increases hepatocytes’ susceptibility to cell death following bile acid challenge. Macrophages promote intestinal leakiness and gut microbiome alterations during cholestasis by activating the inflammasome, leading to increased hepatic endotoxin exposure [135].

Multidrug resistance 2 knockout (mdr2(− / −)) mice manifest a PSC-like liver disease phenotype. Interestingly, germ-free mdr2(− / −) mice display a more vigorous disease activity and cholangiocyte senescence, pointing towards a protective role of specific microbial consortia and their metabolites [136]. Tedesco et al. have demonstrated that livers from mdr2(− / −) mice harbor increased numbers of IL17A + γδTCR + cell populations, and that mdr2(− / −) mice display an increased intestinal abundance of Lactobacillus [137]. Furthermore, the authors found that the manifestation of hepatic inflammation and fibrosis in mdr2(− / −) mice was dependent on intrahepatic activation of γδ TCR + cells and expression of IL-17; these events were triggered by exposure to Lactobacillus gasseri [137]. In another study, mdr2(− / −) mice displayed an altered intestinal microbiota composition and NLRP3 inflammasome activation within the gut-liver axis. Intestinal dysbiosis in these mice correlated with intestinal barrier disruption and bacterial translocation, fueling the NLRP3-mediated immune response in the liver [138]. Thus, the microbiota seems to play a double-edged role in this mouse model featuring both protective and damaging effects.

To summarize, these studies support a causal relationship between gut microbes and autoimmune liver diseases and represent progress towards clinical application. However, it is imperative to recall that one cannot directly extrapolate the findings from these animal models to human patient populations, especially since no mouse model can fully recapitulate all essential features of any autoimmune liver disease [141]. Also, inbred mice do not reflect the genetic heterogeneity of humans. Moreover, experiments in wildling mice that harbor a microbiota more akin to humans on a variable genetic background are required to circumvent these shortcomings [142]. Furthermore, none of these studies thus far has drawn a complete and coherent causal trail between the microbiome and the clinical manifestations of autoimmune liver disease.

The swift advancement in microbiome research uncovered novel therapeutic avenues and reinvigorated “new old tools” targeting the microbiota for medical purposes (Fig. 3).

Further research is required to establish the utility of the therapeutic approaches proposed. Fundamental limitations to data published so far include their short time frame and PSC’s lack of suitable surrogate endpoints correlating with clinically meaningful outcomes. The latter restriction impedes interventional trials in PSC in general.

We conclude that patients with AIH, PBC, and PSC have altered gut microbiome. This observation may also apply to other digestive tract segments and in PSC to ductal bile. These alterations seem to be disease-specific, although the evidence on this question is not conclusive yet. The limitations of the clinical microbiome data available include the cross-sectional designs and the biases associated with PCR-based microbiome profiling. In general, metagenomic sequencing is limited by its inability to account for the functional activity of the community. To accurately analyze health-related outcomes associated with microbial configuration, it is essential to divert the attention from the isolated study of different data types to an integrative approach incorporating multiple covariables from several data domains, such as metatranscriptomics, metaproteomics, and metabolomics, ideally in a prospective manner.

Microbiome configuration and immune responses are highly variable among human individuals and often a higher proportion of variance is explained by inter-individual variation than by disease state. This inherent variability and complexity represent a formidable challenge and an ambit for artificial intelligence and machine learning to decode individualized microbiome-health reciprocation [153].

This article is a contribution to the special issue on: Tolerance and autoimmunity in the liver - Guest Editors: Christoph Schramm, Ansgar Lohse, and Ye Oo

Publisher's note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Timur Liwinski and Melina Heinemann contributed equally to the present work.

