The Human Gut Phageome: Origins and Roles in the Human Gut Microbiome

The investigation of the microbial populations of the human body, known as the microbiome, has led to a revolutionary field of science, and understanding of its impacts on human development and health. The majority of microbiome research to date has focussed on bacteria and other kingdoms of life, such as fungi. Trailing behind these is the interrogation of the gut viruses, specifically the phageome. Bacteriophages, viruses that infect bacterial hosts, are known to dictate the dynamics and diversity of bacterial populations in a number of ecosystems. However, the phageome of the human gut, while of apparent importance, remains an area of many unknowns. In this paper we discuss the role of bacteriophages within the human gut microbiome. We examine the methods used to study bacteriophage populations, how this evolved over time and what we now understand about the phageome. We review the phageome development in infancy, and factors that may influence phage populations in adult life. The role and action of the phageome is then discussed at both a biological-level, and in the broader context of human health and disease.

In the past decade, the importance of the human gut microbiome in both health and disease has come to light. It plays a role in the acquisition of nutrients, defence, and in a range of diseases, from gastrointestinal to neurological. Most of these microbiome studies focus solely on bacterial populations, with fungal, archaeal and viral communities often being neglected. However, it is of vital importance that the viruses of microbes, particularly bacteriophage populations, are not overlooked. These bacteriophages (phages), viruses that solely infect bacteria, are the most numerous viral component within the human body (Reyes et al., 2010; Minot et al., 2011), and are predicted to play a significant role in the maintenance of human health, through processes such as horizontal gene transfer (Camarillo-Guerrero et al., 2021).

In this review we will discuss what is known about: how phages enter the body, how we study the phageome, its main components, and the important roles and functions it performs in both human health and disease.

Since the early work of d’Hérelle (1921), many vital questions within phage biology, and specifically the role in ecosystems such as the human gut, remain unanswered. Techniques used for identifying and characterizing phages in the human gut can be understood from three perspectives: culture-dependent methods, culture-independent methods, and sequencing-based methods. Before the rise of next-generation sequencing in the last 15 years, culture-based methods were the primary approach for researching phage ecology, these rely on isolation techniques to extract virions for investigation ( Figure 1 ) (Mokili et al., 2012).

For culture-based methods it is necessary to isolate virus-like particles (VLPs) from their complex in situ environment. This is often performed on faecal samples due to the ease and minimal cost in obtaining them. However, the bacterial community of the mucosa-associated microbiome is dominated by different phyla to those found in faeces (Lepage et al., 2005), so much so that it is compositionally distinct (Gillevet et al., 2010). Thus, sampling of faeces may select a combination of shed mucosal bacteria and nonadherent luminal populations (Eckburg et al., 2005). This sampling effect is likely to also affect the phage communities recovered. The relative understanding of phageome composition from faecal sampling is visualised in Figure 2 , which highlights gaps in our knowledge from the acquisition of phages through diet, to the various positions of the digestive system. We suggest that future research efforts work towards a more holistic view of the human gut phageome, which undoubtedly relies on colonoscopies for the targeted sampling of the ileum and colon. This will facilitate the study of the phage populations in active luminal and mucosal-associated communities, in order to describe compositional differences in the respective phageomes, and to understand their possible in situ influence on the overall gut microbiome and the human host health.

In addition to characterizing aspects of phage-host interactions, concentrated phage populations can be further interrogated with flow cytometry (Brown et al., 2015), microscopy and molecular biology techniques (Castro-Mejia et al., 2015) (see section Culture-Independent Methods), or sequenced for further in silico analyses (see section Metagenomics). Culture-dependent methods of phage isolation and characterisation focus on individual phage functions and replication strategies. Despite this being vital for the investigation of phage populations and phage-host dynamics, culture-independent methods have facilitated the study of phageome diversity and function.

While the recent rise in culture-independent methods since the 1980s was due to the advent of Sanger sequencing, these methods arose decades earlier thanks to electron microscopy (EM) ( Figure 1 ). Phages were first visualised with EM in the 1930s (Peankuch and Kausche, 1940; Ruska, 1940), which circumvented the magnification limitations of light microscopes, allowing for the visualisation of phages. Transmission EM (TEM) was used to observe that tailed phages were the most abundant VLPs in human faeces (Flewett et al., 1974), with recent microscopy indicating that the gut virome is almost exclusively represented by the order Caudovirales (Hoyles et al., 2014; Guerin et al., 2018). A large diversity of viral morphotypes have been visualised within individuals (Hoyles et al., 2014), with most VLPs representing phages. Microscopic techniques have also been used to enumerate gut phages (Lepage et al., 2008; Hoyles et al., 2014), however it has been suggested that TEM and staining could overestimate the true active phageome by up to 8 times (Kleiner et al., 2015). An evaluation of the staining and visualisation techniques that have led to a number of important discoveries is given in Table 1 . The revelation of the high abundance of viruses, especially phages, in the human gut as observed by microscopy has paved the way for modern phage research.

It is finally worth noting the use of whole animal models for investigating the factors that drive microbiome structure and function, and disease-state modelling of the human gut, e.g. inflammatory bowel diseases (see section Role of Bacteriophages in Human Disease). Animal models enable the experimental investigation of phage-host interactions, to develop hypotheses that connect alterations in the gut microbiome to disease. An extensive review of simple animal models of the gut microbiome was written by Douglas (2019). Murine models have been applied to a wide range of phage studies, including phage-host population dynamics over time (Hsu et al., 2019), changes in phage populations after antibiotic exposure (Modi et al., 2013), investigating the role and function of phage proteins (Miernikiewicz et al., 2016), and the abundance and activity of prophages in the gut (Kim and Bae, 2018). However, there has been much critique of the use of mice models to represent the human gut, discussed in Nguyen et al. (2015). Animal models have enabled hypothesis generation and testing, but due to differences in their physiology and natural microbiota, they should be used as a stepping-stone rather than as final evidence to inform human microbiome related medicine.

Metagenomics is the most recent development on the gut phageome methods timeline, facilitated by the advent of high-throughput sequencing ( Figure 1 ). Metagenomics provides a snapshot of the DNA phage community: the populations that can be recovered, and the genes they encode. There are two favoured approaches to performing metagenomics: sequencing of the entire nucleic acid complement through shotgun metagenomics, and amplification of marker genes such as the 16S ribosomal RNA gene in amplicon sequencing (Jovel et al., 2016; Hayes et al., 2017). Given the absence of a universal viral marker gene, amplicon approaches are unviable for studying the phageome, although some group-specific markers do exist for estimations of phage diversity (Adriaenssens and Cowan, 2014). Instead, whole-community metagenome (WCM) sequencing has been demonstrably the most successful method for exploring phage communities across environmental niches (Hayes et al., 2017). Metagenomic sequencing of gut microbiome free-phages relies on enrichment of VLPs, prior to nucleic acid extraction, introducing the previously discussed biases. Protocols typically use size fractionation of free phages selecting for < 200 nm, with particular focus on DNA phages (Kleiner et al., 2015). A review of the steps involved in producing phage metagenomes, including the biases associated with each step, has been reviewed by Hayes et al. (2017).

Another limitation associated with assembled viral genomes is the lack of information on viral activity (Stern et al., 2012). Sequenced phages may be quiescent and thus less metabolically important relative to the active phage community. Further, the verification of host range, gene function, and replication strategy characterisation requires the cultivation of phage isolates. The activity of phages can, however, be resolved through a combination of ‘omic strategies. In a similar approach to sequencing the DNA metagenome, other meta-’omic strategies have been adopted to study the gut phageome at the RNA, protein and metabolite-levels.

In metatranscriptomics, the sequencing and de-novo assembly of RNA contigs is carried out in a similar way to metagenomics, reviewed for environmental samples in (Lim et al., 2013). Notably, for recovering RNA phages from the gut, there are inherent difficulties facing the collection, storage and assembly of RNA libraries from human samples, which have been reviewed by Bikel et al. (2015). This could be why metatranscriptomics has had limited usage in the study of the gut phageome. In addition, tools developed for the prediction of DNA phage contigs from metagenomes are not optimised for the prediction of RNA phages, due to the scarcity of known RNA phages and the vast diversity in their genomes (Duffy et al., 2008). Subsequently, RNA phages have rarely been identified in the gut; the RNA viruses that have been identified were derived from plants consumed in the diet (Zhang et al., 2005; Lim et al., 2015). A novel alternative approach to recovering RNA phages, based on homology to known core single-stranded RNA (ssRNA) phage genes, has been implemented on metatranscriptomes generated from activated sludge and aquatic environments (Callanan et al., 2020). Future studies should aim to use this method to recover RNA phages from the gut, given recent findings of their abundance and activity in other ecosystems (Callanan et al., 2018; Starr et al., 2019).

There are undoubtedly numerous additional challenges that face the study of the phageome, as compared to the bacterial microbiome. While we have provided many limitations of the existing methods, we have underlined the potential for their future development and implementation in studying the gut phageome. Namely, the greatest challenge involves expanding the proportion of the phageome captured by ‘omic analyses. This means recovering increasingly low abundant phage populations and describing their functional potential and reality. To this aim, future advances in both culture-dependent and sequencing methods, in addition to the combination of these approaches, can be achieved in a number of ways. This begins with amending sampling biases through the direct study of gut samples, and the greater representation of sampled individuals outside of Europe and North America. Increasing sequencing depth, augmenting bioinformatic tools for recovering and annotating phage contigs, and combining ‘omic techniques will maximize our ability to characterize sampled phageomes. The simultaneous implementation of culture-dependent methods with sequencing approaches can validate in silico hypotheses of phage-host interactions for implicating phage populations in the overall functioning of the gut.

The human gut is host to a complex community of microorganisms that contribute greatly to gut function, immune responses and disease pathogenesis. The human microbiome develops from birth, is predominantly of maternal origin, and expands rapidly in response to many environmental factors (Yassour et al., 2016). The phageome follows a similar pattern to the bacterial populations, with changes in diversity occurring within the first 2 weeks of life ( Figure 3 ) (Breitbart et al., 2008). Initially the phageome is of low diversity, with the sources of inoculation being unclear (Mills et al., 2013). Suggestions of the origin of this initial phageome include dietary, environmental and maternal sources (Breitbart et al., 2008), and induction of prophages from the newly colonised microbiota (Breitbart et al., 2003). As early bacterial colonisers are also derived from the maternal source, these should not be considered distinct sources but rather a multifaceted acquisition. It has been reported that vaginal delivery or caesarean section can produce distinctly different viral communities within the infant gut phageome (McCann et al., 2018). Bifidobacterium and their phages can be vertically inherited from the mother via breastmilk (Duranti et al., 2017), including prophage induced from colonizing bacteria (Liang et al., 2020) and phage that infect probiotic lactic acid bacteria abundant in breastmilk (Martin et al., 2003; Pannaraj et al., 2018). Sharon et al. (2013) found that a group of closely related Caudovirales bloomed, then persisted in the infant gut along with their host strains, between weeks 15-24 after birth. These Caudovirales initially dominate the gut phageome, then a shift to a Microviridae-dominated population occurs at around two and a half years old ( Figure 3 ) (Lim et al., 2015). It has been postulated that the Caudovirales populations cannot be supported by the minimal bacterial community, leading to a phage population crash. This, in turn, allows bacterial populations to thrive without predation, shifting the microbiome towards a mature state with an increased diversity of bacteria.

In adulthood, the gut phageome has been proposed to be dominated by phages exhibiting a temperate lifestyle (Silveira and Rohwer, 2016). While this may be true, measures of the phageome are not absolute and the diversity of temperate phages may be masked by a few highly abundant lytic phages, meaning that the intricacies of the phageome have yet to be fully resolved (Sutton and Hill, 2019). The adult gut phageome shows a return to a Caudovirales-dominant population with a subpopulation of Microviridae ( Figure 3 ) (Kim et al., 2011; Manrique et al., 2016), although there is a large degree of inter-individual variation (Reyes et al., 2010). Communities dominated by Microviridae or CrAssphage have also been described in some individuals (Shkoporov et al., 2019). This inter-individual diversity appears to be driven by environmental factors (Reyes et al., 2010), and is significant even between identical twin infants and families (Lim et al., 2015; Reyes et al., 2015). Some RNA phages have also been detected in the gut phageome, but in significantly lower abundance in comparison to DNA phages (Breitbart et al., 2003; Zhang et al., 2005). However, it is difficult to distinguish if this is due to a genuine reduced presence or lack of effective techniques to detect RNA phages, as discussed in section Other ‘Omics. Later in life, the gut microbiome decreases in diversity and shifts from a Firmicutes- and Bacteroidetes-dominated community to one dominated by obligate and facultative anaerobes (Nagpal et al., 2018). While it has yet to be investigated, the functional capacity of the phageome may also be influenced by this change in composition. Though the gut phageome seems to be highly specific from person-to-person, there has been indication of stability over time (Shkoporov et al., 2019), with sequences of the same phages detected more than 2 years apart (Minot et al., 2011; Minot et al., 2013). There is emerging evidence for a core gut phageome, Manrique et al. (2016) identified a set of 23 phages that were present in over 50% of healthy gut samples analysed, with an additional 44 phage groups present in 20-50% of individuals, suggesting a secondary set of shared phages. A recent study found that both CrAssphage and Microviridae were the two most stable members of the gut viral community, suggesting a potential role as part of a core phageome (Shkoporov et al., 2019). However, any core communities only represent a fraction of the overall population, it is almost impossible to simplify the complexity and individuality of the phageome.

CrAssphage were discovered in 2014 via the cross-assembly (crAss) method, providing the name CrAssphage. Previously undetected, they are the most abundant gut phage currently known (Dutilh et al., 2014). Through both metagenomic and culture-based studies, their host has been predicted to be Bacteroides, with a podoviridae-like morphology (Shkoporov et al., 2018a; Yutin et al., 2018). Interestingly, no known lysogeny genes were found in the genome of the original CrAssphage isolate (crAss001), yet the phage could maintain its population in culture with Bacteroides intestinalis, in part due to the long latent phase and very small burst size of 2.5 plaque forming units per cell. However, the true mechanism was not elucidated.

Unusual, composite phages have also been identified to play a role within the gut. Bacterial strain Enterococcus faecalis V583 contains multiple prophage elements, two of which combine to form a lytic phage particle (Duerkop et al., 2012). One of these distinct prophages encodes the structural proteins, while the other contains necessary infection elements, and both are essential for lytic infection. The resultant phage appears to give E. faecalis V583 a competitive advantage over related strains when colonizing the gut (Duerkop et al., 2012) (see discussion in section Phage-Host Population Dynamics). While being of interest as a stand-alone case, this also has implications for future metagenomic studies when partial prophage-like sequences are found.

The location within the gut also influences the phageome ( Figure 2 ). Following the stomach, the proximal gut provides the most hostile environment for bacteria, a microaerophilic environment with a low pH and antimicrobial peptides which enriches bacteria such as Lactobacillaceae and Enterobacteriaceae. The distal gut is the opposite, an anaerobic environment, with a higher pH and reduced concentration of antimicrobial peptides, allowing bacteria such as Bacteroidaceae, Prevotellaceae and Ruminococcaceae to thrive (Donaldson et al., 2016). This longitudinal gradient causes a steady increase in bacterial load and diversity from the proximal to the distal gut, and it may be expected that the phage distribution would also follow this longitudinal axis. In primate models, it has been shown that both the relative abundance of phages and the composition of the phageome varies depending on site within the gastrointestinal tract (Zoetendal et al., 2012; Zhao et al., 2019). Furthermore, a study in pigs found a higher abundance of phages in the ileum, and hypothesised that the nutrient-limited environment may prevent bacterial phage resistance and promote pseudolysogeny, allowing phage proliferation (Looft et al., 2014). The density of phage populations also varies cross-sectionally through the mucus layers of the gut (Barr et al., 2013a), the implications of this are discussed further in section Interactions With the Immune System. These differences in phage communities hint at the different roles and functions of phages throughout the gastrointestinal tract, that require greater understanding to use phages in the future as markers of gut health or as treatments to improve gut function. In Figure 2 we have displayed the varying composition of the phageome throughout the digestive tract, where the majority of the knowledge arises from faecal samples.

A well-characterised influence on the gut microbiome is diet, therefore it can be assumed that diet will impact the phageome too (Singh et al., 2017). This has been observed in studies of high fat diet (HFD) in mouse models, wherein both the microbial and viral gut communities were affected (Howe et al., 2016; Schulfer et al., 2020). These changes to the phageome during a long-term HFD included an increased abundance of Microviridae, while Siphoviridae abundance decreased (Schulfer et al., 2020). As breast milk is high in fat, this may provide some insight into why previous studies have found that infant gut phageomes move towards Microviridae-dominated communities (see section Development of the Phageome) ( Figure 3 ). The change of diet in infancy, to weaning and solid foods was shown to alter gut phage composition and diversity in pandas (Guo et al., 2020), suggesting the change from infant to adult phageome is in part influenced by dietary factors. Malnutrition in infancy was also found to affect the gut phageome (Reyes et al., 2015). The microbiome and phageome developed sequentially, but the phageome was disrupted in malnourished infants (Reyes et al., 2015). Phage populations could not be recovered, despite the use of dietary supplements, suggesting that infancy is a key time in the development of the gut phageome (Reyes et al., 2015). Further studies have identified that the phageome is not only distinct in malnourished children, but in fact these phages may play a pathophysiological role (Mirzaei et al., 2020). In vitro experiments indicated phages from a stunted child caused microbiota shifts to a disease associated state in an age-related manner (Mirzaei et al., 2020). The study suggested there is a time window where the phageome and microbiome of children less than 23 months is amenable, before the malnutrition-associated community becomes fixed. As malnutrition and stunting of growth is a major cause of mortality in infants, this finding is of great importance.

The human gut is an abundant source of potential host bacteria, which should allow many dietary phages to thrive. Equally there are a number of factors that may prevent colonisation by dietary phages, including phage-specific antibodies (Mirzaei and Maurice, 2017), eluded to by a higher abundance and diversity within the phageome of patients with immune disorders (Norman et al., 2015; Perez-Brocal et al., 2015). Phage colonisation may be further hampered by various exclusion strategies by host strains (Rossmann et al., 2015) and phage competition (Reyes et al., 2013). It has been shown that orally delivered phages can survive the stomach to be detected in the faeces, while some phage treatments reduce target bacteria (Mai et al., 2015), not all phage-host systems are equal and some phages fail to proliferate (Sarker et al., 2016). With GI tract phageome studies limited in scope and number, the lack of direct supporting evidence for dietary phages to shape the phageome and microbiome does not mean that they play no role. Instead, it is another overlooked aspect of the human gut microbiome, particularly in the first two formative years.

Medical procedures and treatments can have an effect on the gut phageome, including the well-documented impact of antibiotics. The effect of broad spectrum antibiotics on the gut bacterial community is non-targeted killing, leading to a dysbiotic state (Jernberg et al., 2010), which may in turn affect the phageome. In rhesus monkeys there has been an observed decrease in viral abundance and diversity following antibiotic treatment (Li et al., 2019), but no detectable change in the gut phageome was found in human studies of long-term antibiotic use (Abeles et al., 2015). It may be that disturbances in the gut viral community caused by antibiotics are rapid, and during long-term exposure the community re-adjusts and stabilises. In the short-term, prophage induction has frequently been demonstrated upon antibiotic exposure due to host DNA damage and initiation of the bacterial SOS response, in turn activating prophages and potentially increasing the likelihood of horizontal gene transfer (Maiques et al., 2006; Allen et al., 2011; Lin and Lin, 2019), further discussed in section Virus-Mediated Genetic Exchange. This has consequences for subsequent antibiotic usage, if a reservoir of phage-encoded antibiotic resistance genes is established in the gut (Modi et al., 2013; Abeles et al., 2015).

In contrast with the microbiome, there has been limited success in defining a core phageome. The phageome is highly specific to an individual and its resilience to change over time raises interesting questions. The phageome appears to remain relatively constant, while we know the microbiome fluctuates over time and with environmental factors. But are there as yet undetected effects on the phageome? Do phage populations remain dormant for a long time, persisting in host populations, or is their host range wide enough that they continue to encounter hosts regardless of fluctuations in bacterial populations? We know that phages are consumed in the diet, and it is assumed with the survival of other viruses, phages also survive the human gastrointestinal tract. If this is the case, are phages able to colonize the gut once they reach it? As seen with FMT, this appears to be possible as phages seem to be the key to success of this treatment. However, the stability of the phageome within an individual suggests that no such invasion and colonisation occurs. Answering this myriad of questions is hampered by the sampling method used to study the phageome: metagenome sequencing of faeces (see section Metagenomics). Measuring phage activity throughout the GI tract over a time course would help to elucidate fluctuations in the phageome at sites where it could impact human health and gut function. As this is still an emerging field, we hope with greater investigation the phageome will reach a level of understanding we see for the microbiome.

Given that most phages infect and eventually lyse specific bacterial hosts, the gut bacterial community shapes the phage community, as much as it is shaped by phages. Phage-host interactions occur in a number of context-dependent dynamics throughout the gastrointestinal tract, playing roles in the cycling of nutrients, community function and transfer of genetic material. The role of the phageome is seen primarily through its influence on the function of the bacterial community, however there are further consequences of their presence in the gut, including on human immune responses, impacts on human health and gut-associated bacterial biofilms.

In the human gut, the phageome is thought to affect succession and colonisation events (Lozupone et al., 2012; De Sordi et al., 2019; Shkoporov et al., 2019), it is well known that phage contribute to feedback loops and predation which influence the dominance and diversity within a microbial population. Broadly speaking, there are three main dynamics under which the phageome will be able to alter the gut microbiome: Red Queen dynamics [continual evolution of defence and counter-defence measures ( Table 5 )] (Van Valen, 1973), kill-the-winner (lysis of common genotypes, preventing dominance) (Maslov and Sneppen, 2017), and piggyback-the-winner (lysogeny allowing phage and bacteria to stably co-exist) (Weitz and Dushoff, 2007).

As a consequence of these changes and alterations in phage dynamics and prevalence in the human gut, it is possible that no specific genotypes maintain dominance, but are constantly superseded by functionally equivalent strains, maintaining stable metabolic potential and taxonomic diversity. This functional redundancy is known to be favoured in the bacterial microbiome (Ley et al., 2006), allowing more resilience and less impact of dysbiotic perturbations (Vieira-Silva et al., 2016).

Bacteriophages are able to influence evolution and diversification of bacterial communities through horizontal gene transfer (Wommack and Colwell, 2000; Koskella and Brockhurst, 2014). As previously discussed, lysogenic phage and prophage dominate the human gut (Breitbart et al., 2003; Reyes et al., 2010; Minot et al., 2011). Lysogenic conversion of bacterial phenotype has been shown to contribute to 5% of the conserved microbiome function in the human gut, indicating these prophage exert a strong influence over the microbial function in this environment (Qin et al., 2010). The effects of genetic exchange are well-studied in pathogenic species, but have also been demonstrated in human gut commensals such as Lactobacillus gasseri (Baugher et al., 2014).

Due to the global threat of rising antimicrobial resistance, the contribution of viral genetic exchange has been studied in depth (Balcazar, 2014). It has been theorised that bacteriophage could be the missing link, transferring antimicrobial resistance genes (ARGs) from the environment into the human microbiome, as well as between bacteria within the microbiome (Muniesa et al., 2013; Quiros et al., 2014). Phages may contribute more to the dissemination of these genes compared to plasmids and chromosomal elements, both over time-scale and wider spaces (Debroas and Siguret, 2019). This will be especially important in the densely populated human gut, where numerous transduction events potentially occur at any given moment. In a mouse study, after exposure to antibiotics, there was an enrichment of phage-encoded genes associated with antibiotic resistance and/or antibiotic mitigation in faecal samples (Modi et al., 2013). This was not only to the applied antibiotic, but also to other classes. Critically, these phage-encoded genes were shown to be functional through transfecting antibiotic naïve mice (Modi et al., 2013). On a cautionary note, while these phages were able to transfer antibiotic resistance between mice, the true rate of antibiotic resistance encoded by phages is much lower than predicted by bioinformatic methods (Enault et al., 2017). Despite this, phages can facilitate the release and exchange of plasmid-encoded ARGs when they lyse their hosts.

Nutrient cycling by phages is well-characterised in environmental systems, such as marine and soil ecosystems. The “viral shunt” explains how carbon and other intracellular nutrients are released upon lysis of host cells into the extracellular milieu. (Wilhelm and Suttle, 1999). The human gut has significantly more available nutrients compared to marine and soil systems, leading to the extremely high cell densities, resulting in more competition for available nutrients. Examples of key nutrients which are limited for the gut microbiota are iron and vitamin B12 (cobalamin) (Deriu et al., 2013; Degnan et al., 2014). It has been proposed that gut viruses play a role in alleviating this competition, limiting growth, regulating community stability and nutrient cycling, as observed in other systems (Lozupone et al., 2012). Due to the high degree of interindividual gut community variation, it is difficult to pinpoint how the phageome alters nutrients in the gut or is itself altered by incoming nutrients from the human host diet (see section Impact of Diet on the Phageome) (Minot et al., 2011; David et al., 2014).

While phage interactions with their bacterial hosts are of vital importance, phage interactions with the human host are also paramount. There is evidence that the phageome is able to influence both the innate and adaptive system, playing a defensive role at the gut mucosa (Barr et al., 2013b; Barr et al., 2015). It has been shown that immune stimulation can be caused by a number of phage proteins (Majewska et al., 2015; Miernikiewicz et al., 2016), and possibly cause a low-grade inflammation in the intestines, without any clinical symptoms (Norman et al., 2014). However, the correlation of phage in FMT with positive outcomes in inflammatory bowel disease (Gogokhia et al., 2019) [see section Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD)] suggests a more complex relationship between the phageome and individual human health.

It is clear from the summative research conducted that phages, in addition to affecting their bacterial hosts, impact the health of the human or mammalian hosts in which they reside. This could have an important impact for numerous diseases, as discussed later in section, Role of Bacteriophages in Human Disease.

There is evidence to suggest that the majority of microbial life within the gastrointestinal tract exists as a biofilm, a distinct lifestyle to planktonic bacteria (Costerton et al., 1987; Macfarlane and Dillon, 2007; Hussain et al., 2020). As the bacterial host behaves significantly differently within a biofilm-dominated environment, it is important to consider how this will impact phage behaviour which is predominantly investigated in planktonic in vitro settings.

Understanding how a single phage interacts with its infection host is quite different to how a population of phage interacts with not only bacteria but human cells, fungi and archaea which may dwell in the gut. It has been shown in vitro that a bacteriophage can seemingly impact on Candida albicans, a dimorphic fungus that can be found in the gut (Nazik et al., 2017). In this section, we explained how phages may prime the immune system, but to our knowledge there is no investigation into interactions with other non-bacterial cells. As gut communities become more widely studied, this may soon be elucidated. Having a controlled system is beneficial as it allows determination of these minute interactions, but it is no use if it does not reflect the in vivo situation. One in vitro system which could be utilised complex interaction studies, is a gut fermentation model seeded with faecal samples, currently used in the study of phage therapy for C. difficile (Nale et al., 2018). By expanding to a more “wide-angle lens” of phage interactions, would open the possibility to discover important off-target effects in microbial and human cells.

In recent years, our understanding of the intestinal microbiome has increased to encompass the ways in which it impacts on human health and disease. The majority of this research has focussed on the bacterial populations, yet the phageome is also expected to have a distinct role in shaping the gut environment ( Table 6 ). Even plant viruses which enter through the diet (section Impact on Diet on the Phageome), such as Pepper mild mottle virus, elicit an immune response in humans. This suggests that viruses’ effects are not limited to infective host range (Colson et al., 2010).

For example, the diseased gut environment can be inflammatory, leading to prophage induction in Salmonella, causing bacterial lysis and initiating gut dysbiosis (Diard et al., 2017). As previously discussed in section Interactions With the Immune System, phages can also control populations of invasive bacteria in the gut and have a role maintaining the intestinal barrier function (Barr et al., 2013a). Conversely, gut phages can also directly increase intestinal permeability, leading to translocation of bacteria and bacterial products from the gut into the bloodstream, which contributes to a chronic inflammatory response (Tetz et al., 2017).

Crohn’s disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC) are the two major types of IBD. CD is characterised by chronic inflammation throughout the gastrointestinal tract, most commonly impacting the ileum and colon, whereas UC involves inflammation and ulceration limited specifically to the colon and rectum. CD can affect the entirety of the intestinal wall, leading to the development of complications such as abscesses, fistulas and strictures, whereas UC affects the inner intestinal lining to cause crypt abscesses and cryptitis (Khor et al., 2011). Understanding of IBD pathology has shown that genetic predisposition interacts with the gut microbiota and environmental cues, leading to the development of disease. On the surface IBD shows no obvious direct links to the gut phageome, however we are only beginning to understand how phages are an intrinsic part of the gut community and how they are linked to IBD.

Comparing phage populations of CD and UC patients shows a significant difference in the composition of the gut virome, suggesting that even within IBD the phageome can be influenced by environmental changes specific to each disease (Norman et al., 2015). Taken together, this evidence suggests that phages play a role in IBD, particularly within UC and CD. However, the difficulty in moving from correlation to causation in the disease pathology warrants further research into the role of phages as drivers of human diseases.

Diabetes is a group of diseases characterised by hyperglycemia, caused by a defect in the action of insulin, the secretion of insulin, or a combination of both (American Diabetes Association, 2009). Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is caused by the autoimmune destruction of pancreatic b-cells, whereas Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is a result of insulin resistance (American Diabetes Association, 2009). The gut environment has been associated with the onset of both T1D and T2D, as environmental factors within the gut are thought to act as triggers of disease development.

Despite the research to date, the question remains whether gut phages influence the onset and development of T1D and T2D, or whether they act as disease biomarkers, revealing the effects of diabetes on the gut microbiome. The role of temperate phages in human disease is currently unknown and it is yet to be discovered if prophages are induced in the gut environment and drive the development of T1D or T2D, or if prophage induction is a response to autoimmunity.

HIV is a highly complex disease with wide-ranging systemic consequences for the patient, even with the use of antiretrovirals. The interaction of the gut, blood, and immune system complicates investigation, but it appears that phages may predict disease progression and influence responses to therapy. HIV infections lead to a depletion in CD4+ T cells, rendering the body vulnerable to infection and disease. The advanced stages of HIV infection are referred to as acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), a life-threatening condition associated with excess mortality.

The antiretroviral treatment for HIV could potentially have unintended effects on the phageome. An increase in gut dysbiosis has been reported upon administration of antiretroviral therapy, indicating possible consequences for gut bacteria and their phages (Klase et al., 2015). If the gut phage populations differ in HIV-infected individuals, this could have implications for their response to therapy. The ability of phages to influence the leaky gut (Li et al., 2012) must also be considered, as it has been shown that HIV patients with increased gut permeability may not respond to antiretroviral therapy (Marchetti et al., 2008).

CVD is a broad term used to define several diseases affecting the cardiovascular system, including ischaemic heart disease, myocardial infarction, and congestive cardiac failure. The driving forces behind the development of CVD are atherosclerosis and hypertension, which are themselves intricately related. Atherosclerosis is an inflammatory response characterised by macrophage activation and Th1 responses, among many other contributing factors. The aetiology of CVD can be bacterial, with direct links between the bacterial metabolites and risk of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (Wang et al., 2011).

As CVD is complex in its aetiology, it is difficult to define the specific role phages may play in the disease. However, it seems clear that phage communities vary between healthy and CVD populations, in addition to their immunomodulatory role, suggesting this area is worthy of further investigation.

ASD is a developmental disorder characterised by significant variation in social, communication and behavioural traits. Gut microbiota changes have been observed in patients with ASD, typified by reduced biodiversity and changes in gut anaerobic bacteria abundance, potentially contributing to the disorder’s severity (Parracho et al., 2005; Krajmalnik-Brown et al., 2015).

Psychiatric disorders are extremely complex, with the direct causes remaining unknown. From current evidence it appears that phages, as part of the larger gut microbiome community, are likely to play a role at some level, which may become clearer with future research.

An increase in the abundance of gut phages appears to be a common theme across the diseases reviewed here ( Table 6 ). There is a general shift in the phageome in CD and UC to an increased number of Caudovirales, with an expansion of a few particular phage species (Lepage et al., 2008; Wagner et al., 2013; Norman et al., 2015; Fernandes et al., 2019; Zuo et al., 2019). However, studies of the phageome in other human diseases supported evidence that an increase in specific phage species correlated with disease (Li et al., 2012; Breitbart et al., 2018; Tetz et al., 2019). This could suggest that the role of phages in human disease may be specific to particular gut phage-host relationships, rather than an overall trend within the entire gut phage community.

Despite the microbiome receiving much more in-depth research than the phaegome, limited applications to prevent or treat diseases exist (Durack and Lynch, 2019). Therefore, it is likely to be a long time before any therapeutic options for curing systemic disease by altering the phageome become available. Perhaps understanding any perturbations of the phageome and microbiome following the application of a medical treatments, such as phage therapy, would provide insight into potential new therapies focussed on the phageome.

In this paper we have shown there is a wealth of literature on the role of bacteriophages within the human gut. However, there are still large areas which remain unknown or complex, which with further investigation could lead to discoveries that inform beneficial treatments for human disease, in a similar fashion as we have seen with the microbiome.

From the evidence discussed in this paper, we believe that the role and impact of the phageome is underexplored, and with continued investigation potential therapies and a deeper understanding of the viral influence on human health can be discovered.

Since the importance of the gut microbiome has come to light over the past decade, we have increased our understanding of the function of the human body and how it is not solely “human”. The reliance we have on microbial communities for even our basic biology has become abundantly clear. However, as discussed throughout this paper, the largely overlooked phageome evidently plays a major role.

Discovering how these communities interact and interplay with their human host may lead to improvements in health, nutrition and wellbeing through manipulation of these microscopic communities. We believe this is of heightened importance in light of increasing antimicrobial resistance as traditional antibiotic therapies may become redundant. Phage therapy has already been established as a viable alternative treatment and has found a recent resurgence in popularity in Western medicine. We hope this therapy could be applied in complex diseases such as those discussed in this paper, in which the gut microbiota is disturbed. Understanding more about the phageome will in turn further our knowledge of human health, leading to a brighter future for human health.

EJ conceived, designed and critically reviewed the manuscript. The majority of the manuscript was written by ET, while LK, GM, JB, NH, and DL contributed specialist sections. The figures and tables were compiled by EJ, ET, LK, GM, NH, and DL. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.

This work was supported by Warwick Integrative Synthetic Biology (WISB), funded jointly by BBSRC/EPSRC, grant ref: BB/M017982/1 under the UK Research Councils’ Synthetic Biology for Growth programme. The work has also been supported by PhD fellowships awarded to LK, GM, and JB through DTPs funded by BBSRC, EPSRC and NERC.

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

