Environment shapes the fecal microbiome of invasive carp species

Although the common, silver, and bighead carps are native and sparsely distributed in Eurasia, these fish have become abundant and invasive in North America. An understanding of the biology of these species may provide insights into sustainable control methods. The animal-associated microbiome plays an important role in host health. Characterization of the carp microbiome and the factors that affect its composition is an important step toward understanding the biology and interrelationships between these species and their environments.

We compared the fecal microbiomes of common, silver, and bighead carps from wild and laboratory environments using Illumina sequencing of bacterial 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA). The fecal bacterial communities of fish were diverse, with Shannon indices ranging from 2.3 to 4.5. The phyla Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, and Fusobacteria dominated carp guts, comprising 76.7 % of total reads. Environment played a large role in shaping fecal microbial community composition, and microbiomes among captive fishes were more similar than among wild fishes. Although differences among wild fishes could be attributed to feeding preferences, diet did not strongly affect microbial community structure in laboratory-housed fishes. Comparison of wild- and lab-invasive carps revealed five shared OTUs that comprised approximately 40 % of the core fecal microbiome.

The environment is a dominant factor shaping the fecal bacterial communities of invasive carps. Captivity alters the microbiome community structure relative to wild fish, while species differences are pronounced within habitats. Despite the absence of a true stomach, invasive carp species exhibited a core microbiota that warrants future study.

The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s40168-016-0190-1) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

Aquatic invasive species are among the greatest threats to aquatic ecosystems. In particular, species of carp, such as the common, bighead, and silver carp, can consume large quantities of food and disrupt food chains, while potentially out-competing native species and reaching great densities in invaded ranges [1–4]. The common carp is the most widespread invasive fish in the world. It was introduced to the USA over a century ago, and it has gradually spread throughout lakes and rivers. Once established, common carp act as ecosystem engineers, uprooting aquatic vegetation and increasing phosphorus availability, resulting in eutrophication and ecosystem degradation [5, 6]. In contrast, bighead and silver carps, members of a group known as the “Asian carps,” were recently introduced into the USA in the 1970s. Their range, however, is rapidly expanding and now stretches from the lower Mississippi River to its northern reaches and tributaries.

Our results shed new light on the understanding of the microbiome of invasive carps and highlight the dominant role of the environment in shaping the fish microbiome.

Wild fishes were collected from both river and lake habitats (Table 1). Bighead carp (Hypophthalmichthys nobilis), silver carp (Hypophthalmichthys molitrix), common carp (Cyprinus carpio), and freshwater drum (Aplodinotus grunniens) were caught from the Marseilles reach of the Illinois River, IL, USA (41° 21′ 2′′ N, 88° 26′ 15′′ W) in June and August 2013. Freshwater drums were collected for comparison to the carps because they are an abundant co-occurring carnivorous fish, thus, enabling comparisons across trophic levels.

Fecal specimens from wild fish were collected within 1 h of fish capture, whereas laboratory fishes were anesthetized in an aerated anesthetic bath (0.01 % MS-222; Syndel, CO, USA) prior to handling. Fecal specimens were collected by manual stripping of live or recently deceased fish. Fish were stroked firmly from pelvic fins to anus, and fecal material was collected in a sterile microcentrifuge tube and stored frozen at −20 °C.

DNA was extracted from frozen fecal samples using the QIAamp DNA Stool Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The V6 hypervariable region of the 16S rRNA gene was amplified as previously described using a mixture of five forward primers and a barcoded reverse primer to amplify triplicate 50-μL reactions containing 25 ng of fecal DNA each [35]. PCR products were visualized on a 2 % agarose gel and purified using the QIAquick Gel Extraction Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). Replicate purified reactions were pooled, and DNA was quantified using the QuantiFluor-ST and the dsDNA System (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). Purified amplicons were pooled in equal concentrations.

DNA was sequenced using an Illumina HiSeq 2000 platform at the University of Minnesota Genomics Center (Saint Paul, MN, USA) with up to 20 pooled samples per lane for a total of six runs. Paired-end sequences (100-bp read length) were joined as previously described [19]. Sequencing results were submitted to NCBI under project number SRP071816.

Sequence reads were processed using the mothur software package version 1.36.1, as previously described [35, 36]. Sequence reads that had ambiguous bases, more than one mismatch to primer sequences, homopolymers > 8 nt, and quality scores < 35 in a 50-nt window were removed. UCHIME [37] was used to identify possible chimeric sequences in mothur using the default parameters and the SILVA database release 102 of bacterial reference sequences [38]. Sequences identified as possible chimeras were subsequently removed from the dataset. Sequences were aligned using the SILVA database [38]. The threshold for aligning the reverse compliment sequence was set to 0.75, and all other settings were set to default parameters. OTUs were clustered by furthest neighbor at a 97 % similarity cutoff. OTUs were classified using a naïve Bayesian classifier and the Ribosomal Database Project (RDP) taxonomic database release 9 and mother training set 9, with a probability cutoff of 60 % [39]. Chloroplast sequences and sequences that were unclassified at the kingdom level were removed, which comprised 0.001 % of total reads. Sequences that had a frequency ≤ 10 were removed from the dataset [40], removing a total of 1.7 % of reads. The number of reads from each sample was normalized to 150,000 from a maximum of 1,841,796 by randomly subsampling.

The Shannon index of diversity (alpha diversity) was calculated for each experimental group (Table 1) using mothur. One-way ANOVA and Tukey post hoc tests were used to examine differences in OTUs observed (Sobs) and Shannon index of diversity using JMP, Version 10 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC). The distances among environment-species groups were calculated based on Bray-Curtis dissimilarity [41]. The resulting distances were used to perform a hierarchical clustering of experimental groups using Unweighted Pair Group Method (UPGMA). Results were graphed using TreeView v 1.6.6. Bray-Curtis dissimilarity distances were calculated among individual samples and used to perform ordination and statistical tests. Ordination was done using non-metric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) in two dimensions [42]. NMDS was done separately for lab and wild fishes. Ten iterations were performed, and the iteration resulting in the lowest stress was plotted. Analysis of molecular variance (AMOVA) was used to test for significance of observed groupings by testing whether the genetic diversity within each group was different from the pooled genetic diversity.

Putative microbiota functions were predicted using PICRUSt [44]. OTUs were mapped to the Greengenes database version 13.5, and 85 % of genes were classified to a Tier 1 KO function. The weighted nearest sequenced taxon index (NSTI) scores averaged 0.056 ± 0.018, indicating a relatively good match to reference genomes (ideal NSTI ≤ 0.03). Functional predictions were assigned up to KO tier 2. Tier 1 KO were compared among fishes using one-way ANOVA and Tukey post hoc tests for wild and lab fishes separately. Student’s t test was used to compare KO between wild and lab fishes and between lake and river environments for common carp. Due to numerous significant differences among groups in tier 2 KO, data were visualized using PCA. Functional classifications of chitinases and vitamin B12 synthesis enzymes were compared between wild and laboratory-housed bighead carp using Student’s t test. All statistical analysis of functional data was done using JMP, Version 10 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC).

A total of 14,651 OTUs were identified across all 102 samples, with a mean coverage (estimate of total diversity that has been sampled) of 99 % ± 0.2 % (mean ± standard deviation) which ranged from 98 to 100 %. Observed species richness (Sobs) and alpha diversity, calculated using Shannon index, differed significantly among species (p < 0.0001, Fig. 1). Among lab fishes, silver carp had the greatest mean richness and diversity but were not significantly different than bighead carp (p > 0.05). Among wild fishes, common carp from the river environment had greater richness and diversity than did the other wild fishes examined (p ≤ 0.05). Student’s t test comparison between the gut microbiome of river and laboratory-housed invasive carps showed that common carp exhibited significantly higher richness (p ≤ 0.0001) and diversity in wild fish (p = 0.002). Diversity was higher in captive silver carp relative to wild fish (p = 0.04), but richness did not differ (p = 0.46). Bighead carp did not show differences in either metric (p > 0.05).

Members of the phyla Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, and Fusobacterium dominated the gut microbiomes, comprising 76.9 % of total reads (Fig. 2). A portion (22.3 %) of all reads could not be classified to specific phyla, and other phyla comprised < 1 % of total reads. The most abundant orders included Clostridiales, Fusobacteriales, Aeromonadales, Enterobacteriales, Xanthomonadales, and Vibrionales. All other orders made < 1 % of total reads. The proportion of OTUs for each species at the taxonomic rank of family can be found in Additional file 1: Table S1 for families that had > 1 % of total reads.

There were many OTUs that differed among fish species within and between environments. Of the 13,793 OTUs identified in wild fish, 76.6 % differed in abundance across species (p ≤ 0.05). However, OTUs that differed significantly among species made up 94 to 99 % of total reads per species. Among the laboratory fishes examined, only 20.5 % of the 7262 OTUs identified varied among species, making up 78 to 86 % of reads.

Core gut microbiota must be present within a fish species across habitats [45]. We examined the OTUs that were present across wild and lab fish of the same species, and five OTUs emerged as the dominant bacteria of the core gut microbiota of invasive carps (Table 2). These bacteria were present at abundances of at least 1 % in all habitats, and they comprised, on average, approximately 40 % of the total fecal microbiome of invasive carps. There were three OTUs that were common across all invasive carps, and they were classified to the orders Aeromonadales, Xanthomonadales, and Fusobacteriales. One OTU unclassified at the phylum level was common to silver and bighead carps, whereas another unclassified OTU was prevalent in bighead carp only. We used the sequence of the closest BlastN match for both unclassified bacterial OTUs to search against the 16S ribosomal RNA database. Both sequences returned close matches to species within the Bacteroidetes phylum. For common carp, there was no single OTU that was prevalent, yet specific, to that species.

Hierarchical clustering showed that bacterial communities clustered primarily by environment (Fig. 4). Non-metric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) of wild fishes showed separation of most fish by species, and the lowest stress value was 0.29 with an R2 of 0.67 (Fig. 5). Although the distribution of freshwater drum slightly overlapped with bighead and lake common carp, all groupings were significantly different (AMOVA, p < 0.001). The NMDS analysis was able to capture slightly more variability within the data for lab fishes (stress value = 0.23, R2 = 0.77). The distribution of bighead and common carp that were fed pellets and brine shrimp overlapped (Fig. 5), and these communities did not have significantly different grouping (AMOVA, p > 0.05). The gut bacterial communities of silver carp and goldfish did not group with other lab fishes (Fig. 5), and both species were significantly different from other lab fish species (AMOVA, p ≤ 0.05).

ANOSIM showed significant differences among groups in community composition and abundance (beta diversity). All wild fish species had distinct microbial communities (p < 0.0001), and the gut microbiota between wild and lab fish of the same species were different (p < 0.0001). For lab fishes, however, fewer differences were observed. Bighead carp were not significantly different from common carp fed pellet feed (p = 0.08) or brine shrimp (p = 0.18) diet. Diet did not change the bacterial community composition of common carp (p = 0.30). All other comparisons among lab fish were significant at α = 0.05.

Functional assignments were predicted from microbial community composition using PICRUST, which revealed differences in predicted microbial function across species and environments. The majority of predicted tier 1 KEGG Orthology (KO) were in the functional category of metabolism (Fig. 6).

In a comparison of wild and laboratory-housed fish of the same species, there were no differences in tier 1 KO functions that were consistent across the three species. Comparisons of the proportion of proposed function for five vitamin B12 biosynthesis proteins between wild and lab fishes showed some differences. For instance, there was a higher proportion of vitamin B12 biosynthesis for two enzymes in wild silver carp and all five in common carp (p ≤ 0.05). Chitinase functional classification was not different (p = 0.20) between wild and laboratory bighead carp.

Bacterial community structure and function in the guts of carps was strongly affected by environment. There were large differences between laboratory-housed and wild fish of the same species and between common carp and lake and river environments. Many of the differences between wild and lab fishes can likely be partially explained in the context of diet, and the three taxonomic orders that varied most between wild and lab fish were Clostridiales, Fusobacteriales, Vibrionales, and Aeromonadales.

The distribution of phyla in captive carps was similar to that found in previous studies, with a few exceptions. In common carp, we found nearly 50 % of phyla classified to Fusobacteria, similar to van Kessel et al. [33]. The proportion of Fusobacteria and Firmicutes in bighead carps was similar to Li et al.’s [22]. However, we found a smaller proportion of Bacteroidetes than both studies.

Although patterns in microbiota in wild fish appeared to be linked with feeding preferences, we found that diet had little effect on fecal microbiome in a lab setting. For example, there was no difference in microbial community of common carp fed pellet or brine shrimp by any statistical measure of community composition. Previous studies have shown that diet can influence the fish gut microbiota by introduction of prey-associated microbes [26]. However, we do not have any data in this study on the microbes present in the foods ingested by fishes or the microbiome of the surrounding habitat. Intraspecific changes in the gut microbiome may also result from alteration in food metabolism, as shown in Eastern African cichlids and surgeon fishes [25, 63]. However, changes in response to diet can be slight [24] and may depend on species [64] or ecotype [28]. We also found that bighead and silver carp had different microbiota, despite being fed a similar algal feed mixture. Our results support those of Li et al. [65] who found that paddlefish and bighead carp reared in the same pond had distinct intestinal microbiota.

Our results indicate a striking effect of environment on the fecal microbiome of invasive carps and, in particular, a dramatic effect of captivity. In a previous study, few differences between the gut microbiota of wild and lab populations of zebrafish were observed [30]. But this may be due to rearing practices as the wild zebrafish were held for approximately 1 month under laboratory conditions prior to sampling, and this time frame was previously shown to alter the gut microbial community of silver carp [29]. Several studies have observed differences in microbiota of fishes in captive versus wild environments that mirror our findings. In a study of pond-reared and wild grass carp, Fusobacteria was more prevalent in pond fish [69]. A predominance of Fusobacteria was also found for grass carp, crucian carp, and bighead carp held in a rearing pond and fed a commercial feed [22]. Thus, we support the contention that environment shapes the fish gut microbiome and that a true understanding of their gut microbiota needs to come from wild-caught fish.

Ringø and Birkbeck [45] enumerated five criteria required to be considered core gut microbiota in fishes: (1) they must be present in healthy individuals, (2) they colonize the gut at early life stages and persist throughout the lifespan of the fish, (3) they are found in both wild and cultured fish populations, (4) they are able to grow anaerobically, and (5) they are associated with the stomach, foregut, or hindgut. We identified five OTUs that comprise a large proportion of the core microbiome of silver, bighead, and common carps. These OTUs satisfied criteria 1, 3, and 5, but additional experiments would be needed to evaluate whether these OTUs satisfy all criteria.

Previous studies have shown that the proportion of bacteria that make up the core microbiome is variable [68]. In zebrafish, 21 OTUs comprise the core microbiome [30]. In rainbow trout, the core microbiota makes up over 80 % of the total community, and it is resistant to environmental factors [24]. Future work is needed to further identify and characterize the core microbiota of carps. In addition, studies should assess when these bacteria initially colonize the gut and their degree of persistence over time. Moreover, due to the disproportionate abundance of some OTUs in bighead and silver carp, the potential for utilizing core microbiota to identify the presence of these invasive fishes in water bodies through the identification of their associated microbes be explored [70, 71].

Our results indicate that environment is an important factor controlling invasive carp fecal microbiota. We draw this conclusion from the difference between lab and wild fishes of the same species and the difference between lake and river habitats for common carp. Diet may partially explain some patterns in phyla abundance for wild fishes. However, in laboratory-housed fishes, diet did not exert a strong effect on fish gut microbiota, rather, fish species was the factor controlling differences among lab fishes. Future studies are needed to tease apart the multitude of factors which potentially control fish microbiota in wild populations. The mechanisms underlying differences in microbiota between lake- and river-dwelling common carp, for example, are not known. Due to the role of environment in shaping the microbiome, source-tracking markers for specific fish species should be developed from large representative samples of individuals from different geographical areas and habitat types. Studies on laboratory populations of fishes should be interpreted with caution, as lab fish have distinct microbiome structure from those of wild fishes, a pattern which is apparent, but not well characterized, in other studies. Invasive carps have a core fecal microbiome comprised primarily of five bacterial species, which make up approximately 40 % of the total fish gut microbiome. Future research is needed on the specific functional role of these organisms within the carp fecal microbiome. In addition, potential for augmenting these microbes for aquaculture applications or species detection or control should be evaluated.

AMOVA, analysis of molecular variance; ANOVA, analysis of variance; IACUC, Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee; KO, KEGG Orthology; NMDS, non-metric multidimensional scaling; NSTI, nearest sequenced taxon index; OTU, operational taxonomic unit; PCA, principal components analysis; RDP, Ribosomal Database Project; UPGMA, Unweighted Pair Group Method

Funding for this project was provided by the Minnesota Environment and Natural Resources Trust Fund as recommended by the Legislative‐Citizen Commission on Minnesota Resources (LCCMR).

Sequencing results are available in the Sequence Read Archive (SRA) database at NCBI under BioProject ID PRJNA311219, accession number SRP071816.

PWS and MJS conceived of the study, participated in its design, and helped to draft the manuscript. MJH and CS helped to analyze the data and draft the manuscript. JJE collected and analyzed the data and drafted the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Not applicable.

All animals used in this study were treated in accordance with the approved University of Minnesota’s Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) Protocol: 1407-31659A.

Additional file 1: Table S1.(14K, docx)

