Intestinal microbiota shapes gut physiology and regulates enteric neurons and glia

The intestinal microbiota plays an important role in regulating gastrointestinal (GI) physiology in part through interactions with the enteric nervous system (ENS). Alterations in the gut microbiome frequently occur together with disturbances in enteric neural control in pathophysiological conditions. However, the mechanisms by which the microbiota regulates GI function and the structure of the ENS are incompletely understood. Using a mouse model of antibiotic (Abx)-induced bacterial depletion, we sought to determine the molecular mechanisms of microbial regulation of intestinal function and the integrity of the ENS. Spontaneous reconstitution of the Abx-depleted microbiota was used to assess the plasticity of structure and function of the GI tract and ENS. Microbiota-dependent molecular mechanisms of ENS neuronal survival and neurogenesis were also assessed.

Adult male and female Abx-treated mice exhibited alterations in GI structure and function, including a longer small intestine, slower transit time, increased carbachol-stimulated ion secretion, and increased intestinal permeability. These alterations were accompanied by the loss of enteric neurons in the ileum and proximal colon in both submucosal and myenteric plexuses. A reduction in the number of enteric glia was only observed in the ileal myenteric plexus. Recovery of the microbiota restored intestinal function and stimulated enteric neurogenesis leading to increases in the number of enteric glia and neurons. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) supplementation enhanced neuronal survival alongside bacterial depletion, but had no effect on neuronal recovery once the Abx-induced neuronal loss was established. In contrast, short-chain fatty acids (SCFA) were able to restore neuronal numbers after Abx-induced neuronal loss, demonstrating that SCFA stimulate enteric neurogenesis in vivo.

Our results demonstrate a role for the gut microbiota in regulating the structure and function of the GI tract in a sex-independent manner. Moreover, the microbiota is essential for the maintenance of ENS integrity, by regulating enteric neuronal survival and promoting neurogenesis. Molecular determinants of the microbiota, LPS and SCFA, regulate enteric neuronal survival, while SCFA also stimulates neurogenesis. Our data reveal new insights into the role of the gut microbiota that could lead to therapeutic developments for the treatment of enteric neuropathies.

Video abstract video file.(107M, mp4)

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s40168-021-01165-z.

The gastrointestinal (GI) tract is regulated by finely tuned interactions of its cellular components, controlled by an intrinsic nervous system, the enteric nervous system (ENS) [1, 2]. The ENS is composed of two ganglionated plexuses, the myenteric and submucosal plexuses, containing neurons and enteric glial cells (EGC), connected by a dense network of nerve fibers and glial processes within the gut wall [1]. The ENS regulates GI motility, fluid secretion/absorption, immune function, mucosal growth and integrity, and intestinal permeability [1–5]. Structural and functional alterations in the ENS are linked to GI diseases, including irritable bowel syndrome and inflammatory bowel disease [6, 7]. These debilitating conditions are increasing in incidence globally and have an enormous socioeconomic impact [7, 8].

The role of these microbial determinants in regulating GI function and the structural integrity of the ENS in adult animals remains to be fully elucidated. Our goals were to determine the role of the microbiota and their molecular mediators (i.e., LPS and SCFA) on GI motility, intestinal permeability, fecal output, and the structural organization of the ENS, using a mouse model of antibiotic (Abx)-induced bacterial depletion. We sought to determine whether alterations in GI function and the ENS could be reversed upon reconstitution of the intestinal microbiota over the course of a 3-week Abx washout period. To determine the role of LPS and SCFA in the regulation of gut function and ENS structure, we supplemented Abx-treated mice with either LPS or SCFA at different timepoints to investigate the impact of these key host-microbe interactions.

We first examined the effects of depleting the intestinal microbiota on GI morphology and physiology. We treated mice with an Abx regimen (Fig.
1a) that effectively reduces the enteric microbiota by over 99%, as we have shown previously [38]. No alterations in body weight were observed over the course of Abx treatment (Fig.
1b). Interestingly, anatomical alterations were observed in both sexes in the cecum (Fig.
1c) and small intestine (Fig.
1d), but not in the colon (Fig.
1e), where the absolute number of bacteria are most abundant [39]. Abx-treated mice exhibited larger ceca (Fig.
1c) and an increase in small intestinal length (Fig.
1d) compared to non-Abx control mice. To determine whether the increased small intestinal length was due to tissue elongation, and not an effect of reduced contractile tone, tissues from both groups were treated with nifedipine, an L-type voltage-gated calcium channel blocker, to induce maximal muscle relaxation. Despite inducing relaxation with nifedipine, small intestinal tissues from Abx-treated mice were still significantly longer than control tissues (Figure S1), suggesting that the intestine lengthens to compensate for the loss of the microbiota.

In summary, intestinal microbial depletion altered gut morphology, motility, and permeability in both male and female animals.

After observing alterations in GI morphology and function following Abx treatment (Fig.
1), we sought to determine if these events were associated with neuroanatomical changes in the ENS. Since we observed similar responses in male and female mice regarding Abx-induced alterations in GI function, we performed most of the remaining experiments in male mice. We first evaluated the neuroanatomical changes in two distinct intestinal regions, the distal ileum and proximal colon, analyzing both submucosal and myenteric plexuses (Fig.
2 and Figure S2). Strikingly, a loss of HuC/D+ neurons in Abx-treated mice was observed in both the ileum (Fig.
2b, e) and the colon (Fig.
2c, f), in the submucosal and myenteric plexuses. This loss of enteric neurons was accompanied by a reduction in the Tuj1+ neuronal fiber density (Figure S3a-b). By evaluating the two major subpopulations of enteric neurons, the nNOS+ nitrergic and the ChAT+ cholinergic neurons, we observed a loss of both the nNOS+ neurons in the myenteric plexus (Fig.
2b, c; nNOS+ neurons are virtually absent in the submucosal plexus) and ChAT+ neurons in the submucosal and myenteric plexuses (Fig.
2e, f). To further explore the effect of Abx treatment in subpopulations of enteric neurons, we evaluated the impact of bacterial depletion on calretinin (CALR+) neurons (Figure S3c). After Abx treatment, CALR+ neurons were reduced in the ileal submucosal and myenteric plexuses, and in the colonic submucosal plexus, but, interestingly, not in the colonic myenteric plexus (Figure S3d).

We next tested the hypothesis that the broad loss of neurons in the ENS after Abx treatment would trigger a compensatory response, potentially leading to increased enteric neurogenesis [43, 44]. Sox2 is a transcription factor known as a marker of ENS progenitor cells and is largely expressed by EGC in the adult animal [45, 46]. Thus, we used HuC/D+/Sox2+ double-labeling to evaluate the presence of Sox2-expressing neurons (Fig.
4), a putative marker of enteric neurogenesis [45, 46]. We observed that the reduction of HuC/D+ neuronal numbers in the Abx-treated animals was accompanied by a reduction in Sox2+ cells in the colonic submucosal plexus (Fig.
4b). Surprisingly, we did not detect any HuC/D+/Sox2+ neurons in the submucosal plexus (Fig.
4b). In contrast, the decreased number of HuC/D+ neurons in the colonic myenteric plexus of Abx-treated animals was followed by an increase in Sox2+ cells and HuC/D+/Sox2+ neurons (Fig.
4d), indicative of increased neurogenesis in the colonic myenteric plexus of the microbiota-depleted mouse. Further, we tested whether cell proliferation was evident in the ENS by evaluating ileal and colonic sections stained for Ki67, a marker of cell proliferation. As expected, we observed Ki67+ cells at the base of the intestinal epithelial crypts, but we observed no positive staining in the ENS (Figure S5a). Moreover, we tested whether Abx treatment would lead to higher incorporation of 5-ethynyl-2′-deoxyuridine (EdU) into enteric cells, demonstrating de novo DNA synthesis. We did not detect positive EdU incorporation/staining in the ENS (Figure S5b). Thus, Abx treatment triggered region-specific increased expression of Sox2 in neurons, which is indicative of enteric neurogenesis; however, no markers of proliferation were detected in enteric neurons.

We next assessed if the alterations induced by intestinal microbial depletion could be reversed following cessation of Abx treatment. We allowed spontaneous microbial recolonization for 21 days (Fig.
5a). To confirm bacterial recolonization, we assessed the bacterial load in the feces of the different groups. Bacterial load in the Abx-withdrawal (microbiota recovery) group was comparable to the control group (Figure S6). The Abx-withdrawal led to a slightly lower body weight as compared to the other two groups by the end of the experiment (Fig.
5b). Alterations in gut morphology induced by Abx treatment were normalized following bacteria recolonization (Fig.
5c, d); Abx-withdrawal mice had reduced cecal weight (Fig.
5c) and shorter small intestinal length compared to the Abx-treated group (Fig.
5d). No changes in colon length were observed (Fig.
5e). The fecal pellet output in response to stress also returned to baseline levels after recolonization (Fig.
5f), with a tendency (p = 0.10) to recovery in the wet:dry ratio of the feces (Fig.
5g).

Overall, our data show that the presence of microbial communities in the gut is a major modulator of GI function and ENS integrity in the adult mouse, and that Abx-induced alterations in GI physiology and neuroanatomy of the ENS are largely reversible following spontaneous reconstitution of the microbiota.

Next, we sought to investigate potential mechanisms by which the intestinal microbiota influences GI function and integrity of the ENS. LPS is a component of the cell wall of Gram-negative bacteria and is a known ligand of TLR4, a receptor previously described as important in the regulation of gut motility and ENS neuronal survival [18]. LPS levels are reduced after Abx treatment [18]. Hence, we sought to test whether supplementation with LPS (50 μg/mL) in the drinking water, at a concentration reported to modulate GI motility in mice [47], could attenuate or reverse the changes in GI function and ENS structure (Fig.
7a). Briefly, one group received LPS supplementation concomitant with the Abx treatment (LPS group), and a second received LPS supplementation after 14 days of Abx treatment (LPS at d14); a timepoint in which alterations caused by Abx treatment were fully established (Figs.
1,
2, and
3). No differences in body weight were detected among the different groups at the end of the experiment (Fig.
7b). Changes in gut morphology caused by Abx treatment, such as an enlarged cecum and longer small intestine, were not reversed by LPS supplementation (Fig.
7c–e). Functionally, LPS supplementation had no significant effects on fecal pellet wet weight after novel environment stress or the wet:dry ratio of the feces (Fig.
7f, g), nor did it normalize ΔIsc induced by veratridine or carbachol (Fig.
7h). As observed in previous experiments, Abx treatment slowed motility (Fig.
7i–k), which was not affected by LPS supplementation. Lastly, LPS supplementation had no effect on the alterations in intestinal permeability or TER induced by depletion of the intestinal microbiota (Fig.
6i; TER at d14: control: 27.14 ± 2.17 Ω/cm2; Abx: 29.36 ± 2.77 Ω/cm2; Abx + LPS: 32.65 ± 1.14 Ω/cm2; Abx + LPS: 35.85 ± 1.31 Ω/cm2; one-way ANOVA). Taken together, our LPS supplementation regimens (concomitant with Abx administration or after 14 days of Abx treatment), did not normalize the Abx-induced changes in GI structure or physiology.

Although no significant changes in GI function were observed in Abx-treated mice supplemented with LPS, striking neuronal changes were observed (Fig.
8). In the ileum, Abx treatment reduced the number of HuC/D+ neurons in both plexuses (Fig.
8a, left and middle panels), as observed in our previous experiments. Interestingly, concomitant administration of LPS with Abx prevented the loss of HuC/D+ neurons (Fig.
8a, left and middle panels). However, beginning LPS supplementation after 14 days of Abx treatment was not able to reverse the Abx-induced neuronal loss (Fig.
8a, left and middle panel). Moreover, a parallel effect was seen on the nitrergic neuronal subpopulation; nNOS+ neurons were reduced in the Abx group compared to control, but this effect was attenuated with concomitant supplementation with LPS (Fig.
8a, right panel). Similar trends were observed in the colon (Fig.
8b). Both submucosal and myenteric plexuses had a reduction in the number of HuC/D+ neurons in the Abx-treated mice. This effect was attenuated in mice supplemented with LPS during Abx treatment, but not when LPS was given after 14 days of Abx treatment (Fig.
8b, left and middle panels). However, the number of nNOS+ neurons was not maintained by concomitant LPS supplementation in the colon (Fig.
8b, right panel). Together, these results suggest a role for LPS in neuronal survival, but not in ENS recovery (i.e., neurogenesis).

Finally, we investigated the effects of SCFA supplementation in Abx-treated mice. The SCFA mix (67.5 mM of acetate, 25.9 mM of propionate, 40 mM of butyrate) [48] was administered in the drinking water concomitant with the Abx treatment (Abx + SCFA) or after 14 days of Abx treatment (Abx + SCFA at d14) (Fig.
9a).

Together, we observed a role for SCFA in modulating enteric neurons in a region-specific manner, having the greatest effect in the submucosal plexuses and on colonic myenteric neurons.

In this study, we show the extent to which the intestinal microbiota regulates the structure and function of the GI tract in the adult mouse. We observed significant effects on small intestinal length, cecal mass, GI motility, ion transport, and intestinal permeability that were independent of the sex of the mice. Abx-treated mice displayed slower gut transit time, alterations in ion transport, increased gut permeability, and enhanced fecal output in a novel environment stress paradigm. These alterations were accompanied by neuroanatomical changes in the ENS, including an indiscriminate loss of enteric neurons and region-specific loss of EGC. Spontaneous recovery of the microbiota restored the functional and morphological deficits, including motility and permeability alterations. Remarkably, spontaneous recolonization was also associated with the recovery of neurons, through enteric neurogenesis. Investigating which components of the microbiota were responsible for these effects, we found that neither LPS nor SCFA restored Abx-induced changes in gut function, though SCFA supplementation was able to reverse the stress-induced enhancement of fecal output. Despite not reversing most of the functional deficits, LPS was shown to enhance neuronal survival, and SCFA enhanced neuronal survival and promoted enteric neurogenesis. Why these significant changes in the structure of the ENS are not accompanied by functional recovery remains to be determined. Nevertheless, these findings suggest that other microbial components are critical for initiating the physiological function of new enteric neurons.

The implications of bacterial depletion in adult human health are still under investigation, but changes in barrier function appear to be critical. Here we show that a transient increase in gut permeability after Abx treatment can be normalized following bacterial recolonization in mice. However, we have not identified which region of the gut is responsible for this increase in permeability. Other reports have described the importance of the microbiota in regulating gut mucosal function in germ-free mice ex vivo, including secretion and maturation of the epithelial barrier [51, 78]. In accordance with our results, similar outcomes were described in Abx-treated adult mice, in which a transient increase in gut permeability was observed in vivo [26]. We assessed the role of LPS and SCFA in the modulation of the gut barrier after microbiota disruption. Previously, both molecules have been demonstrated to influence gut permeability [57, 79]. Even though no recovery effect was observed after intervention with LPS in our Abx-treated mice, long-term treatment with SCFA was able to reduce intestinal permeability. Interestingly, the presence of metronidazole in an Abx mix, or when administered alone, is associated with increased gut permeability, likely playing a crucial role in the effects observed [26, 80]. Thus, future analysis of the bacteria being depleted or blooming after metronidazole treatment may shed light on potential microbe-driven mechanisms regulating intestinal permeability.

Our results suggest a role for the gut microbiota in constantly regulating a variety of GI functions in adulthood, independent of sex. Depletion of gut bacteria altered GI motility, secretion, and permeability. Moreover, the microbiota is essential for the maintenance of the ENS integrity, likely regulating enteric neuronal survival and promoting neurogenesis. MAMPs, such as LPS, may regulate enteric neuronal survival, while SCFA treatment was found to be associated with both survival and neurogenesis. Thus, we provide additional understanding of host-microbe interactions that contribute to the regulation of GI structure and function and the organization of the ENS.

Male and female C57Bl/6 mice (Jackson Laboratories, Bar Harbor, ME, USA), 8–12 weeks old, were housed (n = 5/cage) in the animal facility at the University of Calgary at 22 ± 2 °C on a 12-h light–dark cycle. Mice had free access to sterilized food and water. Upon arrival, mice were randomized, followed by a 1-week acclimation period before the start of any experiment. PLP1-eGFP mice were developed by Dr. Wendy Macklin [40] and were bred in-house at the University of Colorado’s animal facility. Male and female PLP1-eGFP littermate mice, 8–12 weeks old, were used in the experiments. Mice were kept under the same conditions as described above. All animal procedures were approved by the University of Calgary’s Health Sciences Animal Care Committee (#AC19-0124) and the University of Colorado’s Anschutz Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (#00088), in accordance with the guidelines established by the Canadian Council on Animal Care and the PHS Policy on Humane Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, respectively.

Abx treatment was administered according to previously published protocols [54, 56]. Broad-spectrum Abx mix was diluted in sterilized water and consisted of ampicillin (1 g/L, A9518; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), neomycin (1 g/L, N1876; Sigma-Aldrich), vancomycin (0.5 g/L, 94747; Sigma-Aldrich), and metronidazole (1 g/L, M3761; Sigma-Aldrich). Mice received the Abx solution for at least 14 days. Due to the body weight loss observed at the beginning of the Abx treatment in a pilot experiment (Figure S8), also shown by others [81], we opted to gradually introduce metronidazole in the Abx solution as previously described [38]. Briefly, no metronidazole was added on day 0; 0.25 g/L (25% of final concentration) was added at day 2; 0.50 g/L (50% of final concentration) was added at day 6; and 1.0 g/L (full concentration) was added at day 9. Abx solution was refilled every week. Body weight was assessed three times a week to monitor body weight changes. To assess the effects of spontaneous microbiota recolonization, bottles of Abx were swapped for regular autoclaved water at day 14. Mice had access to water for 21 days after the bottle swap to allow for microbiota recolonization.

Low-dose LPS supplementation was administered as described previously [38, 56]. LPS (Escherichia coli O111:B4; L2630, Sigma-Aldrich) was diluted (50 μg/ml) in the Abx solution. Animals had free access to the Abx solution containing LPS from day 0, or after 14 days of Abx-treatment only, depending on the treatment group. Mice received LPS supplementation for 21 or 7 days prior to any experiment. LPS concentration was chosen based on promising beneficial effects on gut motility [47].

A mixture of SCFA was administered according to previous reports [48, 82, 83]. SCFA mixture was composed of 67.5 mM of acetate (S2889, Sigma-Aldrich), 25.9 mM of propionate (P1880, Sigma-Aldrich), and 40 mM of butyrate (303410, Sigma-Aldrich). The mixture was diluted in the Abx solution. Solutions with no SCFA mixture were sodium matched. All solutions were pH controlled (7.4–7.6) and changed weekly.

Mice were placed individually in new bedding-free cages and monitored for 1 h. Fecal pellets were collected and weighed every 15 min. Feces were dried at 50 °C for 24 h and re-weighed. Wet and dry weights were used to generate the fecal pellet wet:dry ratio.

The assessment of the whole gut transit time was performed immediately following the novel environment stress test. Mice were gavaged with 200 μL of the non-absorbable dye Evans Blue (5% suspended in 5% Gum Arabic; Sigma-Aldrich) and the period from the time of the gavage to the appearance of the first blue-colored fecal pellet was considered the whole gut transit time. Tests were normally ended at 480 min. However, if 20% or more of the animals being tested had not expelled a blue pellet by 480 min, they were allowed an extra 120 min of testing, with the test ending at 600 min.

Mice were gavaged with 200 μL of the non-absorbable dye Evans Blue (5% suspended in 5% Gum Arabic), and 15 min later, they were euthanized under isofluorane anesthesia. The small intestine was immediately removed and measured (pyloric sphincter to ileal–cecal junction). Distance traveled by the dye was also measured. Results are expressed as a percentage of the length covered by the dye over the total small intestinal length. This test was performed concomitantly with the intestinal permeability assay such that mice received the Evans Blue gavage 3 h 45 min following the FSA gavage for the intestinal permeability assay (see below).

We used the bead expulsion test to assess distal colonic propulsion. Mice were lightly anesthetized with isoflurane and a 2.5-mm spherical plastic bead coated in nail varnish was gently inserted 2 cm into the distal colon using a silicone pusher. Mice were placed in individual, bedding-free cages, and latency time for bead expulsion was recorded. After bead expulsion, mice were returned to their home cage. Experiments were repeated 3 times with 100 min intervals. The mean of 3 experiments was considered the time for bead expulsion.

Mice were gavaged with 100 μL of 50 mg/ml FSA (478 daltons; Setareh Biotech, Eugene, OR, USA). After 4 h, mice were anesthetized under isofluorane. Blood was drawn by cardiac puncture and collected in a Microtainer SST Tube (BD Company, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA) after which mice were euthanized and the small intestine removed to determine small intestinal transit as above. At room temperature, blood was allowed to clot for at least 30 min, followed by centrifugation at 2000 × g for 10 min. The supernatant (serum) was collected, pipetted (50 μL) in triplicate into a 96-well plate, and read at 485/535 nm in a spectrophotometer. Sample FSA concentration (μg/mL of serum) was determined using a standard curve.

After in vivo experiments, mice were either anesthetized with isoflurane and euthanized by cervical dislocation, or euthanized by CO2 asphyxiation followed by cervical dislocation. The entire gut was removed, and different regions were allocated for different analyses. The cecal contents were removed and the cecum was weighed. The length of the small intestine and colon was measured. The distal ileum was divided for immunofluorescence and Ussing chamber tests. The proximal colon was harvested for immunofluorescence.

Dissection of submucosal and myenteric plexuses was done similarly in both the ileum and colon. To obtain whole-mount preparations, samples were first bathed in a solution containing 1 μM nifedipine (Sigma-Aldrich) diluted in PBS for 10 min. Next, tissues were opened along the mesenteric border and pinned out in a petri dish containing Sylgard coating with the serosal side facing down. Samples were fixed with either Zamboni’s fixative for 24 h at 4 °C, or specific for ChAT staining and PLP1-eGFP mice, with 4% paraformaldehyde (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) for 2 h at 4 °C. Tissues were then washed with PBS containing 5% sodium azide (3 times 10 min each) and stored at 4 °C until further processing. To obtain submucosal and myenteric preparations, samples were dissected under a microscope; submucosal preparations were obtained by gently scraping the mucosa away and peeling off the submucosal plexus, and the myenteric preparations were acquired by stripping off the mucosa/submucosa layers and the circular muscle leaving a preparation consisting of the longitudinal muscle and associated myenteric plexus. Following the acquisition of submucosal and myenteric preparations, samples were processed for immunohistochemistry. First, samples were incubated with primary antibody (Table
1) for 48 h at 4 °C. The primary antibody solution was removed, samples were washed (3 times 5 min each) with PBS containing 0.1% Triton X-100 (Sigma-Aldrich), and incubated with secondary antibody (Table
1) for 1–2 h at room temperature followed by washing (3 times 5 min each) with PBS. When double labeling, samples were washed with PBS (3 times of 10 min each), and the second labeling was performed following the same protocol. Particularly when using anti-Sox2 antibodies, samples were pre-treated with DMSO (VWR International, Edmonton, AB, Canada) for 30 min at room temperature prior to primary antibody incubation. Whole-mount preparations were mounted with bicarbonate-buffered glycerol on microscope slides, stored at 4 °C under dark conditions for further analyses. All antibodies used were diluted in a PBS solution containing 0.1% Triton X-100, 10% bovine serum albumin (BSA), 5% sodium azide, 4% EDTA. Tissues from PLP1-eGFP mice were counterstained with DAPI (Invitrogen-ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and mounted with Prolong Gold (Invitrogen-ThermoFisher Scientific).

To obtain cryosections from PLP1-eGFP mice, distal ileum and colon were harvested and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (ThermoFisher Scientific) diluted in PBS for 24 h at 4 °C. After rinsing with PBS, tissues were submerged in 20% sucrose in PBS for 24 h at 4 °C and embedded in O.C.T. compound (ThermoFisher Scientific) on a bed of dry ice. Cryosections were cut at 20 μm and collected on poly-d-lysine (Sigma-Aldrich) coated slides, with intervals of 40–80 μm between each collected section. Cryosections were equilibrated to room temperature, fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 20 min, and blocked in 10% donkey serum, 10% BSA and 1% Triton X-100 diluted in PBS for 1 h at room temperature. Here, a rabbit polyclonal antibody for S100 (ThermoFisher Scientific) at 1:200 diluted in blocking buffer was applied to the sections overnight at 4 °C. Sections were washed with PBS and incubated in donkey anti-rabbit secondary antibody conjugated to Alexa Fluor-647 (Invitrogen) at 1:400 diluted in blocking buffer for 1 h at room temperature. For Ki67 immunolabeling, a similar protocol was used, applying Ki67 monoclonal antibody (ThermoFisher Scientific) and HuC/D (Mayo Clinic). Sections were washed with PBS, counterstained with DAPI (Invitrogen), and coverslipped with Prolong Gold (Invitrogen).

Analyses for neuronal (HuC/D+, nNOS+, ChAT+, Calretinin+, Sox2+) counts and S100B+ EGC were done using a Zeiss Axioplan fluorescence microscope (Zeiss Canada, Toronto, ON, Canada). Analyses of PLP1-eGFP mouse samples were undertaken on an Olympus IX83 motorized inverted microscope (Olympus, Center Valley, PA, USA). For neuronal counts, 10 ganglia were randomly selected and immunolabelled cells were quantified, within each preparation, either submucosal or myenteric. Data for each animal is composed of the mean of the 10 ganglia counted. For Tuj1+ neuronal fiber analysis, the first images were captured using the Zeiss Axioplan fluorescence microscope (Zeiss Canada) applying the same exposure time to all samples. By using the FIJI software (ImageJ, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA) for image analysis, the ganglia were delineated, and the fluorescence intensity measured. Background fluorescence intensity was subtracted to get a corrected fluorescence intensity. Ten ganglia were measured per region, and averaged for the final value. For S100B+ EGC numbers, a total ganglionic area of 0.020–0.036 μm2 for submucosal and 0.20–0.23 μm2 for myenteric was analyzed per mouse, and S100B+ cells were counted within this area. Data are presented as normalized to control values due to variation in tissue stretching during fixation among cohorts. Mucosal PLP1+ EGC were manually quantified in villi and crypts along the entire circumference of the ileum. An average of 35 intact villus-crypt units were counted per mouse. For colonic analysis, an average of 1.5 mm2 of mucosal area was analyzed per mouse. Percent area measurements of the PLP1+ signal in images of whole-mount preparations were analyzed with FIJI (ImageJ, NIH) to determine glial cell density. An average of 4 images were analyzed per animal. All quantification was done by an experimenter blinded to the treatments.

Mice received 100 μL of 10 mg/mL of EdU (ThermoFisher Scientific) diluted in molecular grade water by intraperitoneal injection 7 days following the start of Abx treatment or 1 mg of EdU per mouse. Click-IT Plus EdU Alexa Fluor 594 Imaging Kit (Invitrogen) was used according to manufacturer instructions to visualize the EdU in cryosections of the distal ileum and colon of the PLP1-eGFP mouse.

Immediately after euthanasia, full-thickness segments of terminal ileum were removed, opened along the mesenteric border, cleaned of luminal contents, and mounted in Ussing chambers (Physiologic Instruments, San Diego, CA, USA) with an exposed area of 0.3 cm2. The tissues were bathed at 37 °C in oxygenated (95% O2–5% CO2) Krebs solution (pH 7.4) with 10 mM of glucose and mannitol in the serosal and mucosal compartments, respectively. Tissues were held under voltage-clamp conditions (0 V) and allowed to equilibrate for 20 min. Net electrogenic ion transport across the epithelium was recorded as short-circuit current (Isc; μA/cm2). The measurement of transepithelial potential and Isc allowed calculation of transepithelial electrical resistance (TER; Ω/cm2) according to Ohm’s law. Changes in net electrogenic ion flux were evaluated by measuring changes in Isc in response to neuronal depolarization with veratridine (10 μM serosal side; Calbiochem, 676950, San Diego, CA, USA) or in response to muscarinic receptor stimulation with carbachol (100 μM serosal side; C4382, Sigma-Aldrich). The difference between basal Isc and peak Isc recorded after veratridine or carbachol addition was measured (ΔIsc; μA/cm2). A positive ΔIsc indicated a luminally directed negative net charge transfer (anion secretion). Measurements were conducted and averaged in two adjacent ileal segments from the same mouse.

The small intestine was removed and measured. The tissue was then placed in a 1 μM nifedipine solution for 10 min, after which the length of the small intestine was measured again and the variation (%) in length was determined.

Fecal pellets (1–3) were collected in a sterile tube and fixed immediately on dry ice. Samples were stored at − 80 °C until analysis. DNA was extracted using a DNeasy PowerSoil kit (Qiagen, Toronto, ON, Canada) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, with minor modifications. Briefly, sample homogenization was done applying 30 Hz for 1 min in the TissueLyzer LT (Qiagen) and eluted in nuclease-free water. DNA load was quantified using NanoDrop (ThermoFisher Scientific) and standardized to 1 ng/μL in all samples. Next, a qPCR reaction was carried out using PerfeCTa SYBR Green SuperMix (QuantaBio, Beverly, MA, USA). Universal bacterial primers UniF340 and UniR514 [84] were used to amplify bacterial DNA. The qPCR mixture solution consisted of 10 μL reactions containing: 5 μL of master mix, 0.5 μL of 5 mM UniF340, 0.5 μL of 5 mM UniR514, 2 μL of nuclease-free water, and 2 μL of sample. The qPCR thermocycler (StepOnePlus; Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) was set for an initial step at 95 °C for 3 min, followed by 40 cycles of 10 s at 95 °C and 45 s at 63 °C. Data were acquired in the final step at 63 °C. A melting curve was acquired at the end of the run. Results were calculated based on a standard curve generated with bacterial genomic DNA from a pure bacterium colony of Clostridium sporogeneses.

Data is presented as mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM). Shapiro–Wilk’s and Kolmogorov–Smirnov’s tests were used to assess data normality. Student’s t test was applied for analysis between two groups. For multiple comparisons, we used one-way ANOVA, followed by Tukey’s multiple comparison test. Analyses of two variables were done with Two-way ANOVA, followed by either Tukey’s or Sidak’s multiple comparison test. The specific statistical test used in each figure panel is described in the figure legends. n is variable among experiments and described in every figure legend. Bar graphs display biological replicates as individual dots. p < 0.05 was accepted as statistically significant. Statistical analyses were performed with GraphPad Prism 8 (GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA, USA).



Publisher’s Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Jaime Belkind-Gerson, Simon A. Hirota and Keith A. Sharkey contributed equally to this work.

