Specific gut bacterial responses to natural diets of tropical birds

The composition of gut bacterial communities is strongly influenced by the host diet in many animal taxa. For birds, the effect of diet on the microbiomes has been documented through diet manipulation studies. However, for wild birds, most studies have drawn on literature-based information to decipher the dietary effects, thereby, overlooking individual variation in dietary intake. Here we examine how naturally consumed diets influence the composition of the crop and cloacal microbiomes of twenty-one tropical bird species, using visual and metabarcoding-based identification of consumed diets and bacterial 16S rRNA microbiome sequencing. We show that diet intakes vary markedly between individuals of the same species and that literature-based dietary guilds grossly underestimate intraspecific diet variability. Furthermore, despite an effect of literature-based dietary guild assignment of host taxa, the composition of natural diets does not align with crop and cloacal microbiome similarity. However, host-taxon specific gut bacterial lineages are positively correlated with specific diet items, indicating that certain microbes associate with different diet components in specific avian hosts. Consequently, microbiome composition is not congruent with the overall consumed diet composition of species, but specific components of a consumed diet lead to host-specific effects on gut bacterial taxa.

The composition of gut microbial communities of animals is driven by a multitude of intrinsic (i.e., host genetics, immune system)1,2 and extrinsic (i.e., diet, environment)3–6 factors. In many animal taxa, the establishment of the initial microbiome is facilitated by the inoculation of microbial consortia from parents (parental transmission)7,8. However, the colonisation and persistence of these microbes can be influenced by both the host immune system and gut physiology2,9,10. Throughout host life, ecological and environmental factors (environmental filtering) such as diet, habitat, and social interactions further affect composition and stability (i.e., individual variation and turnover rates) of bacterial communities5,6,11–15. Thus, to understand the evolution and the long-term associations between hosts and their gut microbes, we need to disentangle the relative importance of these factors.

In an attempt to reduce this knowledge gap, we examine how natural diets (as opposed to expected diets based on the literature) of wild birds influence the crop (the food storing pouch) and the cloacal bacterial communities of tropical forest birds in Papua New Guinea. Through the collection of regurgitated crop samples, we characterised specific consumed diet contents and crop microbiomes. These microbiomes could represent both incoming microbes of the ingested diet and the microbes that are already present in the crop. Utilising cloacal swabs, we then investigated the cloacal microbiomes of the same individuals. Diet identification in the crop was conducted using two commonly utilised approaches: DNA metabarcoding and visual identification, while crop and cloacal microbiomes were characterized through sequencing the v4 region of the bacterial 16S rRNA gene. First, we tested two alternative hypotheses related to the effect of diets on crop and cloacal microbiomes (Fig. 1). If consumed diet similarity is a strong determinant of wild avian gut microbiomes, we expected individuals consuming compositionally similar diets to harbour similar crop and cloacal microbiomes, irrespective of host taxonomy (Fig. 1a). However, if host taxon is the main driver, and diet only secondarily influences community structure10, we did not expect microbiome similarity to align with diet similarity across host taxa. Instead, we expected significant correlations between specific microbes and diet items across hosts (Fig. 1b). Secondly, we compared the crop and cloacal microbiomes of the same individuals, testing the assumption that the avian stomach acts as a barrier for passage of microbes from the foregut to the hindgut24, expecting that microbial communities in the crop and the cloaca would be compositionally different. Anatomical gut modifications associated with powered flight has led to gut microbial restrictions in birds (e.g., increased individual variation and less stability of gut microbiomes in smaller birds)9,10, and we therefore further predicted that smaller birds with shorter digestive tracts10 would have more shared bacterial sequences in the two regions.

We collected 62 regurgitated samples (using the tartar emetic method 22) from multiple tropical bird species representing four bird orders (Columbiformes–Pigeons, Coraciiformes–Kingfishers, Psittaciformes–Parrots, and Passeriformes–Passerines). First, we characterized diet components visually and then through metabarcoding of 52 of these samples using universal primers targeting invertebrates (Cytochrome c oxidase subunit I: COI gene) and plants (Internal transcribed spacer 2: ITS2 gene) (Table S1 and Fig. 2). Through visual identification, we identified plant material in 26 samples. The most common visually identified invertebrate orders were Araneae (spiders—27 samples), and Coleoptera (beetles—27 samples) (Table S2). Metabarcoding sequences were analysed using the OBITools software25. Overall, we found 47 plant operational taxonomic units (OTUs—97% sequence similarity threshold) and 180 invertebrate OTUs (Table S3). Plant items were dominated by the orders Rosales (27.7% OTUs), Fabales (8.5% OTUs), and Sapindales (8.5% OTUs). Except for four OTUs, all plants were identified to the genus level. Of the invertebrate OTUs, 54 belonged to feather mites (known feather symbionts), endoparasites, and rotifers (likely due to accidental consumption along with drinking water), and these OTUs were removed from further analyses, leaving 126 potential dietary invertebrate OTUs. Invertebrate samples were dominated by the classes Insecta (67.5% OTUs) and Arachnida (28.6% OTUs). At the order-level, dietary items were mainly represented by Araneae (spiders—28.6% OTUs), Hemiptera (true bugs—15.9% OTUs), Diptera (flies—14.3% OTUs), and Lepidoptera (moths and butterflies—10.3% OTUs). However, 77% of the invertebrate OTUs could not be identified to genus level, highlighting the limited research on genotyping invertebrate communities in Papua New Guinea.

Diet item identification differed markedly between visual and metabarcoding methods (Fig. 2, Tables S2 and S3). The diet components of individuals also varied notably within species (Figs.
2 and S1). Only diets of 12 out of 52 individuals were fully congruent between the two methods (Fig. 2). Of these 12 samples, eight had only plant material. Identification of invertebrate orders also differed between the two methods (Fig. 2, Table
1). Both methods identified the arthropod orders Hemiptera, Diptera, Orthoptera (crickets and locusts), and Araneae in the same samples (Fig. 2 and Table
1), while metabarcoding detected lower proportions of Coleoptera than the visual identification (Table
1).

For subsequent comparisons of diets and microbiomes, we utilised individual datasets from both visual identification (diet components identified at the order level) and metabarcoding (both OTU and order level), and a combination (order level) of both approaches (for details see “Methods” section on identifying prey items). Due to differences between the diet identification methods, a combination of the results was used to circumscribe the full diversity of consumed diets and to account for inherent biases associated with the two methods (i.e., the inability to identify plant material and smaller body parts of invertebrates visually, and extraction and sequencing biases associated with metabarcoding). We separated the microbiome dataset into three datasets due to sequencing limitations: dataset 1 included 12 birds with successfully sequenced crop microbiomes and diets identified using both methods, dataset 2 included 27 birds with successfully sequenced cloacal microbiomes and diets, and dataset 3 included 17 birds for which we obtained successfully sequenced crop and cloacal microbiomes (Table S1). Prior to subsequent analyses, each microbiome dataset was rarefied to even sequencing depths using the sample with the lowest number of sequences26 (Fig. S2).

Out of the collected crop samples (N = 62), samples from only 19 individuals were successfully sequenced for their microbiomes. Of these individuals, we acquired diet samples for 12 individuals. Bacterial 16S rRNA MiSeq sequences were analysed using the DADA2 pipeline27 within QIIME228. There were 351,867 bacterial sequences (mean ± SD: 29,322 ± 33,009) in the crop microbiomes prior to rarefaction (Table S4). After rarefaction, bacterial sequences were identified to 615 amplicon sequence variants (ASVs—100% sequence similarity). Crop microbiomes were dominated by Proteobacteria (53.6%), Actinobacteria (18.9%), and Firmicutes (17.9%). Alpha diversities of individual microbiomes were calculated using the diversity function in the microbiome package29 and they did not differ significantly between host orders [Chao1 richness: Kruskal Wallis (KW) χ2 = 4.559, df = 3, p = 0.2271; Shannon’s diversity index: χ2 = 2.853, df = 3, p = 0.4149], or literature-based dietary guilds (Chao1 richness: KW χ2 = 4.317, df = 2, p = 0.1155; Shannon’s diversity index: KW χ2 = 2.852, df = 2, p = 0.2403) (Fig. S3).

We then explored the association between the crop microbiome composition and the consumed diets, investigating correlations between Bray–Curtis and Jaccard dissimilarities of microbiomes, and Jaccard dissimilarity of diets using Mantel tests in the vegan package30. The compositional similarity of the diets based on any of the methods (visual, metabarcoding—both OTU and order-level separately, and combined) did not correlate significantly with crop microbiome compositions (Table
2 and Fig. S4). We observed similar non-significant associations between diets and microbiomes when investigating host orders separately (Table S6). This suggests that overall crop microbiomes of individuals are not completely modelled by the composition of the consumed diets.

We obtained 27 individuals from 15 bird species with successfully sequenced cloacal microbiomes and diet samples (based on both metabarcoding and visual identification). Prior to rarefying, we acquired 818,272 bacterial sequences from the cloacal swab samples (mean ± SD: 30,306 ± 20,903) (Table S7). After rarefaction, bacterial sequences were assigned to 1,324 ASVs that belonged to Actinobacteria (35.9%), Proteobacteria (32.6%), Firmicutes (21.2%) and Tenericutes (5.0%). Cloacal microbiome alpha diversity did not differ significantly between different bird orders (Chao1 richness: KW χ2 = 2.624, df = 3, p = 0.4532; Shannon’s diversity: χ2 = 6.595, df = 3, p = 0.0861) or literature-based dietary guilds (Chao1 richness: KW χ2 = 1.128, df = 3, p = 0.7703; Shannon’s diversity: KW χ2 = 1.673, df = 3, p = 0.6429) (Fig. S5).

To explore whether specific gut bacterial symbionts of different host taxa are associated with different dietary items (Fig. 1b), we tested for correlations between the 30 most abundant bacterial genera and the proportion of order-level diet items in each individual using the taxa.env.correlation function in the microbiomeSeq package31. These analyses revealed that certain bacterial genera were positively correlated with certain dietary items (Fig. 4 and Table S8) and that the taxonomy of bacterial symbionts associated with the same diet item differed between host orders, suggesting that host-taxon specific microbes are affected by the same dietary items in different bird taxa. For example, the relative abundance of the plant order Rosales was significantly correlated with the bacterial genera Ureaplasma, and Helicobacter in pigeons, while Rosales was significantly associated with Helicobacter, Escherichia and Acinetobacter in passerine birds. These results indicate that the overall effect of diet on cloacal microbiomes results from a combination of associations between certain microbes and specific dietary items in different avian hosts.

For 17 bird individuals, we successfully acquired both crop and cloacal microbiomes. Overall, prior to rarefaction, we acquired 571,488 (mean ± SD: 33,617 ± 17,188) bacterial sequences from cloacal swab samples and 562,557 sequences from crop samples (mean ± SD: 33,091 ± 35,586). After rarefaction, sequences aligned to 1,176 bacterial ASVs (Table S9). The microbiome alpha diversity did not differ significantly between the two regions (Chao1 richness: KW χ2 = 0.3633, df = 1, p = 0.5466; Shannon’s diversity index: KW χ2 = 1.759, df = 1, p = 0.1848) (Fig. 5a,b). Overall, the phylum Proteobacteria (43.9%) dominated the crop microbiomes, followed by Firmicutes (20%) and Actinobacteria (19%). In the cloaca, microbiomes were dominated by Actinobacteria (40.2%), followed by Proteobacteria (25.1%) and Firmicutes (21.7%) (Fig. 6). The relative abundance of the bacterial phyla in both regions of the digestive tract differed markedly between bird species but we observed comparable microbial compositions within species (Fig. 6). Overall, bacterial community compositions did not differ significantly between the two regions of the gut (PERMANOVA10,000 permutations: Bray–Curtis: F = 0.9188, R2 = 0.0279, p = 0.5985; Jaccard: F = 0.8995, R2 = 0.0273, p = 0.6825) (Fig. 5c), while both the crop (PERMANOVA10,000 permutations: Bray–Curtis: F = 1.661, R2 = 0.2771, p = 0.0026; Jaccard: F = 1.393, R2 = 0.2432, p = 0.0051) and the cloacal (PERMANOVA10,000 permutations: Bray–Curtis: F = 1.721, R2 = 0.2841, p < 0.0001; Jaccard: F = 1.521, R2 = 0.2597, p = 0.0006) microbiomes were significantly affected by host order (Fig. 5c). The similarity between the crop and the cloacal microbiomes within individuals indicates that microbiomes are likely to be influenced by the same factors, e.g., host taxon.

Only a small number of ASVs (richness) was shared between the crop and the cloacal microbiomes (mean ± SD: 17.1% ± 12.2%). However, they accounted for a large proportion of the total number of bacterial sequences (61.5% ± 32.3%) (Fig. 6). This suggests that the most abundant ASVs are shared between the crop and the cloacal microbiomes. We further explored the association of richness of these shared ASVs and their relative abundances with the gut length of hosts. We did not find a significant association between host body mass (a proxy for gut length10) and the number of shared ASVs between the two regions (lm: R2 = 0.0312, F = 0.4835, p = 0.4975), indicating that body size did not influence ASV sharing between the two regions. We also did not find a significant association between the combined relative abundance (the proportion of bacterial sequences) of the shared ASVs and body mass (lm: R2 = 0.1631, F = 2.921, p = 0.1081; Fig. S6). However, the relationship between host body mass and relative abundance of shared ASVs tended to be negatively associated, suggesting that larger birds (with longer digestive tracts) share fewer bacterial sequences between the crop and the cloaca.

We investigated the influence of naturally consumed diets on the crop and the cloacal microbiomes of multiple tropical wild bird species. Aligning with previous studies10,18, we found a strong effect of host taxon (i.e., bird order) on the composition of both microbiomes, except for crop microbiomes in dataset1 potentially due to the low sample size. There was also a significant effect of literature-based dietary guilds on cloacal microbiomes (secondary to host taxa)10,18, but microbiome similarity did not align with the consumed diet similarity (Fig. 3, Table
2). We did, however, find that the most abundant bacterial ASVs were shared between the crop and the cloaca in bird individuals (Fig. 6), suggesting a little compartmentalisation of gut microbiomes of the bird species included in this study.

Overall, our results demonstrate that the impact of diet on gut microbiomes of birds depends on the composition of the consumed diet, while the response of specific bacterial taxa to different diet items can vary between bird taxa. This indicates the suboptimal nature of utilizing literature-based dietary guilds that strongly align with the host taxonomy to disentangle the relative importance of diet on microbiomes. Species-level variation in diet consumption and the malleability of gut microbes to different diet components are conceivable sources of the high individual variation observed in wild avian gut microbiomes. A thorough examination of how different diet items influence the gut microbiomes and their functional profiles across multiple populations and bird communities is thus warranted to decipher the diet-mediated long-term associations between wild avian hosts and their gut bacterial symbionts.

Birds were captured using canopy nets spanning 0 m to 30 m above the ground at a lowland rainforest site in Northern Papua New Guinea (Baitabag/Kakoba site: 5.14 S, 145.76 E) during May and July 2019. A cloacal sample was collected from each individual immediately after the capture using a Copan mini Floq swab® and stored in RNAlater®. Birds were fed with 0.8 cm3 of 1.0% antimony potassium tartar (tartar emetic) per 100 g of bird body mass and placed in a sterile container until regurgitation, but for a maximum of 10 minutes22. Once the bird regurgitated, half of the liquid phase (avoiding food items) of the sample was collected using a swab (by dipping the swab multiple times in the regurgitated sample) and stored in RNAlater® to investigate the crop microbiome, while the other half, including visible food items, was stored in 95% EtOH for diet identification and metabarcoding. All samples were stored at − 20 °C within 12 h. Overall, we captured 155 individuals belonging to 40 species (five orders) (Table S1). However, we were only able to collect regurgitated samples and cloacal swabs from 63 individuals (62 regurgitated samples and 63 cloacal samples). Species were also assigned to dietary guilds based on the literature22,51. We confirm that the experiment involving vertebrates in this study was carried out in accordance with all the relevant ARRIVE guidelines. Birds were captured according to the Czech Republic and Australian guidelines (licenses CZ1062 and ABBBS no. 3173) and the experiment was approved by Papua New Guinea government-issued research permit (permit no. 9902077829). Furthermore, the experiment was approved by the University of South Bohemia, Czech Republic, and performed under the experimental protocol 1511-20424/2018-67. Collected samples were exported under a Papua New Guinea government-approved export permit no. 019422.

DNA from swab samples (along with 100 μL RNAlater®) were extracted using Qiagen DNeasy® blood and tissue kit (Hilden, Germany) following the manufacturer’s guidelines with an extended 12–14-h incubation period. Initial PCRs were conducted following Bodawatta et al. 202050. DNA from positively amplified samples was sent to the University of Michigan’s Microbiome Core for MiSeq amplicon sequencing of the v4 region of the bacterial 16S rRNA gene with SA511 and SP701 primer pair using an Illumina platform. We included two control DNA extractions to account for the potential introduction of bacterial contaminants during extraction and two negative samples were sequenced to assess contamination during sequencing.

We used a combination of morphological sorting (visual identification) of the regurgitated samples and DNA metabarcoding to identify the diets of individual birds. Visual identification of the samples was conducted under a stereomicroscope and was based on assigning identifiable remains of diet items to broad taxonomical (i.e., order level) categories22. Invertebrate body parts could most often be assigned to order, but many regurgitated samples contained only small body fragments that could not be identified to family or genus. The presence of plant remnants (seeds, pieces of fruits, pollen grains) was recorded, but most of them could not be identified more precisely (Table S2). Thus, for plant identifications we exclusively depend on DNA metabarcoding.

For further analyses, diets were examined at the order level (with few exceptions), as we used data acquired from both visual identification and metabarcoding individually and in combination for downstream analyses. However, when combining the data from the two identification methods, we were only able to combine invertebrate identifications from visual data with the metabarcoding, as we were unable to assign plants into higher hierarchical groups (e.g., orders or families) through visual identification. In order to combine these two methods, we utilised a conservative approach by only determining the presence or absence of orders in each diet sample, as we were unable to gather accurate quantities or volumes of each diet component 39. For example, with metabarcoding we acquired different numbers of sequences belonging to each dietary taxon, while with visual identification we only identified different body parts of the taxa.

MiSeq sequences were analysed using the DADA2 pipeline27 within QIIME228. Sequences were categorized to ASVs with 100% similarity. ASVs were then assigned to taxonomy using the Silva 132 bacterial reference database62. Mitochondrial, Chloroplast and Archaeal sequences were removed using the QIIME2 pipeline. The two control extractions yielded only three ASVs with low number of sequences (four sequences in control 1 and 291 in control 2). These ASVs were only detected in a few of the experimental samples, and always in very low abundances (Table S10). The lack of consistent presence and the rarity of these ASVs imply that they could not have influenced the patterns we see in crop and cloacal microbiomes. Similarly, the two sequencing negative samples included three ASVs, one of which was found in relatively high abundance (31.8% ± 28.9%) in five experimental samples (Table S10). However, since these samples were placed in different locations of the sequencing plate, the ASV was not omnipresent across experimental samples, and only two sequences appeared in the negative control, contamination during sequencing is unlikely. To not bias analyses of experimental samples, we consequently did not remove this ASV from the dataset.

Samples with less than 1,000 total sequences were removed from subsequent analyses. The majority of the microbiome samples failed during sequencing or quality filtering, yielding only a total of 19 crop microbiomes and 39 cloacal microbiome samples. After quality filtering we divided the dataset into three groups: dataset 1. individuals with both successfully sequenced crop microbiomes and diet data (12 individuals), dataset 2. individuals with both cloacal microbiomes and diet data (27 individuals), and dataset 3. individuals with both successfully sequenced crop and cloacal microbiomes (17 individuals). Statistical analyses of the data were conducted in R 4.0.363 and three datasets were analysed independently. Due to differences in sequencing depth, each dataset was rarefied to even sampling depth using the sample with the lowest number of sequences [dataset 1 (Table S4): 1,226 sequences, dataset 2 (Table S7): 1,406 sequences, and dataset 3 (Table S9): 1,353 sequences,] using the rarefy_even_depth function in phyloseq package26 (Fig. S2).

Alpha diversities (Chao 1 richness estimate, Shannon’s diversity index) were calculated using the diversity function in the microbiome package29. Statistical differences among different categories were investigated using non-parametric Kruskal–Wallis (KW) tests and pairwise differences were tested using Dunn’s post-hoc tests using the FSA package64. Microbial community differences were calculated using Bray–Curtis (weighted) and Jaccard (unweighted) dissimilarity matrixes in the phyloseq package26. We investigated the effect of literature-based dietary guilds and host taxonomic order (due to limitations of multiple individuals per species we focused on host taxonomy at order level) using PERMANOVAs with the adonis2 function in the vegan package30, with “by” parameter set for “margin” to account for marginal effects of the tested variables. Community-level differences were visualized using non-matric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) and principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) plots in phyloseq package26.

To investigate similarities between crop and cloacal microbiomes (dataset 3), we utilised PERMANOVA tests30. Then to assess the magnitude of the microbiome that is shared between the crop and the cloaca, we investigated both the proportion of shared ASVs and bacterial sequences represented by these ASVs in the two microbiomes. Finally, to explore whether the microbiome sharing between the crop and the cloaca is driven by the gut length of the birds we investigated the association of shared ASVs and their sequence abundances with the bird body mass. Host body mass was utilised as a proxy for the gut length, where larger birds tend to have longer digestive tracts and species-level body masses were acquired from the literature65. All illustrations and figures were generated using ggplot266 and viridis packages67, and Microsoft PowerPoint.



Publisher's note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41598-022-04808-9.

