Carbohydrates great and small, from dietary fiber to sialic acids: How glycans influence the gut microbiome and affect human health

Gut microbiome composition depends heavily upon diet and has strong ties to human health. Dietary carbohydrates shape the gut microbiome by providing a potent nutrient source for particular microbes. This review explores how dietary carbohydrates in general, including individual monosaccharides and complex polysaccharides, influence the gut microbiome with subsequent effects on host health and disease. In particular, the effects of sialic acids, a prominent and influential class of monosaccharides, are discussed. Complex plant carbohydrates, such as dietary fiber, generally promote microbial production of compounds beneficial to the host while preventing degradation of host carbohydrates from colonic mucus. In contrast, simple and easily digestible sugars such as glucose are often associated with adverse effects on health and the microbiome. The monosaccharide class of sialic acids exerts a powerful but nuanced effect on gut microbiota. Sialic acid consumption (in monosaccharide form, or as part of human milk oligosaccharides or certain animal-based foods) drives the growth of organisms with sialic acid metabolism capabilities. Minor chemical modifications of Neu5Ac, the most common form of sialic acid, can alter these effects. All aspects of carbohydrate composition are therefore relevant to consider when designing dietary therapeutic strategies to alter the gut microbiome.

The human gut microbiome is defined as the sum of genomic DNA of all microbes inhabiting this environment. With up to a hundred times more bacterial genes than human genes in the human body, including an especially high number of microbes in the gut, the microbial communities in our body are crucial to human life and play a key role in human development and homeostasis.1 As in every natural ecosystem, bacteria in the human gut influence the surrounding environment of their host. The human gut microbiota is involved in many essential host functions, such as the processing of nutrients to bioactive molecules like neurotransmitters, vitamins, and fatty acids and protection from pathogens.2 One of the most well-known examples of this is the breakdown of non-digestible carbohydrates found in plants. As humans do not have the metabolic capability to degrade these complex glycans in the gastrointestinal tract, they reach the colon to be fermented by gut bacteria and lead to the production of short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), which participate in the acidification of the digestive tract.3 Through these and other similar processes, the human gut microbiota has a major impact on the host’s physiology in health and disease.

In addition to a greater number of genes and metabolic capabilities than the human genome, the composition of the gut microbiome is also highly malleable.1 Diet surpasses the role of host genetics in shaping the gut microbiome through modification of the nutritional environment of the bacteria populating the gut.4–8 Given the influence of the gut microbiome in human health, the ability to alter this microbiome through dietary changes indicates that promoting a healthy microbiome has great potential to improve human well-being and disease prevention and control. Glycans (i.e. carbohydrates) are of major importance in determining the gut microbiome composition.9 Glycans come in many forms, from long polysaccharide chains that humans are unable to digest (e.g. cellulose, pectins, resistant starch), to oligosaccharide chains attached to proteins and lipids, to individual mono – and disaccharides, such as glucose, lactose, or sialic acids.9 In this review, we detail how dietary glycans can shape the structure and function of the human gut microbiota and the impact this has on human diseases. We start with an overview of the broad impacts of carbohydrates on gut microbiota composition and metabolic activity. We then focus on the role of sialic acids, a specific monosaccharide class, in shaping the gut microbiome. Sialic acids are a prominent component of the mammalian glycosylation system, and their interactions with the human immune system make their impact on the gut microbiome of particular interest. This review of sialic acids, the gut microbiome, and impacts on health will summarize recent research and suggest directions for future studies.

Human studies have repeatedly demonstrated that dietary changes modify the relative abundance of major gut bacterial groups in a rapid and reversible manner.10,11 For example, low-carbohydrate, weight-loss, and animal-based diets reduce the proportion of the butyrate-producing phyla Firmicutes and Actinobacteria,11–13 while high animal product consumption increases the proportion of Bacteroidetes and specific Proteobacteria like Bilophila wadsworthia in the human gut.11 Lifestyle urbanization and Westernization are key factors influencing dietary behavior, with subsequent impacts on the gut microbiome and potential harmful effects on human health.14 A rural diet, typically rich in host-indigestible carbohydrates like fiber, is associated with a higher abundance of Prevotella and Xylanibacter spp., while an urbanized diet, which generally contains more saturated fat and protein from animals, is associated with an increase of Bacteroides spp. and a decrease of overall microbiome gene diversity.15–17 Interestingly, those Bacteroides-dominated, less diverse gut communities are associated with a higher incidence of obesity and metabolic syndrome.18 The loss of diversity and shift from a Prevotella – to Bacteroides-dominated microbiome has been observed in non-Western immigrants as early as 9 months after moving to the USA.19 These data demonstrate the plasticity of the human gut microbiota in response to dietary carbohydrate changes and the potential impact of these changes on human health.

Mono – and disaccharide dietary sugars can affect gut microbiome composition, with potential effects on human health. Fructose and glucose have been demonstrated to specifically inhibit gut colonization by Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, a mammal gut symbiont associated with lean and healthy individuals, by silencing the Roc (regulator of colonization) protein, which promotes competitive colonization in gnotobiotic mice.45 High fructose intake has also been associated with development of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) in humans46 and mouse models.47,48 The gut microbiome in general plays a causal role in NAFLD development in mouse models,49 and several studies have established correlations between NAFLD and altered abundance of taxa, such as Bifidobacterium,50 Lactobacillus,50,51 Bacteroides, and Ruminococcus.52 Supplementation of Lactobacillus rhamnosus in the gut microbiome of mice fed a high-fructose diet to induce NAFLD resulted in decreased liver inflammation and NAFLD disease development.51 This finding highlights the potential regulatory effects of dietary sugars in the small intestine on gut colonization by beneficial microbes. Later in this review, we will discuss in detail recent research on the effects of sialic acids, a biologically important class of monosaccharides, on the gut microbiome and host health.

Although dietary glycans make up the majority of nutrients the gut microbiota consumes, restriction of carbohydrates like fiber from the diet can push microbes to consume glycans produced by the host instead.53 The colon contains a mucus gel layer composed of two parts: a loose luminal outer layer and a dense mucosal inner layer.54 The mucosal layer is composed mainly of host mucin proteins with regions of extensive O-glycosylation (forming up to 80% of the total mucin mass) (Figure 1B).55 Although microbes do not penetrate the dense inner layer in healthy subjects,37,56 microbial degradation of the outer layer is thought to be a normal part of mucin turnover and regeneration.57 For a review of how gut microbiota interact with and degrade the colonic mucosal layer, we direct the reader to ref. 56.58 Here we focus on how diet can alter the careful balance between gut microbiota and the host mucosal layer.

On the other hand, a recent study suggests potentially beneficial roles of microbial mucus metabolism in ulcerative colitis (UC). Certain organisms are capable of producing the SCFA n-butyrate from mucin degradation,67 and n-butyrate as well as mixed SCFAs have been shown to reduce colon inflammation in UC.68,69 Yamada et al.67 found decreased mucinase activity and decreased levels of n-butyrate in the stool of UC patients, but a significantly higher O-glycan-to-mucin protein ratio. Hypothesizing a deficiency in mucin O-glycan utilization by gut microbiota, the authors assessed the impact of feeding mice a mucin-enriched diet. After 3 weeks, they observed an increased α-diversity; increased relative abundance of Akkermansia, Allobaculum, and Bacteroidales S24-7; increased cecal SCFAs; and increased colonic Treg and IgA+ plasma cells.67 In the setting of UC, mucin degradation may therefore be an important physiologic process to promote.

Thus far, we have discussed the impact of broad dietary glycan classes on the gut microbiome and host health, including how lack of fiber promotes microbial degradation of host mucus glycans. Next, we focus on the impact of dietary sialic acids, a unique and essential class of monosaccharides, on the gut microbiome and human health. Sialic acids are essential to many physiological processes, play a large role in shaping both the infant and adult microbiome, and allow exploration of how minor chemical modifications in sugar structure can shape the microbiome. Although many authors have reviewed sialic acids in the past, to our knowledge a comprehensive review focusing specifically on dietary sialic acids and the gut microbiome has not been published. In the literature, “sialic acids” is often used to refer to both the group and its most common member, N-acetylneuraminic acid. In this review, we will refer to N-acetylneuraminic acid by its abbreviation Neu5Ac and reserve the term sialic acids for the group as a whole.

ialic acids are acidic 9-carbon monosaccharides, derivatives of neuraminic acid, and ubiquitous in all vertebrate glycosylation systems. Sialic acids often serve as the terminal sugars in N-linked and O-linked vertebrate glycans that decorate cell-surface proteins and lipids, and as such they are often some of the first monosaccharides encountered in cell–cell interactions.70,71 They play essential roles in immune system signaling, cell adhesion, membrane transport, and many other processes.71–73 The most abundant mammalian sialic acids are Neu5Ac and its close chemical cousin N-glycolylneuraminic (Neu5Gc) acid (Figure 3A).71 Humans cannot produce Neu5Gc due to loss of the CMP-N-acetylneuraminic acid hydroxylase (CMAH) enzyme,83–85 and as such Neu5Gc is perceived as a foreign antigenic sugar by the human immune system.86,87 Sialic acids are present in our diet in N – and O-linked glycans from animal-derived proteins, and Neu5Gc can be incorporated into human glycoconjugates following ingestion of certain animal-derived foods rich in Neu5Gc, chiefly red meat.88,89 Neu5Ac and Neu5Gc have drastically different effects on human health, with Neu5Ac a natural and beneficial component of human glycans and Neu5Gc an antigenic and pro-inflammatory component.90–94

Human-associated bacteria, including gut microbiota, use sialic acids primarily as either a nutrient source or as a signaling molecule to interact with their host.95 For example, given the role of Neu5Ac on host cells in inhibiting autoimmune signaling through Siglec proteins,96 some pathogens evade the immune system by prominently displaying Neu5Ac on their cell surfaces.97,98 For an extensive review of sialic acids catabolism by human pathogens all over the body, we refer to ref. 87.98 Bacteria can synthesize sialic acids de novo or scavenge from the surrounding environment.72,95 Complete metabolism of sialic acids requires a sialidase to release the monosaccharide from the glycan, a transporter protein to transport the monosaccharide inside the cell, and a suite of intracellular enzymes to convert sialic acids into a sugar fed into different metabolic pathways (Figure 3B).72 Many common gut microbes contain genes for part of or for this entire pathway, affecting their role in the gut microbial community, and through that the community’s potential effects on human health.

Although most research has been done on Neu5Ac, microbes can also act on modifications of Neu5Ac or on other sialic acids (Figure 3a). Neu5Ac modified with an O-acetyl group is generally resistant to release by sialidases. However, recent studies of B. fragilis show the O-acetylesterase EstA removes 9-O-acetyl esterifications, allowing sialidases to release these modified Neu5Ac molecules and promote in vitro growth of E. coli.113 Although not confirmed in vivo yet, this could provide another example of bacterial interactions to share metabolic capabilities. Previous studies of the commensal anaerobe Ruminococcus gnavus showed it cannot grow on unmodified Neu5Ac alone and instead uses an intramolecular trans-sialidase to release 2,7-anhydro-Neu5Ac from α2-3-linked sialic acids.114 2,7-anhydro-Neu5Ac is then selectively transported across the Ruminococcus cell membrane and converted back to Neu5Ac for further metabolism.115 This strategy, which prevents other organisms from utilizing the uncommon 2,7-anhydro-Neu5Ac, seems designed to conserve resources for R. gnavus as opposed to the cross-talk seen in other sialic acid processing pathways. While the major part of sialidase research focuses on Neu5Ac, some recent studies have examined the activity of gut microbe sialidases on Neu5Gc. Zaramela et al.116 reported the discovery of Neu5Gc-preferential sialidases from the gut microbiome of the Hadza hunter-gatherer group,4 with four out of the five selected Bacteroides sialidases displaying preferential release of Neu5Gc over Neu5Ac in at least one of the tested conditions. Further exploration of metabolism of these and other sialic acid modifications will undoubtedly reveal more novel microbial strategies to harvest sialic acids.

The infant gut microbiome is thought to start developing in utero through fetal ingestion of amniotic fluid.117 Peri – and post-natally, the microbiota composition is heavily influenced by mode of fetal delivery (vaginal versus Cesarean section) and infant food source (breast milk versus formula).117,118 Human milk oligosaccharides (HMOs) represent a potent source of sialic acids (and other monosaccharides) that is unique to the infant diet (Figure 1c). HMOs are a group of over 200 oligosaccharide structures present in human breast milk, making up the third most abundant component of milk at 5–15 g/L (following lactose at 70 g/L and lipids at 40 g/L).119 The composition and overall amount of HMOs in breast milk varies by woman and by time since delivery.120 The majority of HMOs are not absorbed by the infant in the small intestine for nutrition, but instead persist into the colon where they have a significant impact on infant health (Figure 2).121 For example, HMOs have been shown to directly inhibit infant gut colonization by pathogens like enterotoxic E. coli, V. cholerae toxin, Campylobacter jejuni, rotaviruses, and noroviruses.122–124

solating the impact of ingested HMOs containing Neu5Ac on the infant gut microbiome is relatively simple, arguably simpler than in adults given the stereotyped diets of infants. However, tying these changes to infant health outcomes is much more difficult. A study in 2016 provides one of the most comprehensive experimental investigations of this question. Researchers inoculated germ-free mice with a defined microbial community of 25 strains isolated from the gut microbiota of a growth-stunted Malawian infant.139 Mice were then fed a typical Malawian diet with or without purified sialylated bovine milk oligosaccharides. Mice receiving the oligosaccharides treatment showed significantly increased weight gain, lean mass, and long bone growth, compared to the control group (caloric intake was equivalent between the groups). These effects were not seen in germ-free mice treated with oligosaccharides, indicating the microbiome plays a critical role in the health benefits observed. Similar results were seen in gnotobiotic piglets.139 Intriguingly, despite the gut microbiome-dependent nature of the effects, the composition of the gut community was not significantly different between oligosaccharides and control groups after treatment. However, significant transcriptional changes were observed in B. fragilis and E. coli, including upregulation of genes in the polysaccharide utilization locus of B. fragilis. The researchers also noted that the two B. longum subsp. infantis strains included in the community failed to colonize in the gut community in both the treatment and control groups, although strains of B. longum subsp. breve, B. bifido, and B. catenulatum did colonize.139 This is surprising given the ubiquity of B. longum subsp. infantis in the gut microbiota of human infants and its superior abilities to digest and metabolize HMOs. However, recent research indicates the ability of bacterial strains to successfully colonize the infant gut is affected by many different factors.140 Follow-up studies on the mechanism of increased long bone growth with sialylated oligosaccharide treatment indicated the effect came from decreased osteoclast generation and activity, in a microbiota-dependent manner.141 Much work remains to be done to investigate the connections between the gut microbiome and infant health.

In contrast to studies of infants and dietary sialic acids, where studies focus on microbiome composition but often do not address direct health impacts, studies of adults and dietary sialic acids focus mainly on health impacts and rarely assess microbiome composition. The ubiquity of sialic acids in mammalian glycoconjugates gives them a role in many physiological and pathological processes, from brain development to immune regulation, infections, heart disease, and diabetes.71 Many of these pathological processes have been associated with hypo-sialylation, or low Neu5Ac levels, of relevant molecules. Several studies have therefore looked at the effect of exogenous Neu5Ac-feeding on disease development and progression. Neu5Ac-feeding in apoE−/ – mice (a model of atherosclerosis through knockout of ApoE, a protein heavily involved in lipid circulation and metabolism)142 reduced atherosclerosis plaque area, as well as lipid liver deposition, triglyceride and cholesterol levels, and expression of inflammatory cytokines and intracellular adhesion factors in aorta endothelial cells and liver cells.92 In a different study, oral supplementation of the Neu5Ac precursor N-acetyl-D-mannosamine in mice on a high-fat diet (to study type II diabetes) resulted in a restoration of IgG sialylation and preserved insulin sensitivity.143 The mechanism of action in these studies is unknown and changes in the microbiome were not investigated in either case. However, given the established connections between the gut microbiome and atherosclerosis and diabetes144–146 and the impact sialic acids can have on the microbiome, an investigation of gut microbiome composition in response to Neu5Ac in these disease models would be intriguing.

The ability of non-human mammals to produce Neu5Gc, through the functional CMAH enzyme that humans lack, has led to a great difficulty in studying the effects of anti-Neu5Gc inflammation in animal models. However, researchers have been able to work around this through the generation of Cmah−/ – animals that, like humans, produce only Neu5Ac.147,148 The presence of Neu5Gc in human glycoconjugates has been implicated in numerous disease processes, such as liver cancer and atherosclerosis.93,94 Neu5Gc-feeding in mouse models deficient in Neu5Gc exacerbates these diseases. Of particular interest, Cmah−/ – knockout in a background knockout of the low-density lipoprotein receptor (Ldlr−/-) reproduces the human-specific Neu5Gc deficiency in a classic atherosclerosis model.94 Neu5Gc-feeding in this Cmah−/ – Ldlr−/ – mouse model demonstrated significantly more atherosclerosis plaque size and necrotic core volume, compared to control groups.94 Feeding of Neu5Gc in a Cmah−/ – mouse model (without the Ldlr−/ – deletion) showed distinct changes in the gut microbiome, with Bacteroides, Barnesiella, Clostridium, Parabacteroides, Roseburia, and Turicibacter significantly enriched compared to feeding with Neu5Ac.116 Examining the effects of Neu5Gc-feeding on the microbiome of the Cmah−/ – Ldlr−/ – model and potential relationships between these changes and atherosclerosis could further our current understanding of the role the gut microbiome plays in cardiovascular disease.

The impact of carbohydrates on the gut microbiome is nuanced, with differences seen from alterations in large carbohydrate classes, individual monosaccharides, and even modifications of individual monosaccharides. Many studies have examined the effects of broad glycan classes, such as fiber, in animals, and humans. Many other studies have looked at the ability of bacteria common in the gut microbiome to metabolize individual monosaccharides or glycans, either in vitro or in vivo. Microbiome composition shifts rapidly and reproducibly with dietary changes, emphasizing the potential therapeutic benefits of diet modifications. However, as a genomic analysis of organisms from the Human Gut Microbiome project shows (Figure 4), we have barely scratched the surface in our studies of individual microbes that can metabolize monosaccharides like sialic acids. Studies are also lacking on the effect of dietary sialic acids on the adult gut microbiome. Given the prominent microbiome and health effects seen in infants with sialylated HMOs, we expect that dietary sialic acids could drive similarly important microbiome modifications in adults. These modifications could be a missing link to explain the changes in disease phenotypes observed with dietary sialic acids in animal models. The impact of individual dietary glycans on the gut microbiome is therefore an essential field of research as we continue to explore the relationship between the gut microbiome and human disease.

K.Z. is an inventor on a patent application related to the use of sialidases.

