Differential human gut microbiome assemblages during soil-transmitted helminth infections in Indonesia and Liberia



The human intestine and its microbiota is the most common infection site for soil-transmitted helminths (STHs), which affect the well-being of ~ 1.5 billion people worldwide. The complex cross-kingdom interactions are not well understood.

A cross-sectional analysis identified conserved microbial signatures positively or negatively associated with STH infections across Liberia and Indonesia, and longitudinal samples analysis from a double-blind randomized trial showed that the gut microbiota responds to deworming but does not transition closer to the uninfected state. The microbiomes of individuals able to self-clear the infection had more alike microbiome assemblages compared to individuals who remained infected. One bacterial taxon (Lachnospiracae) was negatively associated with infection in both countries, and 12 bacterial taxa were significantly associated with STH infection in both countries, including Olsenella (associated with reduced gut inflammation), which also significantly reduced in abundance following clearance of infection. Microbial community gene abundances were also affected by deworming. Functional categories identified as associated with STH infection included arachidonic acid metabolism; arachidonic acid is the precursor for pro-inflammatory leukotrienes that threaten helminth survival, and our findings suggest that some modulation of arachidonic acid activity in the STH-infected gut may occur through the increase of arachidonic acid metabolizing bacteria.

For the first time, we identify specific members of the gut microbiome that discriminate between moderately/heavily STH-infected and non-infected states across very diverse geographical regions using two different statistical methods. We also identify microbiome-encoded biological functions associated with the STH infections, which are associated potentially with STH survival strategies, and changes in the host environment. These results provide a novel insight of the cross-kingdom interactions in the human gut ecosystem by unlocking the microbiome assemblages at taxonomic, genetic, and functional levels so that advances towards key mechanistic studies can be made.

The online version of this article (10.1186/s40168-018-0416-5) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

The gut microbiota of healthy older children and adults is complex but relatively stable in composition and function [1]. The gut microbiota has a large impact on human physiology, and has been demonstrated to modulate immune function, growth [2–4], metabolism, and overall health [5]. Helminths that reside in the gut can directly affect the immune system [6–8] or can indirectly influence the immune system through their effects on the gut microbiota and on the intestinal mucosa. Children are often exposed to helminth infections prior to the stabilization of their microbiota (up to 42% by 3 years of age [9]), increasing the risk of a lifetime disruption of normal microbial community development that can lead to long-term dysbiosis (possibly due to a reduced ability to extract nutrients from food for host absorption) [10]. Understanding the detailed relationship between helminths and the microbiota will provide important insights into how to reduce the negative impacts of helminth infection through simple nutritional strategies to supplement anthelminthic treatment as an integrated therapeutic tool [10]. However, little is known about the interactions between bacteria, the most prevalent soil-transmitted helminths (STHs; hookworms (Necator americanus and Ancylostoma duodenale], large roundworm [Ascaris lumbricoides], and whipworm [Trichuris trichiura]), and the human gut.

Here, we greatly expand on the existing knowledge of interactions between the human gut microbiome and STHs by precisely defining the microbial ecology underlying the STH infections in two very distinct geographic regions (Liberia and Indonesia) and identifying conserved STH-associated taxa despite the very different gut microbiome structure among individuals from these regions. To determine the association among the STHs and the gut microbiome, we considered only moderately/heavily infected and uninfected individuals (with precisely-quantified infection status). We successfully identified bacterial taxa positively and negatively associated with single and/or multiple worm infections. Furthermore, we compared the longitudinal changes in microbiomes from a double-blind randomized trial, identifying bacterial taxa that respond to deworming, while taking the time and treatment effects into consideration. Reconstruction of the metabolic pathways of the microbial communities on a subset of the longitudinal samples revealed functions differentially affected by deworming. The results provide novel (and much more comprehensive) understanding of the cross-kingdom interactions and provide a solid foundation for designing experiments to determine mechanistic insight of these interactions during infections and after deworming.

Our sample set included 402 fecal samples from 250 individuals from different villages in Liberia (n = 98; Table 1, Additional file 1: Table S1) and Indonesia (n = 304; Table
1, Additional file 2: Table S2). All samples were sequenced using targeted metagenomics (V1 V3 hypervariable region of 16S rRNA gene), and relevant sample set comparisons discussed below are shown in Fig. 1. A subset of samples (n = 24; Additional file 3: Table S3) were sequenced using a metagenomic shotgun approach. The STH species endemic in the studied areas included Ascaris lumbricoides (“Ascaris”), Necator americanus (“Necator”), and Trichuris trichiura (“Trichuris”). Other intestinal helminths such as Ancylostoma duodenale, Enterobius vermicularis, or Strongyloides stercoralis were not detected in the study population.

Morbidity due to STHs is strongly correlated with infection intensity [29], as measured by the Kato-Katz smear in eggs per gram (EPG) of feces (per WHO recommendations). However, it is widely recognized that this microscopy-based test is suboptimal and labor insensitive [30], with high day-to-day variation [31]. In contrast, quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) provides consistent results for detecting single or multiple parasitic infections in stool (mixed infections are common in most STH endemic countries [32, 33]). For the 98 samples collected from Liberia (Table 1, Additional file 1: Table S1), we compared STH abundance using both qPCR cycle threshold (CT) values (Additional file 4: Table S4) and the standard EPG procedure (Fig. 2a, b) for samples with “moderate/heavy infections” according to EPG thresholds recommended by the WHO (over 5000 and 2000 EPG for Ascaris and Necator, respectively [11, 34]). Consistent with a previous study analyzing Ascaris and Necator fecal abundance [32], a significant correlation between EPG and CT was found for both Ascaris (Fig. 2a) and Necator (Fig. 2b), the two most prevalent species among these individuals (P < 10− 5). However, at a CT value of 28 and below (chosen based on the lines of best fit for both Ascaris and Necator, as well as being the median detectable value in the previous study for Necator [32]), different subsets of individuals were identified as being moderately or heavily infected [35], with the qPCR method being more sensitive and identifying more individuals as STH positive overall. For all comparative analysis in this study (Fig. 1), only individuals with zero eggs and zero detection by qPCR (CT value ≥ 40) were used as negative controls, and individuals with ≤ 28 CT were considered infected.

The downstream effect of quantifying the level of infection with qPCR instead of egg counting on bacterial taxa associated with infection was tested using LEfSe [36], which performs both a non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis sum test and linear discriminant analysis to estimate effect size (Fig. 2c, d; Additional file 5: Table S5). Using this approach, 79 microbiome taxa were significantly associated with the Ascaris-infected individuals identified by qPCR (among samples from Liberia), whereas only 31 are significant when using the Kato-Katz identification method (Fig. 2c). Of the 18 taxa identified as significant by both approaches, 16 are less significant using the Kato-Katz identifications. Similarly, for infections with any STH (Fig. 2d), 54 more taxa are identified as significant by qPCR than by Kato-Katz (85 vs. 31, with 16 in common). Thus, the use of qPCR for STH quantification used here results in more sensitive detection of differentially abundant taxa, compared to microscopy-based approaches.

“Hierarchical All-against-All” (HAllA; http://huttenhower.sph.harvard.edu/halla) significance testing was used to identify significant associations between the various metadata, including infection status, cohort (according to definitions in Fig. 1), village, age, and sex. With the exception of positive Ascaris infections being associated with any positive infection in Liberia (18 of 26 infected samples had high Ascaris infections), no other significant associations were found between the various metadata according to thresholds used for HAllA in previous studies (FDR q < 0.05, similarity score > 0.5; [37]; Additional file 6: Figure S1A). Principal component analysis (PCA) was also used to cluster the Liberia and Indonesia samples according to relative taxa abundance values. For each of the metadata visualized (infection status in Additional file 6: Figure. S1B and S1D, and village and sex in Additional file 6: Figure. S1C and S1E), PERMANOVA [38] did not identify a significant clustering association (P > 0.1 in all comparisons), suggesting that it is not one of the metadata variables that is driving the overall microbiome profiles of the individuals in the study, and that infection status did not significantly correlate with any of the metadata.

Of the 98 individuals sampled from Liberia, 26 had high STH infections (≤ 28 CT), while 48 had zero STH infection. Prevotella was dominant among the 98 individuals accounting for an average of 32% of all 16S reads (Fig. 3). Species richness was increased with STH infections (89.5 vs 82.1 with no infection; P = 5.8 × 10− 3, 2-tailed t test with unequal variance, Shapiro-Wilk test 0.98 for normal distribution) and Shannon diversity index (measures evenness and richness of communities within a sample) value was also increased (2.8 vs 2.4; P = 0.0008, Shapiro-Wilk test 0.96), indicating higher alpha diversity for infected individuals. In addition to an increased alpha diversity, the average between-individual diversity (Bray-Curtis beta diversity) was higher among the infected individuals (0.52) than among the uninfected individuals (0.43; P < 10− 5, 2-tailed t test with unequal variance; Shapiro-Wilk W = 0.978).

We have also independently analyzed the previously-published Ecuador dataset [27] (n = 97) using our analysis pipeline (data from the study on Malaysia individuals [26] was not available in public databases), identifying associations (positive or negative) between STH infections and 17 genera. All of the 7 individual taxa positively associated with STH infection in Ecuador belonged to the phylum Firmicutes, including 2 taxa from the class Clostridia (which included the genera Eubacteria) and 5 taxa from the class Bacilli, which included 3 Lactobacillales (order) taxa and the genera Streptococcus. In our current study, we likewise have identified cross-cohort STH-associated members of Lactobacillales (Enterococcus, Enterococcaceae, and an unclassified Lactobacillaceae family; P = 0.002 and 0.0003 for over-representation compared to all detected taxa in Liberia and Indonesia, respectively; binomial distribution test) and Clostridia (the genera Butyrivibrio, Flavonifractor, Mogibacterium, and Oscillibacter; not significantly over-represented compare to all detected taxa), with a total of 10 of the 15 cross-cohort taxa belonging to Firmicutes (P = 0.0004 and 0.02 for over-representation compared to all detected taxa in Liberia and Indonesia, respectively).

We utilized a supervised machine-learning technique for identifying non-linear relationships in high dimensional microbiome data (random forest (RF) [40]) to identify STH-infection discriminating taxa in the Liberia individuals (Fig. 6d), and tested its predictive value in the Indonesia individuals. The RF model built using the Liberia samples had 74.3% classification power within the Liberia dataset (by “out of bag” error), and 72.4% predictive power for STH infections for the Indonesia validation dataset, with the top-ranked taxa being Eggerthella, Allobaculum, Olsenella, and Lachnospiracae incerta sedis (according to their “importance score”, measured using the mean decrease in the model’s accuracy as a result of excluding a taxa [1]). The LEfSe and RF approaches identify many of the same microbiota members as being significantly associated with STH infection in both geographical regions, including Olsenella, Lachnospiracae incerta sedis, Allobaculum, and other members of the Erysipelotrichaceae family, which provides further statistically independent verification of the cross-cohort association of these taxa with STH infection. As with the LEfSe analysis, most of the most significantly differentially abundant taxa had relatively low abundance in our dataset, highlighting the critical importance of both accurate and comprehensive sampling of the microbial communities. Performance improvement (up to 92% predictive value) can be achieved when phylogenetic dependency for grouping microbial data is used, as we have shown using subset of the individuals [41]; however, here a standard RF analysis is used for straightforward comparison to the LEfSe results.

In order to better understand the relationship between differentially abundant taxa, correlation networks were generated based on 16S abundances across all taxa identified at the genera level (Fig. 6e, f). SPARCC correlation values [42] (calculated based on 16S profiles while accounting for community diversity and utilizing appropriate statistics to deal with a high number of zero values) were utilized for network generation (P ≤ 0.05, correlation ≥ 0.2). Several genera were differentially abundant in both countries (Fig. 6e, f) and formed correlation subnetworks which include country-specific differentially abundant genera. In both countries, there are subnetworks connecting four consistently STH-associated genera (Oscillibacter, Flavonifractor, Butyrivibrio, and Allobaculum). In Liberia, this subnetwork includes Mogibacterium and Olsenella, but these taxa are separated in the Indonesia network. In both countries, Enterococcus is significantly associated with infection, but it clusters separately from the other taxa. These networks provide further insight into which consistent STH-associated taxa may be affected by similar biological mechanisms, or may possibly regulate each other.

Longitudinal study in Indonesia was used to analyze changes in the microbiomes after deworming. Repeated measures of the same 152 individuals in 2008 and 2010 were compared. These individuals were classified into two study arms: uninfected individuals treated with anthelmintic or placebo, and infected individuals treated with anthelmintic or placebo (Fig. 1; Table 1 and Table 2; see “Methods”). Between the 2 years, 16 individuals were treated with anthelmintics but were never infected in either year with any STH species (Fig. 1; treatment effect), while another 16 were not treated and were also never infected in either year (time effect). Using the LEfSe enrichment approach (with individuals specified as a repeated-measures subclass to perform longitudinal analysis), we identified 10 taxa differentially abundant in the anthelmintic-treated but not the untreated uninfected individuals between the 2 years, including two genera-level taxa (Table 2 (A and B)): Enterococcus, which was higher in 2010 compared to 2008 only among treated individuals (P = 0.009), and Ochrobactrum (and its family Brucellaceae), which was lower in 2010 compared to 2008 only among treated uninfected individuals (P = 0.037; Additional file 3: Table S3). Earlier study tested 19 clinically relevant antimicrobial agents against Ochrobactrum isolates and showed their susceptibility to trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole and ciprofloxacin [43] indicating that the anthelmintic albendazole may be having a similar effect as these antimicrobials.

For the final differential 16S abundance test, we compared the pre-treatment microbiomes of treated individuals in Indonesia who remained infected (N = 11; non-responders) to those who were dewormed (N = 27; responders), in order to identify taxa which may facilitate or prevent worm clearance (as defined by a 28CT threshold for infection no detection for deworming). This test identified 7 taxa which were significantly associated with successful clearance following anthelmintic treatment, including the genera Clostridium_IV, Turicibacter, and Collinsella, along with all of its parent phylogeny (phylum Actinobacteria, class Actinobacter, order Coriobacteriales, family Coriobacteriaceae). In Liberia (but not Indonesia), Turicibacter was significantly negatively associated with baseline infection, suggesting that it may be preventative for infection and also help to clear infection (Additional file 5: Table S5). Clostridium_IV and Collinsella were both positively associated with infection in Liberia (but not Indonesia), so these genera are both associated with infection as well as with worm clearance after treatment. On the other hand, eight taxa were significantly associated with incomplete worm clearance or reinfection including the genus Akkermansia and its parent phylogeny, as well as Ruminococcus genus (and two of its parent phylogeny), which comprised and average 2.5% of the total microbiome in Indonesia and was significantly positively associated with infection in Indonesia. This identifies Ruminococcus as an important taxa both in terms of its association with infection at baseline and its prevention of parasite clearance.

Metagenomic shotgun (MS) sequencing was performed to obtain the species level resolution of the microbiome from 24 stool samples (10 individuals, 2008 and 2010, from the Indonesia dataset and 4 individuals from the Liberia dataset; Additional file 3: Table S3). An average of 154 million MS reads were generated per sample and mapped to the bacterial reference genome database [44], identifying 618 unique bacterial taxa across the samples (average 301.4 per sample), with 82 taxa being identified across all 24 samples (the average taxa was identified in 11.7 of 24 samples). Based on the species-level Bray-Curtis diversity analysis, individuals who were both infected with any level of any STH infection (n = 19, average diversity 0.54) and individuals who both had zero STH infection (n = 5, average diversity 0.52) had more consistent within-group overall microbiome profiles than comparisons between the two groups (average diversity = 0.59; P = 0.011 compared to infected and P = 0.030 compared to uninfected). These results, with a relatively small sample set, provide further evidence for a distinct microbiome associated with helminth infection and provides (for the first time) strain level accuracy of the associated taxa.

The genetic potential of the microbial communities was evaluated by mapping the MS reads to a comprehensive gut bacteria reference gene catalog database (see “Methods”; obtained by stool samples from USA, Europe, and China [45]). In order to perform a direct comparison to samples from other regions, we used representative samples from the Indonesia dataset, along with representative samples from the USA (HMP data [44]) and from Liberia (Fig. 7; Additional file 4: Table S4), down-sampled to 37.8 million reads each. An average of 67.2 and 72.7% of Indonesia and Liberia reads (respectively) mapped to genes in the reference database, but this proportion of reads was much higher for the samples from the USA (86.1%; Fig. 7a), as expected due to its over-representation in the database. However, the overlap between Indonesia and Liberia was much higher (737,397 genes, 23% of all genes) than between either of these countries and the USA (88,145 genes and 174,802 genes, respectively). Only 46,770 genes (15% of detected genes) were conserved among the 3 countries (Fig. 7b), but an average of 45.7% of reads from each sample mapped to these genes. An average of 69.9% of functional groups per study area (68,038 KEGG OGs for all study areas) per sample was shared among the three sample groups (Fig. 7c). These results indicate that different gene sets perform similar functions between the three study areas.

In a separate analysis, reads from the 20 Indonesia samples were mapped to the integrated gene catalog (IGC) database [45]), and abundance values were compared per orthologous group (OG) before (2008) and after (2010) deworming using DESeq2 [46] (paired differential analysis). A total of 114 and 80 OGs were identified as statistically higher and lower after deworming (respectively) but not differential over time among consistently infected individuals (Fig. 7d; Additional file 3: Table S3). In addition, HUMAnN [47] was used to reconstruct the metabolic pathways of the 20 Indonesia shotgun metagenomic datasets, and pathway enrichment was performed using LEfSe [36] to compare STH-infected vs uninfected samples, using the same criteria as the 16S samples (total 12 STH-infected and 5 uninfected, with 3 low-infected samples excluded; Additional file 3: Table S3). The only significantly enriched KEGG pathway among the metagenomes of STH-infected samples was “arachidonic acid metabolism” (ko0059; Fig. 7e). The only KEGG Orthology (KO) category significantly enriched among the microbiomes of STH-infected individuals was “thymidylate synthase” (K00560). A total of 11 KOs were significantly depleted among STH-infected individuals (Table 3; top four visualized in Fig. 7f). These included (i) “RNA Polymerase Sporulation-Specific Sigma Factor” (K03091) and “Spore Coat Protein JC” (K06334), as well as “Cysteine Desulfurase” (K04487) and “Ferrous Iron Transport Protein B” (K04759). Together, these functional enrichment approaches identify many STH-associated microbiome functional pathways which offer further insight into these associations.

We focused on identifying and validating biologically meaningful associations between STH infections and the gut microbiota and its functional potential by (a) comparing the fecal microbiome of moderately/heavily STH- infected individuals to uninfected individuals (detected by qPCR for increased sensitivity), (b) validating the findings using subjects from a distinct geographical cohort, (c) identifying conserved STH-associated and STH-discriminatory taxa, (d) delineating microbiome assemblage changes as a result of de-worming/self-clearing, and (e) identifying microbiome-encoded biological functions associated with STH-infected individuals. While answering these questions using several comparisons between multiple cohorts (Fig. 1), technical aspects were also considered to understand how study design, diagnostic accuracy, precise STH burden estimation, and depth of coverage affect optimal profiling of the microbiome.

The only KEGG Orthology (KO) category significantly enriched among the microbiomes of STH-infected individuals was “thymidylate synthase” (K00560), an essential enzyme for DNA synthesis with no clear function for supporting helminth infection. A total of 11 KOs were significantly depleted among STH-infected individuals (Table 3; top four visualized in Fig. 7f). These included (i) “RNA Polymerase Sporulation-Specific Sigma Factor” (K03091) and “spore coat protein JC” (K06334), suggesting a reduction in spore-forming bacteria in association with STH infections, as well as “cysteine desulfurase” (K04487) and “ferrous iron transport protein B” (K04759), both of which are important for cellular iron homeostasis [63, 64]. These categories may be reduced due to more readily available iron from blood in the intestine, released while the hookworm attaches on the lining of the intestinal wall to feed on blood. Overall, the MS analysis offers a more detailed view of specific microbiome-encoded functions which are associated with STH infection.

Specific microbiome assemblages are significantly associated with STH infection, and specific members of the gut microbiome discriminate between moderately/heavily STH-infected and non-infected states across very diverse geographical regions using two different statistical methods. Microbiome-encoded biological functions associated with the STH infections were identified, which are associated with STH survival strategies and changes in the host environment. These results provide a novel insight of the cross-kingdom interactions in the human gut ecosystem by revealing STH-associated microbiome assemblages at taxonomic, genetic, and functional levels, so that advances towards key mechanistic studies can be made.

For samples from Liberia, a single stool sample was collected from individuals living in remote areas of north-western Liberia (Foya District, Lofa County; N = 68) or in coastal eastern Liberia (Harper District, Maryland County; N = 30). Stool samples and demographic information were collected as part of a larger survey on the long-term impact of mass drug administration (MDA) to eliminate lymphatic filariasis and onchocerciasis. While Foya was co-endemic for intestinal schistosomiasis, Harper was not. No previous de-worming was conducted in the study areas for at least 6 to 8 months before sample collection, but areas had previously received one or two rounds of MDA with ivermectin plus albendazole. Labeled stool containers were handed out in the evening and were collected early next morning. Within 6 h of sample collection, Kato-Katz smears were prepared and 1 g of stool was preserved in 4 mL RNAlater (Ambion) and stored at 4 °C until DNA extraction, or frozen at − 20 °C for long-term preservation.

No subjects with acute infections or other acute illnesses were included in the study as they would be not eligible for anthelminthic mass drug administration. This excludes also subjects with acute malaria. In these rural settings, the HIV prevalence is generally low. Furthermore, mapping of our shotgun metagenomic reads to a database of lower eukaryotes did not show presence of specific non-worm infections. While we have not tested all subjects for specific protozoan, viral, or bacterial infections, we control for this by doing a randomized trial. For this study we postulated that any subclinical infections were evenly distributed between the study groups and did not affect clustering.

In Liberia, duplicate Kato-Katz smears were prepared to estimate the number of helminth eggs per gram of stool as recommended by WHO [66]. Each smear contained 41 mg of fresh stool and was examined 30 to 90 min after preparation to ensure the integrity of the hookworm eggs. For detection of helminth DNA by qPCR, DNA was extracted from 300 μl of stool/RNAlater suspension containing approximately 60 mg of feces. RNAlater was removed by high-speed centrifugation, and the sample’s pellet was homogenized in ASL buffer (Qiagen, Hilden Germany) using a Precellys 24 homogenizer (Bertin Technologies, France) and the Precellys Lysing Kit for soil grinding (Bertin Technologies, France). Then, the homogenate was boiled for 10 min and DNA was extracted using the DNeasy Blood and Tissue Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) according to the instructions of the manufacturer. The DNA content of the extractions was measured using a Qubit fluorometer (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Usually, a DNA concentration between 200 and 500 ng/μl was achieved per extraction and was required for the samples to be suitable for further study.

The collection and processing procedures for the samples from Indonesia have been previously described [67]. Parallel qPCR reactions to detect DNA of Ascaris, Necator, Trichuris, A. duodenale, and S. mansoni were performed using 5 ng total DNA template per 10 μl reaction volume and a QuantStudioFlex6 thermocycler (Applied Biosystems; Additional file 4: Table S4). No A. duodenale DNA was detected in either of the study sites, while S. mansoni was only detected in three samples in Foya (considered STH-positive in the analysis). Although samples from Indonesia and Liberia were tested using different types of thermocyclers and slightly different qPCR assays, the sensitivity of qPCR for both countries was similar. In this study, for both countries, qPCR detection at a CT value of 28 or lower was used to identify “moderately/heavily” STH-infected samples. Samples with a positive qPCR identification, but with greater than 28CT detection were identified as “low”-level infections (and not included in the analysis), and those with no detection by qPCR were considered uninfected. As shown in Fig. 2a, the Ascaris line of best fit (between egg count and qPCR CT) cross the WHO threshold of 5000 EPG at a value of 26.8, and the Necator line of best fit (Fig. 2b) crosses its 2000 EPG threshold at a value of 29. The average of these two values 27.9, which was rounded up to 28, and is consistent with the median detectable value in the previous study for Necator [32].

The V1–V3 hypervariable region of the 16S rRNA gene was amplified by PCR using the 27F and 534R primers “AGAGTTTGATCMTGGCTCAG” and “ATTACCGCGGCTGCTGG.” The PCR products from the Liberia samples were purified and sequenced on the MiSeq Genome Sequencer generating, on average, 24,000 reads per sample (Illumina, San Diego, CA). The Indonesia PCR products were sequenced on the Genome Sequencer Titanium FLX (Roche Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN), generating an average of 6000 reads per sample (differences in the depth of coverage are likely to partially affect the cross-cohort comparisons). Raw sample reads are accessible for download from NCBI’s Sequence Read Archive (SRA, BioProject #PRJNA407815; Upload in progress) and from Nematode.net (Nematode.net/Microbiome.html). A subset of the Liberia samples were also sequenced using the 454/Roche sequencer (using the same variable region), to facilitate a comparison of the sequencing platforms. The degree of overlap for the genera captured by the MiSeq and the Titanium FLX are shown in Additional file 8: Figure S3A. The average reads per taxa obtained with the V1–V3 primers are provided in Additional file 8: Figure S3A.

Sample sequences were binned based on Illumina index sequences and by removing their tags in flow space (Roche Diagnostics), with one mismatch allowed. Paired end fastq files were generated and the primers were removed from the 3′ end of the sequence using Trimmomatic [68] and Flexbar [69], allowing 1 mismatch in addition to primer degeneracies. Low quality bases were removed using Mothur software [70] with the parameter “trim.seqs” (qaverage = 35). Illumina paired reads were assembled using FLASH [71] and then assembled. For the Roche Diagnostics sequences less than 200 bases were removed. Taxonomic calls were generated for each assembly and Roche Diagnostics reads using the Ribosomal Database Project Naïve Bayesian Classifier (version 2.5 with training set 9 [72], as previously performed; e.g., [73]). Chimeric sequences were identified and removed using ChimeraSlayer, with default parameters [74]. To analyze the diversity at various taxonomic levels, RDP-generated taxonomic calls were analyzed to generate sample vs. taxonomy matrices, where a 0.5 confidence level was required to accept a call at each taxonomic level. For example, reads with < 0.5 confidence at the genus level were considered “unclassified” at the family level.

Shotgun metagenomic libraries were generated and sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq2000 platform. Raw sample reads are accessible for download from NCBI’s Sequence Read Archive (SRA, BioProject #PRJNA407815; Upload in progress). An average of 154 million whole genome shotgun reads were captured from metagenomic DNA collected from Indonesia fecal samples (n = 20) from 10 individuals (sampled in both 2008 and 2010), as well as four Liberia individuals. Illumina genomic DNA sequence for the 24 samples were retrieved from the Laboratory Information Management System database and subject to human contaminant screening using BMTagger (version 1.0) as previously described. The non-human reads were then filtered to remove redundancy (using the Picard’s Estimate Library Complexity method, release 1.27), low quality reads were trimmed using the TrimBWAStyle.pl script (which applies the quality trimming logic used by Burrows-Wheeler Aligner) and low complexity reads (as detected by the DUST program) were removed. DUST masks low quality sequence that it identifies and reads were discarded anytime fewer than 60 unmasked bases remained after applying DUST. MS RNA-Seq reads were mapped to the HMP bacterial database).

The cleaned reads were also mapped to the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) genes database (v58) [75, 76] using the MBLASTX program with default parameters [77]. Results of this mapping were used as input to The Human Microbiome Project Unified Metabolic Analysis Network program (HUMAnN) [47] to obtain pathway and KEGG identifier abundances. These abundances were finally fed into the LEfSe [36] and were used to calculate enriched pathways and/or KEGG identifiers between samples infected with each of three STH species for which there was a sufficient number of infected and uninfected samples (Necator and Trichuris). The qPCR identifications of helminth abundance were used to classify the infection status of samples to be consistent with other analyses.

LEfSe [36] was used for differential taxa abundance testing, using default recommended settings according to the author’s instructions, at an adjusted P ≤ 0.05 for significance and requiring an LDA effect size of at least 2 for every significant call. LEfSe’s algorithm performs class comparison tests and validates for biological consistency, and is able to consider all taxonomic levels for comparison simultaneously. Many studies have utilized LEfSe for microbiome comparison testing to identify gut microbiome members associated with pathogenic infections [78] to identify gut biomarkers for disease [36] and to track microbiome recovery following disease [79].

For Liberia and Indonesia 16S sample sets individually, abundance values for all taxa identified to the genus level in a minimum of two samples (normalized to the total mapped read count per sample) were used as input for SPARCC correlation analysis [42] (default settings). SPARCC correlation values were specifically designed for the challenging task of identifying meaningful significant associations among 16S profiling datasets, accounting for community diversity and utilizing appropriate statistics to deal with a high number of zero values [42]. For the final network visualization, a minimum correlation of 0.2 and a minimum significance of association P ≤ 0.05 was required for inclusion (Fig. 6e, f; Additional file 3: Table S3). Networks were visualized using Cytoscape [80] (version 3.3.0) using the “edge weighted force directed layout” based on the correlation values. Identifications of differentially abundant taxa were based on identifications from the “differential microbiome abundance” subsection (above).

We used random forest (RF), a supervised machine-learning technique [40], to identify the bacterial genera that differentiate STH-infected and STH-uninfected microbiomes (according to qPCR standards). RF can identify non-linear relationships from high-dimensional and dependent data, and it is especially suitable for microbiome datasets [40]. Using samples from Indonesia, we built an RF model using 10,000 trees and default parameters are applied for model construction. The generalization error of the model was evaluated by out of bag (OOB) error. To test the prediction accuracy of the model, Liberia samples with the same 37 genera served as the validation set. The prediction power of the model was evaluated using the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis. The genera that are highly predictive of moderate to heavy infection and non-infection were identified using importance score. An importance score of at least 0.001 was considered highly predictive, as previously reported [1].



Data generation was supported by National Institute of Health NHGRI grant number U54HG003079 and data analysis by National Institute of Health NIAID grant number AI081803-06A1. Field work in Liberia was supported by a grant of the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation (GH5342). The findings and conclusions contained within are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect positions or policies of the funders. The funders had no role in data collection and analysis, had no role in decision to publish, and contributed in the writing of the manuscript.

The datasets generated during the current study are available at the NCBI’s Sequence Read Archive (SRA) accession numbers: SAMN07688522 to SAMN07688545. The ~ 4 million 16S assembled sequences from all the Liberia and Indonesia samples are also available for download from Nematode.net (Nematode.net/Microbiome.html).

Metagenomic sequencing was performed using de-identified stool samples. The study was approved by the Institutional Review Boards at Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis, at the University of Liberia, Monrovia (responsible for the Liberian Institute for Biomedical Research), and at the Ethical Committee for Research of the University of Indonesia, Jakarta.

Not applicable.

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

