Microbiome and immune-mediated dry eye: a review

In this review, we aim to summarise key articles that explore relationships between the gut and ocular surface microbiomes (OSMs) and immune-mediated dry eye. The gut microbiome has been linked to the immune system by way of stimulating or mitigating a proinflammatory or anti-inflammatory lymphocyte response, which may play a role in the severity of autoimmune diseases. Although the ‘normal’ gut microbiome varies among individuals and demographics, certain autoimmune diseases have been associated with characteristic gut microbiome changes. Less information is available on relationships between the OSM and dry eye. However, microbiome manipulation in multiple compartments has emerged as a therapeutic strategy, via diet, prebiotics and probiotics and faecal microbial transplant, in individuals with various autoimmune diseases, including immune-mediated dry eye.

The gut microbiome is composed of a plethora of bacteria that play important physiological roles in maintaining host health. First, certain microbiome constituents break down food molecules that are otherwise indigestible, such as plant carbohydrates that can be digested by the phylum Bacteroidetes.1 Second, the microbiome is involved in vitamin synthesis, such as folate production by the genus Bifidobacterium and vitamin K production by several species.2 Third, the gut microbiome helps regulate immune responses, balancing protection against pathogenic organisms while modulating inflammation intraintestinally and extraintestinally. For example, plasma cells in mucosal tissues, including the gut, produce large amounts of immunoglobulin A (IgA) that neutralise pathogenic bacteria and promote survival of commensal bacteria.3 In one study, germ-free mice (mice without a gut microbiome) harboured fewer IgA-producing plasma cells compared with control mice. However, plasma cell levels increased significantly after a microbiome was transplanted via faecal transfer from healthy wild-type mice, demonstrating the importance of the microbiome in regulating antibody production and immune responses.4 Furthermore, a healthy gut microbiome protects against infection by pathogenic bacteria, as evidenced by susceptibility to Salmonella typhimurium and Clostridium difficile in Swiss-Webster mice with reduced intestinal diversity.5 These are just a few examples of the important roles played by the gut microbiome in maintaining health, metabolic function and immunological responses.

Because the gut microbiome influences immune function, many studies have examined whether gut microbiome composition varies in individuals with autoimmune diseases, such as ankylosing spondylitis, Behcet’s and rheumatoid arthritis (RA) as compared with controls.6–8 In this review, we focus on relationships between gut microbiome composition and immune-mediated dry eye, a disease that often coexists with primary Sjögren’s, as well as secondary Sjögren’s (such as in the setting of RA) and graft-vs-host disease (GVHD). First, we describe the ‘normal’ gut microbiome and discuss connections between the gut microbiome and immune system. Next, we summarise data regarding gut microbiome compositional differences in individuals with immune-mediated dry eye and related diseases as compared with controls. Then, we briefly comment on interactions between the ocular surface microbiome (OSM) and dry eye, given that this is an area less well studied. Finally, we discuss strategies that can be used to alter the gut and OSMs and examine their potential as treatments for dry eye.

In this review, we summarise articles that discuss relationships between microbiomes and immune-mediated dry eye in Sjögren’s, as well as related diseases. Articles for this review were collected from the PubMed database using a non-systematic literature search. A mix of keywords was used to identify articles for this review including: ‘microbiome’, ‘dysbiosis’, and ‘commensal bacteria’ combined with terms such as ‘Sjögren’s’, ‘graft vs host disease’, ‘rheumatoid arthritis’, ‘autoimmune’, ‘dry eye’, ‘conjunctivitis’, ‘keratoconjunctivitis sicca’, ‘therapy’, ‘fecal microbial transplant’, ‘probiotics’, ‘prebiotics’ and ‘diet’. All published scientific articles were considered including original research, meta-analyses and systematic reviews. When multiple studies were available on the same topic, we chose articles with the most robust methodology that were pertinent to our review. All searches were limited to the English language. Overall, the search yielded 2325 articles on PubMed of which 62 were included in this review after the screening process. A Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses flow diagram reports the results of our search and filter strategy (figure 1).

Several studies have examined the gut microbiome in ‘normal’ individuals with variations noted among populations.9 10 This is not surprising as age, geographic location, genetics and diet have all been shown to affect gut microbiome composition.11 12 Overall, the human gut microbiome is predominately constituted by the phyla Firmicutes, Bacteroides, Proteobacteria and Actinobacteria.9 13 14 These four phyla were dominant in the gut of 17 healthy individuals living in France or the Netherlands,10 as well as in 39 healthy individuals spanning six nationalities (Danish, Spanish, Italian, French, American and Japanese).9 At the genus level however, greater variation exists in the microbiome. For example, Faecalibacterium, Ruminococcus and Eubacterium were the most common genera in France and the Netherlands,10 while Bacteroides, Prevotella and Ruminococcus were the most abundant genera among the six aforementioned nationalities.9 Geographic variations in microbiome composition have also been noted in other regions. For example, in a study of 326 children (0–17 years) and 202 adults, significant phylogenetic differences were noted between both children and adults living in Malawi, Venezuela, and the USA, with US residents having the least diverse microbiome.12

Age and genetics also affect microbiome composition. In one study, the gut microbiome of 12 unrelated children and 1 fraternal twin pair was regularly sampled during their first year of life. From the first stool produced after birth through approximately 6 months, significant microbiome variability existed between the children. However, from approximately 6 months to 1 year, their microbiomes migrated toward a similar ‘adult-like’ composition with a predominance of Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes.11 Interestingly, the twin pair harboured a more similar microbiome compared with the other infants. More support for the impact of genetics and diet on microbiome composition comes from a Canadian study that examined 173 white and 182 South Asian 1-year-old infants whose mothers all lived in Canada for an average of 8 years. South Asian mothers were more likely to be vegetarian compared with white mothers. South Asian infants were found to have an increased abundance of Bifidobacterium, Atopobium, Streptococcus and Enterococcus and a decreased abundance of Firmicutes compared with white infants. This study suggests that the gut microbiome composition of infants may be influenced by genetics and both the infants’ and mothers’ diet.16 Collectively, these studies highlight that various factors may affect the gut microbiome and that there is variation with respect to what constitutes a ‘normal’ microbiome.

The gut microbiome influences immune system development and function. For example, among Swiss-Webster mice that were 3–6 months of age, germ-free mice had lower numbers of immunologically competent cells in the lymphoid tissue of the mesenteric, submaxillary, axillary and popliteal lymph nodes compared with conventionally house mice.17 Furthermore, germ-free mice were more susceptible to infection by bacteria,18 including Listeria monocytogenes,19 Salmonella enterica,20 Klebsiella pneumoniae21 and fungus (Cryptococcus).22 Interestingly, mice were not only susceptible to systemic infection but also to infections at peripheral sites, such as an increased susceptibility to Pseudomonas aeruginosa keratitis.23 Fortunately, the noted immune abnormalities and their functional consequences were overcome when the gut microbiome was restored by faecal transplant from healthy mice, including normalised proportions of T-helper-17 (Th17) and T-regulatory (Treg) cells.24 This suggests that the microbiome is critical in maintaining normal levels of various immune mediators, such as plasma cells, Th17 and Treg, which are important for protection against infections at multiple sites.

Via its effect on Th17 (proinflammatory) and Treg (anti-inflammatory) cell regulation, the gut microbiome can also impact inflammation in multiple compartments.25 26 For example, some Clostridia species can stimulate Th17 expansion in intestinal and extraintestinal sites (proinflammatory), while other Clostridia species produce short chain fatty acids (SCFA) that support Treg proliferation (anti-inflammatory). Similarly, some Bacteroides species express molecules such as polysaccharide A (PSA) which mediates the conversion of CD4+ T cells into Treg cells and suppresses the Th17 inflammatory response, thus permitting the colonisation of Bacteroides fragilis.27 28 In fact, oral administration of PSA was found to both prevent and improve experimental colitis in mice,29 highlighting the important role of B. fragilis in the gut as a facilitator of Treg differentiation which induces mucosal tolerance.27 Overall, the gut microbiome is essential for the development of a healthy gut immune system that protects against infection with pathogenic micro-organisms while dampening excessive proinflammatory T-cell responses.

Alterations in the gut microbiome, also known as gut dysbiosis, have been linked to a variety of diseases. However, different autoimmune diseases have different microbiome signatures.

Overall, gut dysbiosis has been described in several autoimmune diseases include including RA, spondylarthrosis and Behcet’s, however with differences in microbiome composition between studies, even within the same disease.7 8 32 35

Sjögren’s is a chronic autoimmune disease characterised by oral and ocular dryness. It affects 0.5%–4% of the population, including more than 2 million Americans living with the disease.36 Gut dysbiosis has also been found in Sjögren’s, both in mouse models and humans.

Examining these four studies, both consistencies and discrepancies emerge between studies. Two studies found increased abundances of Blautia and Streptococcus and reduced abundances of Faecalibacterium and Prevotella in individuals with dry eye compared with controls.35 41 However, one study found a decreased abundance of Blautia and an increased abundance of Prevotella.39 The differences in microbiome compositions among studies may be due to several factors, including the aforementioned population-based differences, variations in processing and analytical techniques for microbiome analysis or comorbid diseases. Further studies are needed that characterise the microbiome in Sjögren’s and examine potential confounders.

The association between the gut microbiome and T-cell profiles in immune-mediated dry eye and Sjögren’s has been explored in a few studies (figure 2). As mentioned previously, germ-free CD25KO mice were found to have a worse dry eye phenotype when compared with CD25KO conventionally housed mice.37 This suggests that gut dysbiosis contributes to increased lymphocyte-associated inflammation. Furthermore, in our study of individuals with immune-mediated dry eye, we demonstrated relationships between various dry eye metrics and T-cell profiles in blood. Dry eye symptom severity was positively related to both effector T cells (Th1: r=0.76, p=0.01; Th17: r=0.83, p=0.003) and regulatory T cells (CD25: r=0.66, p=0.04; FoxP3: r=0.68, p=0.03) frequencies.41 Positive associations were noted between corneal staining and effector T cells (Th1: r=0.48, p=0.19; Th17: r=0.47, p=0.21), while negative associations were identified between corneal staining and regulatory T cells (CD25: r=−0.66, p=0.06; FoxP3: r=−0.54, p=0.13). Although these latter relationships were not statistically significant potentially due to an underpowered analysis of only 10 individuals, these findings may suggest the severity of corneal staining is positively associated with effector T-cell populations and inversely associated with regulatory T-cell populations.41

Relationships between soluble inflammatory markers and microbiome composition have also been examined in a Spanish study that included 19 individuals with Sjögren’s and 19 age-matched, sex-matched and body mass index-matched healthy controls.42 In patients with Sjögren’s, the proinflammatory cytokines interleukin-17 (IL-17) and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α were negatively associated with serum levels of Bifidobacterium (R2=0.742, B=−1.289, p<0.001 and R2=0.697, B=−0.580, p<0.001, respectively), while IL-17 was positively associated with Ruminococcus (R2=0.742, B=−0.815, p<0.001). IL-12 was negatively associated with Lachnospira (R2=0.897, B=−0.601, p<0.001), Roseburia (R2=0.897, B=−0.641, p<0.001) and Bifidobacterium (R2=0.897, B=−0.715, p<0.001) and positively associated with Enterobacter (R2=0.897, B=0.562, p<0.001). IL-6 was negatively associated with Blautia (R2=0.835, B=−0.132, p=0.022) and Roseburia (R2=0.835, B = −0.785, p=0.001) and positively with Escherichia coli (R2=0.835, B=0.678, p<0.001). This same pattern was not noted in healthy controls. Specifically, a significant negative association was only noted between the proinflammatory cytokines IL-6 and TNF-α and Parabacteroides distasonis (R2=0.948, B=1.139, p<0.001 and R2=0.570, B=0.570, p=0.011, respectively). Interestingly, both individuals with Sjögren’s and healthy controls shared the same anti-inflammatory cytokine associations. In both groups, the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 was positively associated with Faecalibacterium prausnitzii (R2=0.325, B=0.570, p=0.011; R2=0.494, B=1.337, p<0.001, respectively) and Ruminococcus (R2=0.325, B=0.259, p=0.029; R2=0.494, B=0.259, p=0.029, respectively). Finally, FOXP3 mRNA expression, which is implicated in the development and function of Treg cells, was positively associated with B. fragilis in both individuals with Sjögren’s (R2=0.547, B=0.548, p=0.029) and healthy controls (R2=0.547, B=0.670, p=0.016).42 Collectively, these studies suggest that gut dysbiosis is associated with alterations in cellular and soluble immune profiles in immune-mediated dry eye. While larger studies across diverse populations are necessary to validate the noted correlations between bacterial composition, clinical metrics and immune profiles, the presence of such associations suggest that modulating the microbiome may serve as a therapy for immune-mediated dry eye.

Gut microbiome manipulation, with the goal of restoring a healthy microbiome, has been examined as an approach to alter disease phenotype in autoimmune diseases. Strategies that have been explored in this regard include diet modification, probiotics, prebiotics and faecal microbial transplant (FMT) (table 1).

GVHD, graft-vs-host disease; RA, rheumatoid arthritis.

The role of diet and nutrition has been investigated as a therapy for immune-mediated dry eye. One study examined relationships between a Mediterranean diet and Sjögren’s. In 82 adults diagnosed with primary Sjögren’s and 51 adults who had symptoms but did not meet the criteria for Sjögren’s, higher Mediterranean diet scores (calculated via a questionnaire based on the amount of certain food intake per week) were associated with a lower odds of having Sjögren’s. Interestingly, the strongest inverse associations were noted with fish and vegetable consumption on multivariate analysis.43 Fish intake has also been shown to reduce the risk of other autoimmune diseases such as RA.44 Although no data specifically exist on how diet affects the microbiome in individuals with immune-mediated dry eye, it is increasingly recognised that diet may have an impact on health by impacting gut microbiome composition.45

Animal studies have also examined the role of diet in dry eye. In one study, the impact of a high-fat diet on lacrimal gland function was investigated in 4-week-old C57BL/6 mice. The results showed that mice on a high-fat diet demonstrated pathologic changes, including lower levels of tear secretion, increased inflammatory CD4+ T cell infiltration, increased proinflammatory factors such as TNF-α and IL-1β and increased apoptosis of acinar and myoepithelial cells compared with mice with standard diets. After a standard diet was introduced to the mice previously on a high-fat diet, pathologic changes in the lacrimal gland were partially reversed, including a reduction in inflammatory cells and proinflammatory factors and an upregulation of anti-inflammatory cytokines.46 These studies suggest a relationship between certain diets, disease severity and inflammatory signatures.

Probiotics and prebiotics have also been studied as a way to improve gut microbiome composition and downstream metabolites in diseases associated with immune-mediated dry eye. One prospective clinical trial evaluated the efficacy of prebiotics in preventing symptoms and signs of acute GVHD. Prebiotic supplements that contained resistant starch, glutamine, fibre and oligosaccharides were administered daily to 43 individuals before their allogenic haematopoietic stem cell transplantation until 28 days after transplantation, while 142 individuals did not receive prebiotics before their transplantation. Overall, prebiotics reduced the incidence of acute GVHD of all grades 100 days after transplant (53% vs 73%; p=0.004). In addition, individuals who received prebiotics had a reduced duration (median, 11 days vs 14 days; p<0.001) and severity (measured by Eilers’ Oral Assessment Guide) of oral mucositis, a shortened duration of diarrhoea (median, 7 days vs 9 days; p=0.049) and a shortened duration of opioid use (median 8 days vs 10 days, p=0.013) compared with controls. Moreover, a greater frequency of individuals in the prebiotic versus control group had stable or increased microbial alpha diversity (Shannon index) at day 28 compared with baseline (increased: 20% vs 2.8%; stable, 23.3% vs 20.8%, decreased, 57.7% vs 76.4%; p=0.004).47

The disease modifying effects of prebiotics and probiotics may be due to their anti-inflammatory properties. In one randomised double-blinded study in Ireland, 27 healthy volunteers who received prebiotics containing Bifidobacterium infantis were compared with 12 healthy volunteers who received a placebo. The prebiotics group demonstrated an increased IL-10, an anti-inflammatory cytokine and increased numbers of Foxp3+CD4+T cells, important players in mucosal immune tolerance, in peripheral blood.50 This study suggests that B. infantis leads to immunoregulatory responses, highlighting its potential benefit individuals with inflammatory disease. These findings may translate to individuals with immune-mediated dry eye, however studies on the effects of prebiotics and probiotics on individuals with immune-mediated or SDE have yet to be reported.

FMT is the process of transferring intestinal microbiome from a healthy donor to a patient with the goal of replacing an abnormal gut microbiome with a stable and healthy one. Despite the technical difficulties, FMT has been explored as a therapy for autoimmune diseases associated with immune-mediated dry eye. For example, in an open-label study, one or two doses of FMT (from healthy spouses or relatives) were delivered by enema to four individuals with GVHD after stem cell transplantation. One month after FMT, improved gastrointestinal symptoms including defecation consistency and frequency were noted. This correlated with an increase in beneficial bacteria including Lactobacillus, Bacteroides, Bifidobacterium and Faecalibacterium.51 However, no data were given on FMT’s effect on dry eye in this publication.

FMT has also been investigated in other autoimmune diseases, including ulcerative colitis, multiple sclerosis and idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura. In a randomised control trial, 75 individuals with ulcerative colitis received six weekly FMTs from healthy donors or placebo. The remission frequency at 7 weeks (24% vs 5%) was significantly higher in the FMT versus placebo groups.52 FMT has also been examined in individuals with metabolic syndrome, in a study that highlighted the importance of donor characteristics in influencing FMT’s effect. In a double-masked study of 18 obese individuals (body mass index>30 kg/m2 or waist circumference>102 cm with fasting plasma glucose level>5.6 mmol/L), subjects were randomised to allogenic (from lean male donors) or autologous (from own collected faeces) FMT via a gastroduodenal tube. Increased sensitivity to insulin was noted in recipients 6 weeks after a single dose of FMT from lean donors but not after autologous transplant.53 Furthermore, FMT has been explored as a treatment for autoimmune neurological conditions. In an open-label study of three individuals with multiple sclerosis and constipation, daily FMT infusions (route not reported) for 1–2 weeks resulted in an objective improvement in neurological symptoms, including regaining the ability to walk, decreased paresthesia and improved energy levels.54 With FMT being successful in other autoimmune conditions, gut microbiome manipulation via FMT remains a potential future therapy for immune-mediated dry eye, with the most effective route and frequency still yet to be determined.

The OSM may also have a role in immune-mediated dry eye. Of note, the OSM is paucibacterial compared with the gut, with 0.06 bacteria per human conjunctival cell compared with the gut which has 10 bacterial cells for every one human cell.55 56 The composition of the OSM also differs from the gut microbiome, with Proteobacteria dominating on the ocular surface as opposed to Firmicutes in the gut.57 58

Taken together, differences in OSM composition have been described in individuals with immune-mediated dry eye compared with non-immune dry eye subtypes and controls, however with discrepancies between studies regarding alpha diversity and compositional differences. As with gut microbiome composition, potential confounders such as population-based differences (geography, diet, demographics, comorbid diseases) may explain the divergent findings across studies. While larger studies across diverse populations needed, the OSM may also be a therapeutic target for immune-mediated dry eye through microbial modulation.

Modulating the OSM may be a potential therapy in dry eye; however, research exploring this concept is sparse. One study evaluated the efficacy of Lactobacillus eye drops on symptoms (itching, photophobia, burning, tearing) and signs (conjunctival hyperemia, chemosis, secretion, Trantas dots, superficial punctuate keratitis) in individuals with vernal keratoconjunctivitis. In an open label study in Italy, seven patients were treated Lactobacillus eye drops four times per day for 4 weeks in both eyes. After 4 weeks of treatment, a significant improvement in symptoms and signs was reported in six patients, most notably in symptoms of photophobia, itching, tearing and signs of conjunctival hyperemia and chemosis.62 While these results are promising, it is unknown if these findings will translate into beneficial effects in immune-mediated dry eye. As such, further studies are needed.

Overall, the studies above highlight complex interactions between microbiomes, the immune system and immune-mediated dry eye. A balance between proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory bacterial species is important for immune system development and function, to protect the body locally and systemically from infection and to appropriately dampen inflammatory response. Several studies have found gut microbiome alterations in autoimmune diseases associated with immune-mediated dry eye, and as a result, the gut microbiome has emerged as a potential therapeutic target to mitigate symptoms and signs of immune-mediated dry eye via dietary manipulation, prebiotics and probiotics and FMT. However, as there is not one apparent microbial signature in immune-mediated dry eye, it is not clear which therapy is optimal in which individual. Furthermore, the role of the OSM in immune-mediated dry eye is less well understood and as such, is an important avenue for future studies.

Contributors: All authors have contributed to the idea, literature review, writing, editing and review of the manuscript.

Funding: This study was supported by the Sjögren's Foundation, the University of Miami Interdisciplinary Team Science Award (UM SIP 2018-2R), the Department of Veterans Affairs, Veterans Health Administration, Office of Research and Development, Clinical Sciences R&D I01 CX002015 (AG) and Biomedical Laboratory R&D Service I01 BX004893 (AG), Department of Defense Gulf War Illness Research Program W81XWH-20-1-0579 (AG) and Vision Research Program W81XWH-20-1-0820 (AG), National Eye Institute R01EY026174 (AG) and R61EY032468 (AG), NIH Center Core Grant P30EY014801 (institutional) and Research to Prevent Blindness Unrestricted Grant (institutional).

Competing interests: None declared.

Provenance and peer review: Commissioned; externally peer reviewed.

Not applicable.

Not applicable.

