Diet and gut microbiome interactions of relevance for symptoms in irritable bowel syndrome

While several studies have documented associations between dietary habits and microbiota composition and function in healthy individuals, no study explored these associations in patients with irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), and especially with symptoms.

Here, we used a novel approach that combined data from a 4-day food diary, integrated into a food tree, together with gut microbiota (shotgun metagenomic) for individuals with IBS (N = 149) and healthy controls (N = 52). Paired microbiota and food-based trees allowed us to detect new associations between subspecies and diet. Combining co-inertia analysis and linear regression models, exhaled gas levels and symptom severity could be predicted from metagenomic and dietary data.

We showed that individuals with severe IBS are characterized by a higher intake of poorer-quality food items during their main meals. Our analysis suggested that covariations between gut microbiota at subspecies level and diet could be explained with IBS symptom severity, exhaled gas, glycan metabolism, and meat/plant ratio. We provided evidence that IBS severity is associated with altered gut microbiota hydrogen function in correlation with microbiota enzymes involved in animal carbohydrate metabolism.

Our study provides an unprecedented resolution of diet-microbiota-symptom interactions and ultimately guides new interventional studies that aim to identify gut microbiome-based nutritional recommendations for the management of gastrointestinal symptoms.

This trial was registered on the ClinicalTrials.gov, with the registration number NCT01252550, on 3rd December 2010.

Video abstract video file.(45M, mp4)

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s40168-021-01018-9.

Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is one of the most common gastrointestinal disorders, affecting between 5 and 18% of the population, depending on geographical region [1, 2]. However, the effectiveness of treatment options for this common disorder is limited, and IBS is associated with profound reductions in health-related quality of life and huge societal costs [3]. Most individuals with IBS report the triggering or worsening of symptoms following food intake [4]. Therefore, the interest in the IBS symptoms’ dietary management has increased, particularly over the last decade. Recent clinical studies have shed light on the importance of specific food items in exacerbating gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms. However, the optimal dietary recommendations for individuals with IBS remains uncertain [4]. Diet, particularly long-term eating habits, is known to be one of the drivers of microbiota variation. Detailed tracking of covariations between the gut microbiota and diet demonstrated insight into the clearly personalized responses to variation in dietary intake [5, 6].

First, using a diet index, we showed that individuals with severe IBS symptoms are characterized by a higher intake of food items of poorer quality during their main meals. Then, combining co-inertia analysis and linear regression analysis suggested that gut microbial hydrogen metabolism and dietary profile are associated with IBS symptom severity. Additionally, our study further suggests that specific hydrogenases were associated with gut microbiota function in terms of the CAZy involved in animal carbohydrate metabolism.

Adult patients aged 18–65 years fulfilling the Rome III criteria for IBS [22] were prospectively included at a secondary/tertiary care outpatient clinic (Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Sweden). The diagnosis was based on a typical clinical presentation and additional investigations, if considered necessary by the gastroenterologist (HT or MS). Exclusion criteria included the use of probiotics or antibiotics during the study period or within the month preceding inclusion, another diagnosis that could explain the GI symptoms, severe psychiatric disease as the dominant clinical problem, other severe diseases, and a history of drug or alcohol abuse. Patients with severe heart disease, kidney disease, or neurological disease, as well as other GI diseases that could explain the symptoms, were not included. The healthy control group was recruited through advertisements and checked by interview and with a questionnaire to exclude chronic diseases and any current GI symptoms. The healthy controls completed a checklist consisting of the presence and severity of ten different GI symptoms (no, mild, moderate, severe, very severe) the previous week. To qualify as healthy control, no more than one symptom of maximum mild severity was allowed. The food diary was performed approximately 10–14 days before the stool sample collection. A bowel habit diary based on the Bristol Stool Form Scale was completed for 14 days before the stool collection to allow IBS subtyping according to the ROME III criteria [22]. Breath tests were done approximately 10–14 days after the stool sample collection. Concomitant medication was also recorded and previously reported [19].

All participants gave written informed consent for participation after receiving verbal and written information about the study. The Regional Ethical Review Board at the University of Gothenburg approved the study before the start of the inclusion period.

Demographic information and body mass index were obtained for all subjects. Individuals with IBS reported their current use of medications and completed questionnaires to characterize their symptom severity and bowel habits: the IBS Severity Scoring System (IBS-SSS) [23], a 4-day food diary, and a 2-week stool diary based on the Bristol stool form scale. IBS severity was assessed with validated cutoff scores for the IBS-SSS (mild IBS: IBS-SSS < 175, moderate IBS: IBS-SSS = 175–300, severe IBS: IBS-SSS > 300). Oral–anal transit time (radiopaque marker study) [24] and exhaled H2 and CH4 levels after an overnight fast (i.e., with no substrate intake preceding the test) were also determined for individuals with IBS. Exhaled CH4 and H2 levels were determined after an overnight fast (i.e., not after the intake of any substrate) and after the subjects had received thorough instructions to avoid a diet rich in fiber and poorly absorbed carbohydrates the day before the test. Exhaled H2 and CH4 levels were determined in parts per million in end-expiratory breath samples collected in a system used for the sampling and storage of alveolar air (GaSampler System; QuinTron Instrument Company, Milwaukee, WI) immediately analyzed in a gas chromatograph (QuinTron Breath Tracker; QuinTron Instrument Company).

All subjects completed a paper-based diet record, in which all foods and drinks consumed during four consecutive days (Wednesday–Saturday) were reported. Oral and written instructions were given to the patients on how to record their dietary intake, and patients were told to keep to their regular diet during the recording days. The type of food and the time at which it was consumed were noted, with quantification in grams, according to the use of household utensils (e.g., tablespoons) or the number of slices, for example. Cooking methods and the contents of food labels were noted where applicable. All diet records were entered into a special version of Dietist XP 3.1 software (Kostdata.se, Stockholm, Sweden), which calculates the energy and nutrient composition of foods. The software was linked to a Swedish Food Composition Database provided by the National Food Agency in Sweden (https://www.livsmedelsverket.se/) and to a Swedish database with FODMAP content, developed in-house [25]. This database contained information about fructose, fructan, lactose, galacto-oligosaccharide (GOS), and polyol content (g/100g) from published sources [26]. All diet records were entered into the software by a trained dietician. Excess fructose levels were calculated from data for fructose and total monosaccharide content from diet records. Glucose and fructose are the dominant monosaccharides in foods. If glucose content was higher than fructose, then the excess fructose variable was assigned a value of 0 (for each separate meal). For the reported intake of FODMAPs, outliers were defined as values exceeding the mean ± 4 SD.

Nutrient intakes were first summarized for each meal, and then per day, and were finally determined as the mean intake for all 4 days. A cutoff value was set for energy intake, and subjects reporting energy intake levels below 800 kcal/day or exceeding 4500 kcal/day were excluded to remove reports corresponding to an implausible habitual intake. No subjects exceeded these limits.

The FSA-NPS (British Food Standards Agency Nutrient Profiling System) [27] score was calculated for all foods and beverages, as follows: points (0–10) are allocated for the content per 100 g in total sugars (g), saturated fatty acids (g), sodium (mg), and energy (kJ) and can be balanced by opposite points (0–5) allocated for dietary fiber (g), proteins (g), and fruits/vegetables/legumes/nuts (percent). The grids for point attribution were as described by Deschasaux et al. [28]. The FSA-NPS score for each food/beverage is based on a unique discrete-continuous scale ranging theoretically from − 15 (most healthy) to + 40 (least healthy). Besides, each food item was assigned to one of five groups: from A (high quality) to E (low quality) for a FSA-NPS score below 1, 2, 5, 9, and 40 for A, B, C, D and E, respectively, for drinks, and below 0, 3, 10, 18 and 40 for A, B, C, D and E, respectively, for all other foods. The overall diet index, FSA-NPS DI, was calculated as the energy-weighted mean of the FSA-NPS scores of all foods and beverages consumed, as described by Deschasaux et al. [28].

We used the hierarchical format of the Swedish Food Composition Database to categorize foods into a hierarchical tree, the food tree. Food items, their associated nutrients, and their corresponding hierarchical levels were downloaded from the Swedish Food Composition Database (https://www.livsmedelsverket.se/). These hierarchical levels corresponded to levels 3 and 4 in the food tree. We then grouped level 2 into five large categories: animal-based, plant-based, alcohol, fats, and others. Level 1 is the root of the food tree. We then divided level 4 into 85 subcategories, constituting level 5 in the food tree, as follows:

For instance, items from the “cheese” food category (level 3 in the food tree) are classified as “animal product” (level 1) and “dairy product” (level 2), and have been classified into three food-nutrient subcategories (level 4): high-fat cheese, low-fat cheese, and whey-based cheese. All downstream analyses were performed at the food-nutrient level (corresponding to level 4 in Table S1).

Fecal samples from 138 subjects were collected in RNA Later solution (Ambion, Courtaboeuf, France). Fecal DNA was extracted by mechanical lysis (Fastprep® FP120) (ThermoSavant, Illkirch, France) followed by phenol/chloroform-based extraction, as previously described [19]. A barcoded fragment library was prepared for each sample, and DNA sequencing data were generated with SOLiD 5500xl sequencers (Applied Biosystems, Life Technologies, Villebon-sur-Yvette, France), resulting in a mean of 38 (SD 14) million sequences of 35-base single-end reads. High-quality reads were generated, with a quality score cutoff > 20. Reads with a positive match to human, plant, cow, or SOLiD adaptor sequences were removed. Filtered high-quality reads were mapped onto the MetaHIT 3.9 million gene catalog with METEOR software. The read alignments were performed in color space with Bowtie software (version 1.1.0), with a maximum of three mismatches and a selection of the best hit. Uniquely mapped reads (reads mapping to a single gene from the catalog) were attributed to the corresponding genes and used to construct a raw gene count matrix. If multiple alignments were found, counts were divided equally between the aligned genes.

Metagenomics species pangenomes (MSPs) are co-abundant gene groups that can be considered part of complete microbial species pangenomes. MSP gene content was extracted from a previous publication by Plaza-Onate et al. [29]. MSP gene content was subdivided into core and accessory genes. Gene annotations (KEGG orthology and CAZy family) were extracted from the paper by Li et al. [30]. Thus, MSP relative abundance was calculated for each sample, based on the median core gene abundance. Samples were attributed to an MSP subspecies based on accessory gene clustering, as follows:

Hydrogenase amino acid sequences were extracted from a previous study [31] and aligned, with BlastX software (version 2.7.1+), with 3.9 million gene catalogs. Best hits with an identity of more than 60% over a stretch of more than 40 amino acids were considered for downstream analysis.

All statistical analyses were performed with R software (version 3.4.1). UniFrac distances between food diaries were calculated with the phyloseq R package, using the food tree as input. Jensen Shannon divergence (JSD) between metagenomes aggregated at MSP subspecies level was calculated according to a tutorial published by Arumugam et al. [32] implemented into BiotypeR R package (available on github tapj/BiotypeR). PERMANOVA analysis was performed with the vegan R package (Adonis, version 2.5). Principal coordinate analysis (PCoA), co-inertia analysis, and linear discriminant analysis were performed with the ade4 R package (version 1.5). To note, PCoAs on microbiota and diet distances were computed using all available samples, while co-inertia analysis was computed on common sub-samples from PCoAs components. Spearman correlation analysis was used to project features onto PCoA axes. Principal component linear regression analysis was used to train models to predict clinical, microbiome, and diet features (e.g., exhaled gas metabolism, symptom severity, meat/plant ratio) with the co-inertia axes. Spearman’s correlation analysis was performed on relative abundance data for genes aggregated at the CAZy family and hydrogenase levels. A network was generated for correlations with an absolute rho value above 0.4. Data were visualized with cowplot, ggraph, and ggplot2. p values were adjusted for multiple testing by Benjamini–Hochberg false-discovery rate correction when specified. Otherwise, p values are given at a 5% nominal level.

We investigated the association of GI symptom severity and patterns with diet and the gut metagenome in 52 healthy controls and 149 individuals with IBS (Table
1). The IBS symptoms were severe, according to the IBS Severity Scoring System (IBS-SSS) [23], in 65 of the 149 individuals with IBS. A 4-day food diary was obtained from 142 subjects (26 healthy controls and 49 individuals with severe IBS). Dietary macronutrients and micronutrients identified as consumed differentially between individuals with IBS and healthy controls or between patients with severe IBS symptoms and other individuals (healthy or non-severe, i.e., mild/moderate IBS symptoms) did not remain significant after correction for multiple testing (Fig. S1 and S2). This suggests that dietary data, aggregated at the micro- and macronutrients levels, differ neither between individuals with IBS and healthy controls nor between IBS patients with different levels of symptom severity.

Finally, based on the PCoA results, we investigated whether FODMAPs (fermentable oligo-, di-, and monosaccharides and polyols) were associated with diet quality based on the hierarchical food tree. GOS and fructan intakes were positively associated with PCoA1 (rho = 0.28 and rho = 0.33 respectively, p < 0.05), suggesting that subjects who consumed high levels of plant-based food items had a diet enriched in GOS and fructans. Polyol intake was associated with PCoA2 (rho = − 0.31, p < 0.05), indicating that subjects who consumed high levels of processed foods and lower-quality food items had a diet enriched in polyols. The intake of lactose and fructose was not associated with PCoA1 or PCoA2, suggesting that their consumption was not a major driver of the overall variation in dietary intake or symptom generation in our study.

As diet is a major driver of microbiota composition and function, we investigated whether differences, previously observed in dietary profile between study individuals, were associated with gut microbiota composition and functions. We have previously shown that enterotypes, assessed by 16S rRNA gene sequencing, could be separated into three microbiota communities based on Dirichlet multinomial mixture (DMM) modeling [19]. Enterotypes were not associated with dietary distance (PERMANOVA, p > 0.05), nor with meat/plant ratio (p > 0.05) or diet quality (FSA-NPS DI, p > 0.05), suggesting that the variation of diet within this cohort was not associated with that of global microbiota structures (see Supplementary Tables S2 and S3).

Next, whole-metagenomic sequencing was performed in 138 individuals (102 individuals with IBS and 36 healthy controls), and among these subjects, both diet and metagenomics profiling were available in 79 subjects (Table
1). Metagenomic reads (with an average of 14 million reads per sample) were mapped onto a catalog of Metagenomic Species Pangenomes (MSPs) [29], yielding a total of 1661 MSPs. Based on per-individual genetic content, 166 of them were further divided into 523 subspecies, corresponding to a mean of 75.3% of the metagenome read mass. The remaining 1495 MSPs were not assigned to MSP subspecies (MSP_unassigned). We then used the taxonomic tree to investigate the effect on each node’s dietary profile variation, from phylum to subspecies level (PERMANOVA test). Each microbial lineage with at least one node with an effect size of more than 2% was selected with no filter applied on statistical significance (Fig.
2a). Depending on taxonomic lineage, dietary variation was either better explained at the species (i.e., MSPs) or subspecies level (Fig.
2b). For example, the MSP assigned to Eubacterium rectale was less associated with diet than its two subspecies. In particular, the relative abundance of the E. rectale subspecies with flagellin-encoding genes (Fig.
2c) correlated with a diet enriched in meat-based products (rho = 0.23, p = 0.05) and with vitamin B12 intake (rho = 0.31, p < 0.05).

As dietary variation was better explained at the species (i.e., MSPs) or subspecies level MSP, we further combined microbiota profile variation (JSD distance at subspecies and MSP_unassigned) with dietary profile variation. Using a co-inertia approach on PCoA components, we explored the complex association between gut microbiota, diet, and multiple explanatory variables in 79 subjects for whom both dietary and microbiota datasets were available (training set, co-inertia RV coefficient = 0.59). Individuals with only one of these datasets (microbiota or diet, Table
1) constituted the test set (N = 122). All 201 study subjects (training and test sets) were projected onto the same hyperspace based on their gut microbiota and dietary profiles (Fig.
3a). We then investigated how this common projection of gut microbiota and diet was associated with clinical parameters. The relation of microbiota and dietary profiles to gas metabolism and clinical parameters was investigated by extracting the first co-inertia coordinates from both the training and test sets. Then, we correlated them with variables, including BMI, age, IBS symptoms severity score, exhaled gas metabolism (H2 and CH4), microbiota gene richness, and dietary variables (meat/plant ratio, diet quality) (Fig.
3b). The first seven coordinates (axis A1 to axis A7, Fig.
3c), accounting for 50% of covariation, were retained. Consistently for both the training and test sets, the meat/plant ratio was associated with axis A1, whereas microbial gene richness, diet quality, and exhaled CH4 were associated with axis A2 (Table S3). This suggests that the meat/plant ratio was the main tested factor explaining microbiota and dietary covariations independently of gene richness, diet quality, and exhaled CH4. Although weaker, consistent correlation directions for axis A1, in both the test and training set, were detected for exhaled H2 and IBS symptom severity. Since CH4 metabolism is dependent on H2 metabolism, the ratio of exhaled H2 to exhaled CH4 for each subject was calculated. This ratio was consistently correlated with axis 4 in both the food and microbiota in the training sets and microbiota in the test set, suggesting that H2/CH4 metabolism can be explained by metagenomic and dietary profile variations.

For the prediction of each clinical variable, we used a machine learning approach by constructing regression models from the first five co-inertia coordinates (40% of the variance) extracted from the microbiota and dietary datasets. Co-inertia models trained on microbiota and validated on dietary data were assessed for robustness by regression analysis (Fig.
3c). For example, using a model fitted on the microbiota training set, H2/CH4 ratio could be predicted from the microbiota test set (Pearson r = 0.53, p < 0.05). Similarly, using a model fitted on the microbiota training set, the meat/plant ratio could be predicted from the dietary test set (r = 0.69, p < 0.05). Using another model fitted on the dietary training set, IBS symptom severity could be predicted from the dietary test set (r = 0.28, p < 0.05).

As carbohydrates belong to the food items that can exacerbate symptoms related to gas accumulation, we further explored the relationship between CAZy and hydrogenases. Metagenomes were clustered according to DMM models based on the relative abundance of CAZy. Using the minimum Laplace approximation, study subjects could be divided into three distinct CAZy clusters (CAZotype) that were significantly associated with enterotypes (chi2, p < 0.05, Fig. S4), suggesting a link between carbohydrate metabolism and enterotypes. In contrast to enterotypes, CAZotypes were associated with the diet profile variation (PERMANOVA test, p < 0.01).

We further investigated potential links between CAZy and hydrogenases, encoded by gut metagenomes, and symptom severity. CAZy were subdivided into broad substrate categories (plant cell wall carbohydrates, animal carbohydrates, peptidoglycan, and others (starch/glycogen, sucrose/fructans, fungal carbohydrates, and dextran) [33], whereas hydrogenases were classified according to their active metal site [31]. A network based on Spearman’s correlation between the CAZy family and hydrogenases was constructed (Fig.
4a). Network analysis showed that a specific hydrogenase involved in hydrogenotrophy, [FeFe] group A3, was associated with eight different CAZy families involved in the metabolism of animal carbohydrates (mucin- or meat-derived) (Fig.
4a). One plant-based CAZy family, a carbohydrate-binding module known to target the terminal fructoside residue of fructans, was also associated with [FeFe] A3 hydrogenase. Hydrogenase from the [FeFe] group B was associated with seven plant-based CAZy families, including enzymes involved in starch and xylose metabolism. This suggests that the abundance of [FeFe] hydrogenase in gut metagenomes is associated with the metabolism of dietary and host glycans. Finally, we assessed the relation between the relative abundance of [FeFe] hydrogenases and IBS symptom severity. A linear discriminant analysis showed that [FeFe] A3 hydrogenase was a strong predictor of IBS symptom severity (Fig.
4b). Indeed, [FeFe] A3 hydrogenase presented higher relative abundance in individuals with severe IBS compared with healthy controls (Fig.
4c). Overall, these findings indicate a link between carbohydrate metabolism and symptom generation in IBS.

In this study, we have demonstrated that individuals with severe IBS are characterized by a higher intake of food items with lower overall quality during their main meals. Our study further provides evidence that IBS severity is associated with altered gut microbiota hydrogen function in correlation with CAZy involved in animal carbohydrate metabolism. A combination of co-inertia analysis and linear regression analysis also suggested that covariations between gut microbiota and diet were associated with IBS symptom severity, exhaled gas, glycan metabolism, and meat/plant ratio.

This study has some limitations. While we provide a detailed and novel approach that combines both diet and gut microbiota, the sample size is limited, and we do not have longitudinal data. Hence, confirmation in larger, ideally population-based, rather than clinical cohorts is needed, ideally with longitudinal follow-up. Another potential limitation is our diet assessment tool, as it does not accurately determine gut microbiota accessible carbohydrates. Future dietary questionnaires should be optimized to capture relevant food-based microbiota modulators [5, 34]. Also, food diaries were collected 10–14 days before the stool sampling, but 3 to 4 days of dietary records are enough to be a representative [46]. Besides, further improvement of food tree configurations such as optimization of distance metrics used is desirable. Nevertheless, this study expands our knowledge of microbiota–diet association and provides new insight into the altered function of the gut microbiota in individuals with severe IBS symptoms, potentially as a consequence of interactions with dietary habits.

In this study, we have demonstrated that individuals with severe IBS symptoms have a higher consumption of low-quality food products during their main meals and an enrichment of gut microbiota function towards a specific type of hydrogen metabolism associated with animal carbohydrate metabolism, detected using metagenomics. Those specific microbial metabolic pathways and metabolites should be targeted in future studies as markers for dietary/microbiota-targeted therapies for IBS. Our findings can potentially guide new interventional studies that aim to identify gut microbiome-based nutritional recommendations for the management of gastrointestinal symptoms.



Publisher’s Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Muriel Derrien and Magnus Simren contributed equally to this work.

