Effects of therapeutic levels of dietary antibiotics on the cecal microbiome composition of broiler chickens

Dietary antibiotics, including antibiotic growth promoters (AGPs), have been commonly used to improve health and growth of poultry. The present study investigated the effects of therapeutic doses of dietary antibiotics, including bacitracin methylene disalicylate (BMD), penicillin G potassium (PP) and an ionophore (salinomycin, SA), on the cecal microbiome of chickens. BMD and SA treatments were given as dietary supplements from d 1 to 35 of age. The SAPP (salinomycin+ penicillin G potassium) group was given SA as a dietary supplement from d 1 to 35 of age and PP was added to drinking water from d 19 to 24 of age to simulate common practices for control of necrotic enteritis in broilers. The cecal contents were collected from all treatment groups on d 10, 24, and 35 of age and DNA was extracted for metagenomic analysis of the cecal microbiome. The results revealed that dietary or water supplementation of therapeutic levels of antibiotics and ionophores to chickens significantly altered the cecal microbial homeostasis during different stages of the chicken life. The alpha diversity analysis showed that BMD, SA, and SAPP treatments decreased diversity and evenness of the cecal microbiome of treated chickens on d 10 of age. Species richness was also reduced on d 35 following treatment with BMD. Beta diversity analyses revealed that SAPP and BMD induced significant changes in the relative abundance of Gram-positive and -negative bacteria on d 10, while no significant differences were observed on d 24. On d 35, the non-treated control group had higher relative abundance of unclassified Gram-positive and -negative bacteria compared to SA, SAPP, and BMD treatment groups. Overall, despite their beneficial role in controlling necrotic enteritis outbreaks, the findings of this study highlight the potential negative effects of dietary supplementation of therapeutic levels of antibiotics on the gut microbiome and suggest that adjusting gut bacteria may be required to restore microbial richness and diversity of the gut microbiome following treatment with these antibiotics.

Antimicrobial growth promoters (AGPs) have been used widely as feed additives to improve livestock health and productivity (Dibner and Richards, 2005). In addition to their health benefits, inclusion of subtherapeutic levels of antibiotics in poultry feed has been shown to enhance feed efficiency and growth performance and to reduce the levels of enteric bacterial pathogens, including Clostridium perfringens (Gadbois et al., 2008; Neumann and Suen 2015). However, due to public health concerns about the impact of antibiotic residues on human health and the potential emergence of antibiotic-resistant bacteria, many countries have taken steps to mitigate these risks by phasing out the use of certain antibiotics in poultry feed (United States Food and Drug Administration 2012; Agunos et al., 2019). For example, measures have been set in Canada to eliminate the preventive use of antimicrobials in poultry feed, including Category I, II, III antibiotics, while Category IV antibiotics such as ionophores that are not being used for humans will not continue to be used in the raised without antibiotic (RWA) programs. The removal of antibiotics from poultry feed has been thought to result in re-emergence of some well-controlled diseases such as necrotic enteritis (NE), consequently leading to the use of antibiotics at therapeutic doses for treatment of these diseases.

While the effects of subtherapeutic doses of antibiotics on the chicken gut microbiome composition and diversity have been extensively studied, relatively little is known about the impact of therapeutic levels of antibiotics on the chicken gut microbiome dynamics. A better understanding of the possible antibiotic-associated dynamic shifts of the gut microbiome will not only aid in the prudent use of antibiotics in poultry production, but will also help in developing potential therapeutics, such as probiotics, to re-shape an impaired gut microbiome following their use. Therefore, this study was undertaken to investigate the effects of different antibiotics, including bacitracin methylene disalicylate, salinomycin, and penicillin G potassium, at therapeutic dosages on the cecal microbiome composition using next generation sequencing.

Eighty one-day-old mixed broiler chicks (Ross 708), obtained from a commercial hatchery in Ontario, Canada, were randomly assigned to 4 groups (n = 20/group) and housed in separate floor pens (200 × 215 cm) with fresh litter in the same room at Arkell poultry research station, University of Guelph. Chickens in group 1 were fed a diet containing 0.15% BMD at (150 g/ton) (Bean-Hodgins and Kiarie, 2021) during each phase of growth: starter (d 1 to 10 of age; Table 1), grower (d 11 to 24 of age; Table 2), and finisher (d 25 to 35 of age; Table 3). Chickens in group 2 were fed a diet containing 0.05% SA at (50 g/ton) (Bean-Hodgins and Kiarie, 2021) during the starter, grower and finisher phases. Chickens in group 3 were given a diet containing 0.05% salinomycin from d 1 to 35 of age and had access to medicated water containing 20 g of penicillin g potassium (Pot-Pen)/100 liter of drinking water (SA + PP) from d 19 to 24 of age. Chickens in group 4 served as a negative control group and did not receive any medicated feed or water throughout the entire experiment. The room temperature was maintained at 32°C during the first week of hatch and gradually decreased to reach 27°C by d 17. Birds were exposed to fluorescent lighting in a 23 h of light (20+ lux) for the first 4 days and then a 16 light: 8 dark (10–15 lux) light cycle. Birds in all groups had free access to the food and water during the experiment. The experiment complied with the guidelines of the Canadian Council on Animal Care (CCAC) and was approved by the Animal Care Committee at the University of Guelph.

On d 10, 24, and 35 of age, five birds randomly collected from each treatment group and euthanized by CO2 inhalation. Cecal contents were collected from both ceca, snap-frozen on dry ice and then stored at −80°C until further use (Zhou et al., 2007). DNA was extracted from the cecal contents using QIAamp DNA Stool mini kit (Cat. No. / ID:51604) as per manufacturer's instruction (Qiagen, Toronto, Canada). DNA quality and concentration were assessed with a NanoDrop spectrophotometer (NanoDrop Technologies, Wilmington, DE). The DNA samples with 260/280 ratio between 1.8 and 2 were considered pure and were used for further processing. DNA concentration was measured and adjusted to 10 ng/μL in a volume of 10 μL nuclease-free water. The V4 hypervariable region of the 16S rRNA gene was amplified and sequenced with an Illumina MiSeq sequencer at the Genome Quebec Innovation Center. The pair primer set used in the study was 564F YTGGGYDTAAAGNG and 785R TACNVGGGTATCTAATCC. A total of 1,359,182 sequences were produced with an average number of 22,653 sequences per sample.

Processing of sequence data was performed using Mothur (v.1.44.) (Schloss, 2009) software, following the MiSeq SOP (Kozich et al., 2013). Briefly, make.contigs command was applied to assemble the read pairs into contigs. Non-assembled and redundant contigs were removed by screen.seqs and unique.seqs commands, respectively. The sequences that did not align to V4 region of the 16S rRNA gene and had ambiguous bases less than 254 bp or were not classified as bacteria or contained homopolymers of >9 bp removed. No samples were removed due to low reads. SILVA bacteria reference database 138 was used to align the sequences. The redundant aligned sequences created by trimming the ends were removed by unique.seqs command. The chimera.vsearch command was used to remove the chimeric sequences. The dist.seqs (cutoff = 0.03) and cluster commands were used to cluster the sequences into operation taxonomic units (OTUs), and the number of sequences per OTU was determined by using the make.shared command. Taxonomy was assigned against SILVA database (v.138.). Alpha and beta microbial community diversity analysis were performed using standard Mothur pipelines. Bacterial community dissimilarity in the treatments was measured by Nonmetric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) using Bray Curtis dissimilarity index.

Permutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) (‘Adonis’ function, vegan package, R [v.3.5.1.]; 1,000 permutations) was used to analyze statistical comparison of spatial separation on the nMDS. The significant differences between the taxa associated with each treatment were analyzed with the package DESeq2 (Love et al., 2014) in R software.

Alpha diversity Chao1 (richness measures), and Shannon and Simpson diversity (evenness measures) were carried out using Mothur software. On d 10 (Figure 1), alpha diversity indexes indicated that chickens in the SA, BMD, and SAPP treatment groups had significantly different cecal microbial evenness and diversity compared to the non-treated control group. The Shannon index showed that chickens in the control group had higher microbial evenness (P < 0.05, ANOVA) compared to those in SAPP group and marginal evenness compared to those in the SA treatment group (Figure 1). Chickens in the SAPP treatment group had lower evenness compared to those in the SA treatment group (Figure 1).

There were not any species shared among the control, SA, and SAPP groups on d 10, 24, and 35 (Figure 4, Figure 5, Figure 6).

Beta diversity of the cecal microbiome in chickens was measured in NMDS with Bray Curtis index on d 10, 24, and 35 (Figure 7). Analysis of PERMANOVA was performed to determine the difference in the cecal bacterial communities among treatment groups (Table 4). All pairwise comparisons were significant using ADONIS at 0.05 using Benjimani-Hochberg correction for multiple comparison.

On d 35, the cecal microbial community structure of the SA, BMD, and SAPP groups varied significantly from that of the control group (Table 4). The microbial structure of the BMD-treated group was different from that of the SA- and SAPP-treated groups (Table 4).

Differences in the cecal microbiome of the antibiotic-treated and control chickens on d 10, 24, and 35 are shown in Figure 8, Figure 9, Figure 10. At the phylum level, on d 10, 24, and 35, the most abundant phylum between all treatments was Firmicutes (Figure 11). Proteobacteria was the most abundant phylum in the SA treatment group on d 10 (29.5%), 24 (15.3%), and 35 (8.0%; Figure 11). Actinobacteria proportion was higher in the control groups compared to other treatment groups on Day 10 (Figure 11). On d 35, the relative abundance of phylum Campilobacterota was higher in the BMD-treated chickens in comparison with other treatments (Figure 11). DESeq2 analysis was used to compare differential enrichment of the cecal microbiome of the antibiotic-treated and control chickens (Love et al., 2014; Figures 12,
14 and
15). On d 10, the cecal microbiome of the SA group was enriched with genera Eisenbergiella, Victivallaceae ge, and Incertae Sedis and family Enterobacteriaceae. The most abundant genus in the SAPP group was Anaerofilum (Figure 12). RF39 ge was also found to be more abundant in SA and BMD treatment groups on d 10 (Figure 12). On the other hand, the SA and SAPP treatments resulted in a significant decrease in the unclassified Firmicutes (Figure 12). The relative abundance of Gram-positive and -negative bacteria on d 10 post-hatch was higher in the SAPP treatment and control groups (Figure 13).

On d 35, the cecal microbiome of the BMD group was significantly enriched with the genus Helicobacter (Figure 16), while the control group was enriched with the unclassified either Gram-positive or Gram-negative bacteria (Figure 16). The SA group had high abundance of unclassified class Bacilli (Figure 16). The cecal microbiome of the control group had significantly higher number of unclassified Gram-positive and -negative bacteria on d 35 (Figure 17).

In recent years, there has been extensive research on the mechanisms of action of AGPs, particularly their role in the modulation of gut microbiome composition (Engberg et al., 2000; Pourabedin et al., 2014; Costea et al., 2017; Proctor and Phillips 2019; Robinson et al., 2019). Despite the general consensus that AGPs can change gut microbial composition either by enhancing or limiting the growth of certain microbial species (Broom, 2017; Torok et al., 2011), there is scarcity of information about the effects of therapeutic doses of antibiotics on richness (number of bacterial species) and evenness (relative distribution) of microbial communities in the chicken gut. As a case in point, while some studies demonstrated that supplementation of diet with AGPs such as avilamycin (Choi et al., 2018) and zinc bacitracin (Díaz Carrasco et al., 2018) decreases the alpha diversity index of the cecal microbiome, other studies revealed that their supplementation has no major effects (Danzeisen et al., 2011; Crisol-Martínez et al., 2017; Proctor and Phillips, 2019). These conflicting data can be attributed to several environmental and experimental factors, including animal age, diets, stressors, and PCR biases (Hume et al., 2003; Yin et al., 2010; Torok et al., 2011; Zou et al., 2018).

It is noteworthy that a few members of phyla Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes, particularly butyrate-producing bacteria, were enriched in the cecal microbiome of both antibiotic-and ionophore-treated chickens, albeit not at the same level of diversity and abundance as in the control chickens.

Dietary or water supplementation of chickens with therapeutic levels of antibiotics and ionophores has been shown to significantly alter the cecal microbial homeostasis during different stages of the chicken life. Given the important role of the gut microbiome in regulating host metabolism and immunity, these findings highlight the importance of prudent use of antibiotics in poultry production and suggest the need for in-feed or water supplementation of chickens with beneficial microbial consortia following treatment with these antibiotics to restore microbial richness and diversity in the gut microbiome. Further investigations are required to determine the functional changes in intestinal immune responses, metabolic activity of the gut microbiome and growth performance of the antibiotic-treated chickens.

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

