The Potential Role of Gut Microbiota in Alzheimer’s Disease: From Diagnosis to Treatment

Gut microbiota is emerging as a key regulator of many disease conditions and its dysregulation is implicated in the pathogenesis of several gastrointestinal and extraintestinal disorders. More recently, gut microbiome alterations have been linked to neurodegeneration through the increasingly defined gut microbiota brain axis, opening the possibility for new microbiota-based therapeutic options. Although several studies have been conducted to unravel the possible relationship between Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) pathogenesis and progression, the diagnostic and therapeutic potential of approaches aiming at restoring gut microbiota eubiosis remain to be fully addressed. In this narrative review, we briefly summarize the role of gut microbiota homeostasis in brain health and disease, and we present evidence for its dysregulation in AD patients. Based on these observations, we then discuss how dysbiosis might be exploited as a new diagnostic tool in early and advanced disease stages, and we examine the potential of prebiotics, probiotics, fecal microbiota transplantation, and diets as complementary therapeutic interventions on disease pathogenesis and progression, thus offering new insights into the diagnosis and treatment of this devastating and progressive disease.

Alzheimer’s disease (AD), which affects approximately 50,000,000 people worldwide, is the most frequent cause of dementia, constituting a real global health problem [1]. The disease is characterized by the progressive deposition of beta amyloid (Aβ) plaques and tangles of hyperphosphorylated tau neurofibrils, leading to neuroinflammation and progressive cognitive decline [2]. Synaptic dysfunction and neuronal death are at least in part due to the excessive or non-resolving activation of the immune response and any infections or traumatic events affecting the brain (traumatic brain injury) can interfere with central immune homeostasis and accelerate the progression of the disease [3]. Although several hypotheses have been formulated about the causes of AD pathogenesis and progression, both the onset and the evolution of the disease remain not entirely clear. Therefore, although different therapeutic options have been proposed, many have failed in clinical trials and have not been found to produce significant benefits [4,5,6]. It is widely thought that an early diagnosis could be essential to act at the earliest disease stages, but effective and reproducible biomarkers are still far from clinical application [7,8].

The term “gut microbiota” refers to the commensal microbial community that colonizes the gastrointestinal tract and is constituted by bacteria, fungi, archaea, viruses, and protozoans living in symbiotic relationship with our intestine [9,12,13,14]. Thanks to their active role in regulating host’s homeostasis and disease, they are becoming more and more important in the pathogenetic mechanisms of neurodegenerative disorders, such as AD [15,16,17,18]. Indeed, even though for a long time it was believed that the brain was a totally isolated organ, recent evidence shows that the gut microbiota is at the center of a bidirectional communication between intestine and brain, the so-called microbiota gut–brain axis [15,19,20,21]. This interplay involves the central nervous system (CNS), the autonomic nervous system, the enteric nervous system (ENS), and the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis (HPA), and it has been reported to be implicated in a number of physiological and pathological processes such as satiety, food intake, glucose and fat metabolism, insulin sensitivity, and stress [22]. Although the mechanisms underlying this interaction are not fully understood, targeting the microbiota might represent a new diagnostic and therapeutic strategy in AD and in other neurodegenerative diseases [23]. However, despite several published papers having reviewed possible microbiome-based therapies, to our knowledge a comprehensive view of gut microbiota-based diagnostic and therapeutic approaches is still lacking. Here, based on the main studies addressing gut microbiota dysregulation in AD, we discuss how the microbiota-derived biomarkers might be exploited for early disease detection, and we review the potentiality of probiotics, prebiotics, diet, and fecal microbiota transplantation as complementary therapeutic options for this devastating and progressive disease.

The gut–brain axis (GBA) consists of a signaling pathway between the gastrointestinal (GI) tract and the CNS, which allows a bidirectional communication between the two systems. Its primary role is to monitor and integrate intestinal functions as well as to link, through immune and neuro-endocrine mediators, the emotional and cognitive centers of the brain with peripheral intestinal mechanisms such as immune activation, intestinal permeability, enteric reflex, and entero-endocrine signaling [20]. In this communicating network, the brain affects gut movement, sensory, and secretion functions, and in turn the signals from the gut affect brain function [24]. This relationship is therefore of outmost importance for the maintenance of gut homeostasis, and it has been reported to be also involved in the etiology of several metabolic and mental (psychiatric and neurological) dysfunctions and disorders [21,25].

Given this complex interplay, it is not surprising that the gut–brain axis, and therefore the gut microbiota as main component of this crosstalk, directly or indirectly affects neuropsychiatric illnesses [33].

The role of gut microbiota and GMBA in AD is of utmost importance [34]. The composition of the gut bacteria affects dramatically any age-related neurological disorder, such as AD, and mood disorders. Extrinsic factors including diet, lifestyle, or also pro-inflammatory insults, along with intrinsic components including genetic polymorphism, immunity, metabolites, and hormones, profoundly affect the composition of the gut microflora, which in turn produces signaling molecules such as short chain fatty acids (SCFAs), tryptophan, choline, and hormones (such as ghrelin, leptin) in the GI tract able to regulate CNS functions [35]. Aging has a strong impact on gut microbiota composition favoring the development of pro-inflammatory bacteria (such as Bacillus fragilis, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, Eubacterium rectale, Eubacterium hallii, and Bacteroides fragilis) to the detriment of anti-inflammatory bacteria, a condition that induces local systemic inflammation then leading to enhanced permeability of the gastrointestinal tract, an impairment in the blood–brain barrier (BBB), finally promoting neuroinflammation. Indeed, Cattaneo et al. observed such pro-inflammatory bacteria in amyloid-positive patients when compared to healthy subjects [36]. In transgenic mice (mutant human APP) when infected with Salmonella enterica and in transgenic Caenorhabditis elegans (human Aβ42 peptide) infected with Candida albicans, the authors reported a susceptibility to further infections although they died later with respect to wild type animals. Probably, this was due to the antimicrobial activity of Aβ peptide, as the heparin-binding motif of Aβ oligomers make easier the binding to the glycosyl group of the carbohydrate moiety in the bacterial cell wall, so preventing its adhesion to the host cell and the induction of microbial agglutination [37]. Also, bacteria-derived amyloids have been reported to be causative factors for Aβ peptide aggregation in AD. For example, amyloids produced by bacteria such as curli (E. coli), TasA (Bacillus subtilis), CsgA (S. Typhimurium), FapC (Pseudomonas fluorescens), phenol soluble modulins (Staphylococcus aureus), etc., have been shown to contribute to the development of AD pathology particularly by promoting Aβ oligomers and fibrils formation [38].

The relationship among gut microbiome composition, inflammation, further neuroinflammation, and AD onset, is a fundamental matter of debate in AD etiopathogenesis. A certain number of investigations reported the presence of pathogens in the post mortem brains of AD patients [46,47,48,49]. Among them are herpes simplex virus type 1 and bacteria such as Chlamydophila pneumoniae, Borrelia burgdorferi, or other spirochetes [50,51,52]. Furthermore, a significant increase in the level of Helicobacter pylori-specific IgG antibodies, found in the cerebrospinal fluid and in the serum of AD patients, was reported [53]. In this context, novel therapeutic approaches can be envisaged by investigating the crucial role of some gut microbiota compositions leading to AD with the aim of promoting the prevalence of health-associated species, also adjusting both dietary habits and lifestyle, that could help to prevent disease development/progression [54,55,56].

Intestinal dysbiosis is a condition of microbial imbalance caused by an overgrowth of “bad” bacteria inside the gut, associated with potential negative outcomes such as the incorrect production of essential metabolites or even the genesis of harmful metabolites [14,57]. Although the composition of a “healthy microbiota” has not yet been defined, a balanced environment between the host and microorganisms is known to be essential to carry on the necessary immunological and metabolic functions [58]. Over the past years, dysbiosis has been reported to be implicated in the development of several disorders, such as obesity, diabetes, chronic fatigue syndrome, intestinal bowel syndrome, cancer, autoimmune diseases, depression, anxiety, PD, multiple sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and other neuropsychiatric disorders [59,60,61,62,63,64,65,66,67,68,69]. Recently, many studies have shown that gut microbiota alterations directly influence cognitive decline, actively participating in AD pathogenesis and progression [36,70,71,72,73]. Generally, AD patients are often characterized by a decreased gut microbial diversity, with a significant shift in favor of pro-inflammatory taxa at the expense of the more beneficial anti-inflammatory ones, similar to what has been observed in both mouse and human aging [25,36,70,71,72,73,74,75]. For example, when fecal microbiota 16S rRNA sequencing was performed on 97 individuals [33 AD, 32 MCI (mild cognitive impaired) and 32 controls], a significant decrease in Firmicutes was accompanied with a higher Proteobacteria, Gammaproteobacteria, and Enterobacteria abundance in patients with neurodegeneration compared to healthy subjects. Interestingly, a pronounced difference in Enterobacteriaceae has been reported also between MCI and AD patients, thus indicating a progressive change in the gut microbiota composition during disease progression [72]. Similarly, Vogt et al. detected a significant dampen in Firmicutes and Bifidobacteria in the fecal samples of AD patients, and this decrease was counterbalanced by the overgrowth of Bacteroidetes species in the same individuals [70]. Alterations in the gut microbiota composition during neurodegeneration has also been reported by Zhuang et al. when comparing 43 AD patients with age- and sex-matched controls: enriched Bacteroidetes and decreased Actinobacteria at the phylum level were paralleled by enhanced Ruminococcaceae, Enterococcaceae, and Lactobacillaceae, together with less Lanchnospiraceae, Bacteroidaceae, and Veillonellaceae at the family level [76]. However, in contrast with this evidence, lower Bacteroides, Lachnospira, and Ruminiclostridium and higher levels of Prevotella have been reported in another study [77]. Although reductive, this discrepancy might be at least in part explained by the different geographical origin of the participants, since regional identity may strongly affect gut microbiota composition, as well as other comorbidities [78]. In this respect, larger studies are certainly needed to establish standard and reproducible inclusion criteria, possibly excluding also the possible confounding effect of other comorbidities.

A growing body of evidence indicates that gut microbiota dysfunctions are involved in the early disease stages of AD pathogenesis, enhancing immuno-senescence, oxidative stress, cytokine secretion, and neuroinflammation [79]. In this respect, Cattaneo et al. report that patients with AD show an increase in pro-inflammatory endobacteria species of Escherichia/Shigella and a decrease in the anti-inflammatory taxon E. rectale, and that this microbiota alteration is associated with amyloidosis and peripheral inflammation [36]. Moreover, when stool samples were collected from 108 nursing home elders and analyzed with metagenomic sequencing, a decline in butyrate-synthetizing bacteria was paralleled by a rise in pro-inflammatory taxa in AD elders, thus possibly exacerbating local and systemic inflammation [71]. Interestingly, these data have been correlated with low levels of expression of the P-glycoprotein, an essential molecule required for intestinal homeostasis, therefore indicating a clear nexus between microbiome dysregulation and intestinal inflammation [71]. These results further support the concept that changes in gut microbiota composition also reflect in alterations in intestinal function. Indeed, differences in gut microbiota population may influence tryptophan and serotonin levels in the body and may affect the synthesis of some key molecules useful for the brain, such as dopamine, norepinephrine, and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) [80,81,82]. As mentioned, another beneficial role exerted by the gut microbiota is the production of SCFAs, including butyrate, propionate, and acetate, essential for energy production, gut epithelia homeostasis, and immune regulation [83]. When their production is altered as a consequence of dysbiosis, Aß plaques deposition, metabolic dysfunctions, and microglia dysregulation is favored, thus promoting cognitive decline [84,85,86]. Moreover, a decrease in butyrate-producing bacteria, as reported in AD, has been linked to T cell imbalance, epithelial barrier leakage (so called “leaky gut”), and increased bacterial translocation [80,87,88]. Consequently, circulating Gram negative endobacteria-derived LPS, also known as metabolic endotoxemia, triggers systemic inflammation via TLR4 and promotes BBB disruption, thus fostering neuroinflammation. [89,90]. Intestinal dysbiosis can also contribute to the increase of harmful substances such as amyloid and trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO). TMAO is a microbial metabolite that has been recently implicated in increased formation of beta amyloid, peripheral immune response activation, enhanced oxidative stress, platelet hyperactivity, intestinal mucosal barrier dysfunction, and BBB permeability, thus promoting the consequent passage of bile acids produced by bacteria and cholesterol in the brain [91,92,93,94,95]. Finally, the ability of some endobacteria to produce gaseotransmitter molecules, such as nitric oxide (NO), hydrogen (H2), ammonia (NH3), methane (CH4), and hydrogen sulfide (H2S) seems to be fundamental for the proper neuronal function, and its alteration participates to AD pathogenesis [96,97]. Overall, these data indicate that the dialogue between gut microbiota and brain is much more complicated than previously thought, and only its entire understanding can provide insights into new diagnostic and therapeutic interventions.

One of the major concerns in AD research is to find predictive, sensitive, non-invasive accurate, and accessible biomarkers for early disease diagnosis [98,99]. Although many studies focus on fluid biomarkers for early disease detection, we are still far from having found an effective and consistent assay to be used in the clinical practice [100]. As mentioned above, the gut microbiota has emerged as a key player in regulating both physiological and non-physiological conditions, thus gut microbiota-related biomarkers may represent a promising alternative/complementary tool to assess disease conditions [101]. Indeed, although initially hypothesized for gastrointestinal disorders [102], gut microbiome-derived biomarkers have also been considered for psychological and neurodegenerative diseases (i.e., bipolar disorder, multiple Sclerosis, and PD), reporting powerful predictivity and differential diagnosis ability [103,104,105]. Regarding AD, promising results have recently been obtained, and Table 1 summarizes the main findings [72,73,106,107,108,109,110,111,112,113,114,115] (Table 1). Whilst species of Prevotella and Helicobacter have been shown to be significantly different between APP/PS1 transgenic mice and controls, Actinobacteria and TM7 phylum seem to be more accurate in diagnosing AD when using the triple transgenic mouse model [106,107,109]. Changes in beta diversity and variations in circulating metabolites involved in inflammatory pathways and metabolism of nucleotides, lipids, and sugars (i.e., glutamate, hypoxanthine, thymine, hexanoyl-CoA, and leukotrienes) have also been considered in the same studies, showing promising results [106,107]. Remarkably, when the gut microbiota of APP/PS1 mice at different ages was compared to matched controls, huge shifts in the abundance of the families Proteobacteriaceae, Verrucomicrobiaceae, Bifidobacteriaceae, Erysipelotrichaceae, Prevotellaceae, Bacteroidaceae, and Rikenellaceae could be detected far before any plaque deposition in the brain, suggesting a great potentiality for early diagnosis [110]. Although nowadays, mice clearly represent the most used animal model, some evidence obtained with Drosophila melanogaster indicate Wolbachia as a potential AD biomarker, while Stenotrophomonas appears to exert a beneficial role in preventing neurodegeneration [111].

Abbreviations: APP/PS1: APPswe/PSEN1dE9 transgenic; GC: gas chromatography; LDA: linear discriminant analysis; LEfSe: linear disciminant analysis effect size; LC = liquid chromatography; MCI: mild cognitive impaired; MS: mass spectrometry; SCFAs: short chain fatty acids; 3xTg; triple-transgenic mouse model of AD; TMAO: Trimethylamine N-oxide; WT: wild type; ↑: increase; ↓: decrease.

Overall, although there are still some limitations, these data indicate that gut microbiota-based biomarkers might represent an alternative and/or an integration to the existing ones and should encourage scientists to plan larger investigations in humans.

Prebiotics are non-digestible organic substances (i.e., short-chain carbohydrates) capable of selectively stimulating the growth and/or activity of one or a limited number of beneficial bacteria present in the gut [124]. Being used as food from the gut microbiota, they stimulate the production of SCFAs, thus influencing both gastrointestinal and extra-intestinal functionality [125]. A growing body of evidence suggests their potentiality as adjuvant therapy in different neurological and psychiatric conditions, such as anxiety, depression, and PD [126]. Recently, some studies are also considering the use of prebiotics for AD prevention/therapy, with promising results [124,126,127,128,129,130,131,132,133,134,135,136]. For example, yeast beta glucans administration to mouse models of AD proved effective in re-establishing the balance between pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory gut microbiome species, promoting SCFAs production and limiting neuroinflammation and insulin resistance [127]. Reduced neuroinflammation and improved short-term memory and cognitive ability in mice resembling AD features were also reported upon pre-treatment with lactulose and melibiose, two trehalose analogues, possibly via enhanced autophagy function [129]. Furthermore, 5xFAD mice fed for eight weeks with mannan oligosaccharide were shown capable of favoring the growth of Lactobacillus species and decreasing Helicobacter abundance, therefore preventing LPS leakage and intestinal epithelial barrier and BBB dysfunctions [130]. Interestingly, this prebiotic-driven reshaping of the gut microbiota was also accompanied by reduced Aβ accumulation in different brain areas (i.e., cortex, hippocampus, and amygdala), re-established redox homeostasis, and increased butyrate levels [130]. Similar results were also obtained in both rats and mice models of AD via oral administration of Marinda officinalis-derived oligosaccharides, reporting improved memory and learning ability, together with a decrease in plaque formation, oxidative stress, and overall inflammation [134,135]. Although the mechanism of action of the above-mentioned prebiotics is not totally clear, the capability of these molecules to sustain gut microbiota diversity and stability might be at the basis of these improvements [127,132,134]. This hypothesis is reinforced by recent evidence showing that a combination of probiotics and prebiotics (so-called synbiotics) seems to be more effective in increasing neurogenesis and reducing local and systemic inflammation compared to prebiotics alone [132].

Regarding humans, data on a large multi-ethnic longitudinal study comprising 1837 elderly people with no evidence of neurodegeneration have shown that daily administration of fructan, a well-known prebiotic, reduces the risk of AD development, confirming the previous evidence in mice [131]. However, despite this study being conducted normalizing for age, gender, recruitment time, ethnicity, daily caloric intake, education, and APOE genotype, other authors point out that the evidence for the use of prebiotics in the clinical practice still lacks robustness [133]. Altogether, these data suggest that prebiotics may be helpful as preventative/adjuvant therapy for AD, but more human clinical trials are needed before drawing any conclusion.

In 1965, Lilly and Stillwell introduced for the first time in the literature, the term “probiotics”, defining them as “living microorganisms with a low or zero pathogenicity that provide beneficial effects on the health of the host” [137]. Studies on human and animal models have shown that probiotics can modulate intestinal ecosystem homeostasis, regulate intestinal epithelial functions by helping to maintain the epithelial barrier, producing SCFAs, supporting cell survival, enhancing protective immune response, and inhibiting the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines [83,138,139,140,141,142,143,144,145,146,147]. Many of these responses arise from the regulation of specific intracellular signaling ways by probiotics, such as mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) and nuclear factor (NF) -κB in intestinal epithelial cells [83,138,139,140,141,142,143,144,145,146,147]. Probiotic bacteria, through the modulation of the intestinal microbial ecosystem, have shown capable of playing an important role in immune response regulation by Th1, Th2, Th17, Treg cells, and NK and B cells stimulation [148]. Several studies have also confirmed the anti-inflammatory capacity of specific probiotics, by modulating the cytokine network and the macrophage tissue pattern, to reduce the mucosal inflammatory process and modulate the local immune response [149].

In conclusion, even if there are several studies that show the influence of gut microbiota in neurological and psychiatric pathologies, the mechanisms of action and the effects of probiotics rest largely unknown, and several gaps and inconsistences remain. Therefore, human studies need to be further developed and need to include analysis of the gut microbiota composition in specific populations of patients by identifying probiotic bacteria strains able to significantly affect gut–brain axis and assess their safe use.

Diet is a rapid and direct way of modifying the gut microbiota composition and function, reducing inflammation, and helping in eubiosis maintenance [123,164,165]. Given the evidence of association between neuropsychiatric conditions and gut microbiota dysregulation, it is worth speculating that dietary interventions could represent effective candidates for preventing and delaying the pathogenesis and progression of AD [166,167,168,169,170,171,172,173,174,175,176,177,178,179,180,181,182,183,184,185,186] (Table 2). Here, we present some of the most promising dietary therapies proposed in the literature, with a particular focus on Mediterranean and ketogenic diets.

Abbreviations: CrS: cross sectional study; CS: cohort studies; DHA: docosahexaenoic acid; EGb 761: Ginkgo biloba extract 761; EPA: eicosapentaenoic acid; KD: ketogenic diet; KS: ketogenic supplement; IS: interventional study; LS: longitudinal study; Obs: observational studies; RCT: randomized controlled trial.

The renowned and ancient Mediterranean diet (Medi), rich in vegetables, fruit, whole grains, nuts, olive oil, moderate consumption of fish and poultry and limited consumption of red meat and sweets, have been extensively described for their protective role against non-communicable diseases [187]. DASH diet (Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension), designed for hypertension treatment, overlaps the Medi diet in composition, with more attention on salt introduction (less than 2.4 g/day) [188]. Similarly, MIND diet (Mediterranean-DASH Intervention for Neurodegenerative Delay) is a combination of both, DASH and Medi, specifically developed to delay neurodegeneration. Besides being rich in fruits, vegetables and legumes, the MIND includes the consumption of single dietary components, i.e., green leafy vegetables and berries, which have displayed a superior effect against cognitive impairment and decline compared to other vegetables and fruits [189].

Polyphenols are receiving growing interest in AD research due to their antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and neurotrophic properties supported by preclinical evidence. Nonetheless, so far, there is no conclusive evidence on the association between polyphenols and AD in humans. On 24 RCT conducted on AD patients exposed to polyphenols (mainly flavonoids), only 12 have shown a reduction in cognitive decline [181]. Again, further trials carried out in people with mild cognitive impairment consuming grape juice or blueberries rich in polyphenols showed minimal benefits in memory or no significant results [179,180]. A polyphenol that might contribute to neuroprotection is resveratrol. This phenolic compound promotes synthesis of glutamate receptors, enhances synaptic transmission, activates SIRT1, exerts antioxidant and anti-inflammatory actions [186,207]. Results from in vitro and in vivo (mice and rats) studies underscored resveratrol as a potential treatment for AD; however, its effectiveness is only partially understood in humans [208]. Although some research groups have performed trials in humans to test the potential protective effect of resveratrol, results have failed to demonstrate a positive correlation. The lack of a substantial number of clinical trials and issues related to clinical applications, e.g., dosage, bioavailability, side effects, etc., emphasize the need of further investigation [186].

Ketogenic diet (KD) is a nutritional program rich in fats and low in carbohydrates and proteins (ideally, 90% fat, 4% carbohydrates, 6% proteins) developed in the early 1990s as a treatment for epilepsy, with numerous studies consistently supporting its effectiveness [209]. Recently, the application of KD as potential treatment for other neurological diseases, such as PD and AD, has been investigated in vitro and in vivo [210,211,212]. The sugar-shortage leads the body to break down and oxidate fats with the production of ketone bodies, used as an alternative energy-substrate to glucose by many organs, including the brain [213]. In mice models, ketone bodies influence neurotransmission, channels modulation, increase BDNF, reduce neuroinflammation and oxidative stress, improve mitochondrial functions, reduce amyloid accumulation, and improve learning and memory abilities [213,214,215,216]. In humans, results from RCT reported that KD might be beneficial in people with mild cognitive impairment or AD [171,172]. Similar to KD in terms of mechanisms (i.e., ketone bodies production), medium-chain triglyceride (MCT) diet/supplementation and the modified Atkins diet are effective in counteracting cognitive decline in AD, symptoms such as fatigue and daytime sleepiness in PD, epileptic seizures and mood swings in depression [173,174,175,217,218]. Moreover, the modified Atkins diet, which does not restrict protein intake as the KD protocol, allows a much more nutritional flexibility than classic KD. Indeed, overall, dietary patterns that lead to ketone bodies production seem to represent a promising therapy for AD, but more investigation to unveil protective mechanisms in humans and adverse aspects is needed—including the lack of flexibility and variability of the alimentary regimen easily leading to a drop-out, the scarcity of plant-based food rich in vitamins, and other antioxidant compounds [219].

Even if further well-designed human clinical trials are needed to better understand the role of diet for the prevention and treatment of AD, up to now, most of the diet-related beneficial effects in AD patients seem to be in favor of the Medi diet. Vitamins and other phenolic compounds might represent potential boosts for AD patients.

Diet is the most impactful modulator of gut microbiota across lifespan. Considering that, as previously mentioned, AD is associated with changes in microbiota composition, it is reasonable to assume that dietary interventions, and the related gut microbiota composition shifts, might constitute a future complementary tool to prevent or manage dementia. However, the proof of a cause–effect relationship among gut microbiota, diet, and neurodegeneration is very poor, with a low number of clinical studies analyzing the interplay among those elements.

Decoding the interplay between microbiota and diet in neurogenerative disease patients seem to be promising; however, all the multi-faceted aspects of dietary patterns on human health should be examined in depth, considering the body as a superorganism, made of human and microbial cells.

Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) is a procedure where a solution of fecal material from a donor is transferred (through colonoscopy, nasogastric tube, or oral pills) into the intestinal tract of a recipient, aimed at directly changing the gut microbiota composition [227]. Reprogramming the gut microbiota eubiosis by FMT has been already used to successfully treat C. difficile infections and could be an innovative therapy for various neurological diseases in an imminent future [228]. So far, most of the limited number of studies have been conducted in mice/rats, with promising but not conclusive results (Table 3) [10,229,230,231,232,233,234,235,236,237,238,239].

ABX: antibiotic cocktail; APPSWE/PS1L166P: APPPS1-21; BDNF: brain derived neurotrophic factor; CDI: Clostridioides difficile infection; CDR: Clinical Dementia Rating assessment; CLDN1: claudin 1; CONVR-APPPS1: conventionally-raised transgenic APPPS1 mice; COX2: cyclooxygenase 2; FMT: fecal microbiota transplantation; LPS: lipopolysaccharide; MCA: Montreal Cognitive Assessment; MMSE: Mini-Mental State Examination; MWM: Morris water maze test; OLT: object location test; ORT: object recognition test; PSD-95: postsynaptic density protein 95; SAMP8: senescence-accelerated mouse prone 8; SAMR1: senescence-accelerated mouse resistant 1; SCFAs: short chain fatty acids; ZO-1: Tight junction protein-1; ↑: increase; ↓: decrease.

In conclusion, although the promising results obtained in mice certainly prove that the gut microbiota is involved in the pathogenesis and progression of neurological diseases, more human studies are needed before pointing out FMT as an AD complementary therapy.

AD is a neurodegenerative disorder, often occurring in the elderly, which has a fundamental causative source in the impairments in the GMBA. Recent data, which are to be further deepened and improved in any investigation planning, reported to date a close relationship between gut microbiota composition (then affected by nutritional habits) and AD onset, usually derived from neuroinflammation caused by bacteria products or bacterial brain migration, a circumstance that normally occurs to contribute to the regulation of brain synaptogenesis and development, besides mood and cognition evolution. Given the close cross talk between gut bacteria and brain, here we reviewed that gut microbiota dysregulations, often reported in AD patients, can be exploited to investigate both new diagnostic and therapeutic approaches for this devastating disease. However, despite promising results have been published, more research is needed to limit interstudy inconsistencies and enhances reproducibility before considering a clinical application.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

