The gut microbiota is a transmissible determinant of skeletal maturation



Genetic factors account for the majority of the variance of human bone mass, but the contribution of non-genetic factors remains largely unknown. By utilizing maternal/offspring transmission, cohabitation, or fecal material transplantation (FMT) studies, we investigated the influence of the gut microbiome on skeletal maturation. We show that the gut microbiome is a communicable regulator of bone structure and turnover in mice. In addition, we found that the acquisition of a specific bacterial strain, segmented filamentous bacteria (SFB), a gut microbe that induces intestinal Th17 cell expansion, was sufficient to negatively impact skeletal maturation. These findings have significant translational implications, as the identification of methods or timing of microbiome transfer may lead to the development of bacteriotherapeutic interventions to optimize skeletal maturation in humans. Moreover, the transfer of SFB-like microbes capable of triggering the expansion of human Th17 cells during therapeutic FMT procedures could lead to significant bone loss in fecal material recipients.

Osteoporosis has a devastating impact on quality of life and is a significant cause of disability and morbidity in both women and men. Low bone mineral density (BMD), a key feature of osteoporosis, results from suboptimal skeletal maturation culminating in low peak bone density by 30 years of age, and/or by accelerated bone loss thereafter. Interestingly, there is considerable natural variation in peak BMD within populations, with most of the variation being attributed to genetic heterogeneity (Boudin et al., 2016; Peacock et al., 2002; Estrada et al., 2012). However, the remaining nongenomic factors that contribute to peak BMD variance remain enigmatic. A well-recognized determinant of phenotypic variability within populations is the composition and community structure of the gut microbiome (Sommer and Bäckhed, 2013; Tremaroli and Bäckhed, 2012). Indeed, studies undertaken in both humans and animals have pointed to the gut microbiome as a potential regulator of skeletal maturation. Among them are the reports that mice raised in germ-free (GF) conditions have altered BMD, bone volume and bone structure compared to conventionally raised (Conv.R) mice (Sjögren et al., 2012; Novince et al., 2017; Schwarzer et al., 2016; Yan et al., 2016). Additional evidence showing that the microbiome is a significant regulatory factor for skeletal health include reports that the gut microbiome affects the bone waste induced by estrogen deficiency (Li et al., 2016), glucocorticoids (Schepper et al., 2020) and by diabetes (Zhang et al., 2015). Furthermore, we showed that the presence of the gut microbiota is required for parathyroid hormone (PTH) to stimulate both bone formation and bone resorption (Yu et al., 2020; Li et al., 2020). It is also known that antibiotic treatment which depletes the gut microbiome increases bone density in mice (Yan et al., 2016), while bacterial recolonization post-antibiotic treatment results in bone loss (Schepper et al., 2019). Moreover, variations in the composition of the microbiome affect not only BMD, but also bone strength by its actions on bone material properties (Guss et al., 2017).

With this goal, in this study we assessed the role of gut microbiota as a transmissible influencer of skeletal development and homeostasis. Using gnotobiotic murine models of early microbiome establishment through maternal contacts or cohabitation, we show that skeletal phenotypes are transferable within the fecal microbiome. We also show that the transfer from the mother to offspring of microbes that induce Th17 cell expansion in the gut is a significant negative determinant of bone health structure later in life. Together, our data supports the notion that the gut microbiome acts as a factor that can be transmitted between individuals and elicit significant effects on skeletal development. These findings also identify the acquisition of the microbiome as a window of opportunity for therapeutic interventions to overcome gut microbe-orchestrated suboptimal skeletal maturation.

To investigate the extent to which maternal microbiome affects the skeleton of the offspring we made use of two strains of mice, C3H/HeN and C57BL/6 purchased from Taconic biosciences (herein referred to as TAC mice) raised in conventional conditions or GF conditions. C3H/HeN mice have higher indices of bone volume and bone stracture as compared to C57BL/6 mice. Conventional TAC C57BL/6 mice were raised in a vivarium that contains SFB, which are potent microbial inducers of Th17 cell expansion in intestinal tissue (Ivanov et al., 2009). Conventional TAC C3H/HeN mice were raised in a SFB- facility. In these experiments, we transferred fecal material of each conventional mouse strain to GF mating pairs of the other mouse strain, i.e. transfer fecal material from a conventioanlly raised C57BL/6 to a GF C3H/HeN breeding pairs, and vice versa. We then assessed bone structure and turnover in 16-week-old female mice of the F1 generation produced by the conventionalized breeding pairs, which were colonized with the mother’s microbiome from birth (Figure 1A).

Since C57BL/6 microbiome is SFB+ and C3H/HeN microbiome is SFB-, and SFB is a potent inducer of intestinal Th17 cell expansion (Ivanov et al., 2009), we assessed the number of Th17 cells in Peyer’s Patches (PP) and the BM (Figure 2—figure supplement 1). Because the measurement of the absolute number of PP Th17 cells is technically challenging due to variability of the size of the collected PP tissue, PP Th17 cells were quantified as percentage of total CD4+ T cells. We confirmed that the number of PP Th17 cells and the levels of small intestine (SI) tissue Il17a transcripts were higher in all groups of mice with SFB+ microbiome than in those with SFB- microbiome (Figure 2A,B). In addition, the number of Th17 cells and the levels of Il17a mRNA in the BM were also higher in all mice with an SFB+ microbiome, as compared to those with SFB– microbiome (Figure 2C–E). IL-17 stimulates the release of further inflammatory cytokines. Accordingly, we found the levels of Tnfa mRNA were higher in the BM and SI and of mice with SFB+ microbiome (Figure 2G,H). BM Receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-Β ligand (Rankl), also known as tumor necrosis factor ligand superfamily member 11 (Tnfsf11) was higher in mice with SFB+ microbiome (Figure 2I), although SI Tnfsf11 mRNA levels were similar in all groups (Figure 2J). These data suggest that the signal to expand BM Th17 cells originates in the intestine, and requires Th17 cell-inducing bacteria, such as SFB to be a component of the microbiome. Critically, these data show proof of principle that acquisition of maternal microbiome at birth affects the postnatal skeletal development of the offspring regardless of its genetic strain.

Cohabitation is a key non-genomic factor that influences the development over time of species structure in the microbiota of humans (Faith et al., 2013) and mice (Robertson et al., 2019). To evaluate the role of cohabitation on skeletal maturation, 10-week-old female C57BL/6 mice purchased from Jackson Laboratory (herein referred to as JAX mice) and C57BL/6 TAC mice were housed separately, or co-housed for 4 weeks (Figure 3A). Confirming earlier reports (Ivanov et al., 2009), we found JAX and TAC mice to have distinct microbiome composition and diversity (Figure 3B). Importantly, while TAC mice were SFB+, JAX mice were SFB- (Figure 3C), a finding concordant with previous reports (Farkas et al., 2015). As expected, co-housing of JAX and TAC mice equalized the composition of the microbiome, and lead to SFB colonization within the JAX mice (Figure 3B,C). JAX C57BL/6 mice that were housed alone had a higher femoral BV/TV, Tb.N and Tb.Th and lower Tb.Sp than TAC mice housed alone (Figure 3D–G), although they did have similar cortical structure (Figure 3H,I). Co-housing of JAX mice with TAC mice resulted in the equalization of all indices of trabecular volume and structure, although it did not affect cortical bone indices (Figure 3D–I). TAC mice housed alone had higher levels of serum CTX than JAX mice housed alone (Figure 3J). Co-housing of JAX and TAC mice increased the serum levels of CTX in JAX mice, leading to the equalization of CTX levels. By contrast, all groups of mice had similar levels of serum osteocalcin (Figure 3K). These findings indicate that post-natal skeletal development is infleunced by cohabitation via a microbiome dependent mechanism that affects bone resorption.

We found that TAC mice had a higher number of PP and BM Th17 cells and higher expressions of SI and BM Il17a transcripts compared to JAX mice (Figure 4A–E). Co-housing resulted in an increase in Th17 cells and Il17a mRNA in JAX mice. As a result, at the end of the cohabitation period, Th17 cells and Il17a transcript were similar in gut tissues and BM of TAC mice and cohoused JAX mice compared to JAX mice housed alone (Figure 4A–E). In addition, TAC mice housed alone had higher expression of SI and BM Tnfa than JAX mice housed alone, while co-housing of the two groups increased the levels of Tnfa transcripts in JAX mice, up to levels of TAC mice (Figure 4F,G). Finally, while SI Tnfsf11 mRNA levels were similar in all groups (Figure 4H), expression of Tnfsf11 in the BM was higher in TAC mice than in JAX mice housed alone. However, BM Tnfsf11 mRNA levels increased in JAX mice as a result of co-housing with TAC mice (Figure 4I). These data suggest that co-housing of JAX mice with TAC mice induced bone loss in JAX mice by expanding BM Th17 cells and increasing osteoclastogenic cytokine levels.

Although the gut microbiota in mature animals and humans is resistant to colonization by new organisms, extensive and prolonged microbicidal interventions such as a long-term course of antibiotics may elicit enduring changes (Yatsunenko et al., 2012). To investigate the impact on post-natal skeletal development of microbiome changes occurring after the establishment and consolidation of the original microbiome, FMTs were carried out across two strains of mice, and antibiotic treatments were employed. Specifically, groups of 8-week-old female TAC C57BL/6 and TAC C3H/HeN were treated with a cocktail of broad-spectrum antibiotics (Ampicillin; 0.5 g/L, Vancomycin; 0.25 g/L, Neomycin; 0.25 g/L, and Metronidazole; 0.5 g/L) for 2 weeks. 24 hr after the completion of the antibiotic treatment, mice were subjected to oral gavage of a liquid suspension of fecal material from either TAC C57BL/6 mice or TAC C3H/HeN mice (Figure 5A). The recipient mice were housed in sterile cages in an isolated environment for 8 weeks before sacrifice (Figure 5A). Analysis showed that donor C57BL/6 and C3H/HeN mice had distinct microbiome composition and diversity, and that FMT led to the establishment of the donor microbiome in the host mouse (Figure 5B). We confirmed that SFB was present in donor C57BL/6 mice, and that antibiotic treated mice subjected to FMT with fecal material from these mice were also SFB+(Figure 5C). In-vitro µCT analysis showed that donor C3H/HeN mice had higher femoral BV/TV, Tb.N, Tb.Th and lower Tb.Sp compared to C57BL/6 mice (Figure 5D–G). C3H/HeN mice also had higher indices of cortical structure compared to C57BL/6 mice (Figure 5H,I). FMT from donor C57BL/6 mice to antibiotic treated C3H/HeN mice altered all indices of trabecular volume and structure in the recipient C3H/HeN mice (Figure 5D–G). In addition, FMT from C57BL/6 mice to antibiotic treated C3H/HeN mice induced cortical bone loss in the recipient C3H/HeN mice (Figure 5H,I). Conversely, FMT from donor C3H/HeN mice did not affect indices of trabecular and cortical bone in recipient C57BL/6 mice (Figure 5D–I). These data suggested that gut microbiota of C57BL/6 mice has modulatory influences on both trabecular and cortical bone structure. In order to investigate the mechanism of bone loss induced by the transfer of C57BL/6 to antibiotic treated C3H/HeN mice, we measured serum levels of markers of bone resorption and bone formation. Analysis showed that serum levels of CTX were significantly higher in antibiotic treated C57BL/6 mice and C3H/HeN mice colonized with C57BL/6 microbiome (Figure 5J). However, FMT had no effect on the levels of osteocalcin in all experimental groups (Figure 5K). These data indicate that the bone loss that occurred following the transfer of a C57BL/6 microbiome to recipient mice was due to increasing bone resorption.

Additional studies revealed that C57BL/6 donor mice had higher numbers of PP and BM Th17 cells, and higher expression of Il17a transcripts compared to C3H/HeN donor mice (Figure 6A–E). FMT of fecal material from C57BL/6 donor mice to antibiotic treated to C3H/HeN mice resulted in increased Th17 cell numbers and Il17a transcript in recipient mice (Figure 6A–E). In addition, antibiotic treated C3H/HeN mice colonized with fecal material from C57BL/6 donor had higher levels of Tnfa mRNA in the SI and BM compared to donor C3H/HeN mice (Figure 6F,G). While SI Tnfsf11 mRNA levels were similar in all groups (Figure 6H), expression of Tnfsf11 in the BM was higher in donor C57BL/6 TAC than in C3H/HeN mice. Moreover, BM Tnfsf11 mRNA levels were increased in antibiotic treated mice colonized with C57BL/6 (Figure 6I). These data indicate that the transfer of the C57BL/6 TAC microbiome to an antibiotic treated mouse of a different strain resulted in the induction of an inflammatory environment that led to increased bone resorption and net bone loss. The data also suggest that colonization following a major disruption to the microbiome can change the microbiome composition and induce skeletal phenotypic alterations.

This study demonstrated the contribution of the gut microbiome to skeletal maturation. We showed that the gut microbiome shapes the acquisition of bone volume, structure and turnover when acquired by newborn mice via vertical transfer from the mother or by young mice via co-housing with other mice. Replacement of the original established microbiome with a new microbiome via treatment with broad-spectrum antibiotics followed by FMT, also conditioned skeletal maturation. Transmission of gut microbes, and in particular of SFB, lead to the stimulation of bone resorption in recipient mice of the same, or different genetic strain. Moreover, the gut microbiome was found to act as a major non-genomic heritable factor in the transmission of bone phenotypes, including from mother to offspring. Together, these data showed that the microbiome is a communicable regulator of bone development.

In summary, our data showed that the gut microbiome is a non-genomic heritable factor that contributes to the variance of bone volume, structure and turnover within populations. The specific effects of the microbiome on bone depend on its diversity and composition. The presence in the gut microbiome of saprophytic strains capable of expanding intestinal Th17 cell in healthy individuals it is likely to a predictor of suboptimal skeletal development and low peak bone mass. Furthermore, the findings of this study have significant implications to the practice of FMT from healthy donors to recipients, where the transfer of microbes that trigger the expansion of gut Th17 cells could lead to lower bone density in recipients. On the other hand, we also identified the method or timing of microbiome transfer as a window of opportunity to apply bacteriotherapeutic interventions to overcome suboptimal skeletal maturation.

All in vivo experiments were carried out in female mice. All conventionally raised mice entering Emory University were shipped to the same room in the same vivarium within the Whitehead Biomedical Research Building. All conventionally raised mice were maintained under a general housing environment and fed sterilized food (5V5R chow) and autoclaved water ad libitum. GF pregnant dam mice used for the FMT experiment were housed in a Tecniplast ISOcage P - Bioexclusion System within the Emory Gnotobiotic Animal Core. All mice were acclimatized within our facility for 3 days before experimentation.

Conv. R C57BL/6 and C3H/HeN mice and GF C3H/HeN mice were purchased from Taconic biosciences (Rensselaer, NY). Fecal material from 16 week-old Conv.R C57BL/6 and C3H/HeN mice was transferred into GF pregnant C57BL/6 and C3H/HeN mice of the opposite genotype (or same genotype to generate controls) through oral gavage on alternate days between E4 and E15 as described (Gomez de Agüero et al., 2016). Pregnancies were timed according to the day of vaginal plug. Fecal material donor mice were housed in Tecniplast bio-exclusion ISO cages to maintain the original microbiota until 16 weeks of age. Pregnant mice and offspring were housed in hermetically sealed ISO bio-exclusion cages. Once weaned, the offspring was housed alone in bio-exclusion ISO cages until the pups reach 16 weeks of age. To control for host-microbiome reciprocal interactions, the microbiome of each group of donor mice were normalized by routinely exchanging bedding between cages.

For the co-housing experiment, 10-week-old female Conv.R C57BL/6 mice were purchased from TAC and JAX laboratories. All the mice were fed sterile water and chow. Control groups were housed separately for 4 weeks. Experimental groups were co-housed with mice purchased from the other vendor that is JAX mice were co-housed with TAC mice for 4 weeks. Since mice are coprophagic, co-housing caused equalization of gut microbiome. After 4 weeks of co-housing mice were sacrificed.

8-week-old female Conv.R C57BL/6 and C3H/HeN mice were purchased from Taconic. All mice were fed sterile water and 5V5R chow. Prior to FM, recipient mice were treated with broad- spectrum antibiotics (Abx) (1 mg/mL ampicillin, 0.5 mg/mL vancomycin, 1 mg/mL neomycin sulfate, 1 mg/mL metronidazole) in drinking water for 2 weeks starting at the age of 8 weeks. 24 hr after completion of the antibiotic treatment, a liquid suspension of fecal material was gavaged into recipient mice for three consecutive days using methods previously established in our laboratory (Yu et al., 2020; Li et al., 2020).

For microbiome analysis fecal pellets were collected from mice at sacrifice and DNA extracted from fecal samples using the MoBio DNA isolation kit. The V4 region of the 16S genes were amplified using the methods of Caporaso et al., 2011. Amplicons were sequenced on an Illumina MiSeq instrument at the Emory Integrated Genomics Core (EIGC). Analysis of the sequencing reads were done by the Emory Integrated Computational Core (EICC) using standard methodology for microbiome analysis. Briefly, the raw sequence was processed via QIIME, using closed-reference OTU picking and the Greengenes reference database. The resulting files were then moved into R and analyzed using the phyloseq package. Data processing involved demultiplexing, QC filtering (Edgar et al., 2011), OTU representation (Edgar, 2010), taxonomy assignment via a reference database (Caporaso et al., 2010a; McDonald et al., 2012; Wang et al., 2007) and phylogeny and diversity analysis (Lozupone et al., 2007) using the QIIME (Caporaso et al., 2010b) and MOTHUR (Schloss et al., 2009) pipelines.

μCT scanning and analysis was performed as reported previously (Tyagi et al., 2018; Grassi et al., 2016; Li et al., 2015), using Scanco μCT-40 scanner. Voxel size was 12 μm3 for in-vitro measurements of femur. For the femoral trabecular region, we analyzed 70 slices, beginning 50 slices below the distal growth plate. Femoral cortical bone was assessed using 80 continuous CT slides located at the femoral midshaft. X-ray tube potential was 70 kVp, 114 μA, and integration time was 200 ms for the in-vitro measurements. We used the thresholding approach described by Bouxsein et al., 2010. which is recommended by Scanco, the μCT-40 manufacturer, and involves a visual inspection and comparison of preview and slice-wise gray scale 2D images. The same threshold value was used for all measurements.

Peyer’s patches (PP) cell isolation was performed as described (Tyagi et al., 2018; Lefrancois and Lycke, 2001). Briefly, the small intestine was removed and flushed of fecal content. PPs were excised and collected in 1 mL cooled RPMI1640. PPs were dissociated using the plunger of a 2.5 mL syringe and gently forced through a 70 μm cell strainer placed over a 50 mL tube. A single cell suspension was used for measuring the number of Th17 cells in PP by flow cytometry.

Flow cytometry was performed on a LSR II system (BD Biosciences) and data were analyzed using FlowJo software (Tree Star, Inc, Ashland, OR). For cell surface staining: cells were stained with anti-mouse purified CD16/32 (clone 93), BV 510-CD45 (clone 30-F11), BV 421-TCRβ (clone H57-597), AF 700-CD3 (clone 17A2), PerCP/Cy5.5-CD4 (clone RM4-5) and BV 711-CD8 (clone 53–6.7) (BD Biosciences). The live cells were discriminated by Zombie NIR Fixable Viability Kit (Biolegend). For intracellular staining, cells were incubated with cell activation cocktail (Biolegend) in the presence of Monensin Solution at 37°C for 12 hr. Anti-mouse PE-IL-17A (clone eBio17B7) was added after cell fixation and permeabilization with Intracellular Fixation and Permeabilization Buffer Set (Thermo Fisher).

Markers of bone turnover, Osteocalcin (OCN) and C-terminal cross-linked telopeptide (CTX) were measured in serum by ELISA kit (Immunodiagnostic Systems Ltd. (Boldon, UK)).

Stool samples were collected directly into sterile tubes from live animals and snap-frozen before DNA extraction. Relative bacteria gene copies of Conv.R mice and antibiotic treated mice were confirmed at the end of the treatment period by fecal DNA extraction (DNA Stool Qiagen kit) as described in manufacture’s protocol and subsequent qPCR using 515F (GTGCCAGCMGCCGCGGTAA) and 806R (GGACTACHVGGGTWTCTAAT) primers. Conv.R mice and water were used as positive and negative control, respectively.

Total RNA was extracted from whole BM cells and small intestine using Trizol (Invitrogen). cDNA was synthesized from 1 mg total RNA with the superscript III first strand cDNA synthesis kit (Invitrogen). The mRNA expression levels of genes were analyzed by RT-PCR using an ABI Prism 7000 or One Step Plus Sequence Detection System and SYBR GREEN PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). Changes in relative gene expression between groups were calculated using the 2–ΔΔCt method with normalization to 18S rRNA as previously described. All the primers used were designed by Primer Express Software v2.0 (Applied Biosystems) and most were validated in previous investigations (Grassi et al., 2016; Li et al., 2015). The primer sequences we used are as followed. 5’- ATTCGAACGTCTGCCCTATCA −3’ (forward) and 5’- GTCACCCGTGGTCACCATG −3’ (reverse) for 18 s rRNA. 5’- AACTCCAGGCGGTGCCT AT −3’ (forward) and 5’- TGCCACAAGCAGGAATG AGA −3’ (reverse) for Tnfa mRNA. 5’- TGACGCCCACCTACAAC ATC −3’ (forward) and 5’- CATCATGCAGTTCCGTCA GC −3’ (reverse) for Il17a mRNA. 5’- 5′-CCTGATGAAAGGAGGGAGCA −3′ (forward) and 5’- TGGAATTCAGAATTGCCCGA −3’ (reverse) for Tnfsf11 mRNA.

All data are expressed as Mean ± SEM. Data were normally distributed according to the Shapiro-Wilk normality test. Data were analyzed by two-way ANOVA. This analysis included the main effects for animal strain and fecal matter transfer. When the statistical interaction was statistically significant (p<0.05) then tests were used to compare the differences between the treatment means for each animal strain, applying the Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons.

All the animal procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Emory University.

This paper was supported by the following grants:

No competing interests declared.

Data curation, Formal analysis, Validation, Investigation, Visualization, Methodology, Writing - original draft, Writing - review and editing.

Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology.

Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology.

Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology.

Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology.

Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology.

Data curation, Investigation, Visualization, Methodology.

Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology.

Resources, Supervision, Investigation, Writing - review and editing.

Conceptualization, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Writing - original draft, Project administration, Writing - review and editing.

Animal experimentation: This study was performed in strict accordance with the recommendations in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the National Institutes of Health. All of the animals were handled according to approved institutional animal care and use committee (IACUC) protocols (201800029) of Emory University.

All data generated or analyzed during this study are included in the manuscript and supporting files.

Acceptance summary:

7) There are some typos as Payer's patches in the legend of supplemental figure.

We believe that our findings are relevant in humans. In fact, while in healthy mice Th17 cells are induced mostly by SFB, in healthy humans, there are about 20 non-virulent gut bacterial strains known to induce Th17 cell differentiation (1, 2). Therefore, we hypothesize that skeletal growth in humans is influenced by the presence and the frequency of one or more of these Th17 cell-inducing bacteria. This point is now discussed in the revised manuscript where we state:

5) Zaiss MM, Jones RM, Schett G, Pacifici R. The gut-bone axis: how bacterial metabolites bridge the distance. J Clin Invest. 2019;130. Epub 2019/07/16. doi: 10.1172/JCI128521. PubMed PMID: 31305265.

