Effects of paternal high-fat diet and maternal rearing environment on the gut microbiota and behavior

Exposing a male rat to an obesogenic high-fat diet (HFD) influences attractiveness to potential female mates, the subsequent interaction of female mates with infant offspring, and the development of stress-related behavioral and neural responses in offspring. To examine the stomach and fecal microbiome’s potential roles, fecal samples from 44 offspring and stomach samples from offspring and their fathers were collected and bacterial community composition was studied by 16 small subunit ribosomal RNA (16S rRNA) gene sequencing. Paternal diet (control, high-fat), maternal housing conditions (standard or semi-naturalistic housing), and maternal care (quality of nursing and other maternal behaviors) affected the within-subjects alpha-diversity of the offspring stomach and fecal microbiomes. We provide evidence from beta-diversity analyses that paternal diet and maternal behavior induced community-wide shifts to the adult offspring gut microbiome. Additionally, we show that paternal HFD significantly altered the adult offspring Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes ratio, an indicator of obesogenic potential in the gut microbiome. Additional machine-learning analyses indicated that microbial species driving these differences converged on Bifidobacterium pseudolongum. These results suggest that differences in early-life care induced by paternal diet and maternal care significantly influence the microbiota composition of offspring through the microbiota-gut-brain axis, having implications for adult stress reactivity.

As the obesity epidemic continues to intensify in Western societies, research has identified early life programming involving gene by environment (GxE) interactions underlying development of obesogenic phenotypes and susceptibility to high-fat diet (HFD)1. Western diets consist of large quantities of carbohydrates (from refined cereals, corn, potatoes and sugars, dairy products), fats and protein, and oils rich in omega-6 polyunsaturated fatty acids2. While the effects of HFD on individuals have been intensely studied over the past 30 years, the potential transgenerational impacts of HFD—more specifically, the impacts of paternal diet on obesogenic phenotypes in the offspring—are not well understood. Paternal HFD, leading to diet-induced obesity (DIO) in rats3–5, results in offspring with delayed growth, impaired liver function6–10, and deviations in social and anxiety-like defensive behavioral responses11, epigenetic reprogramming12,13, and alterations to the gut microbiome14,15. Recently, paternal diet has been implicated in the development of inter- and transgenerational offspring phenotypes16–18. While altered maternal investment11,19–21 could potentially explain offspring developmental deficits, epigenetic changes to spermatozoa that cause negative outcomes in the paternal lineage have been identified22–29. Additionally, probiotic treatment of male rodents in the paternal generation (F0) potentially buffers environmental stressors in F1 and F2 offspring. Combined, all of this evidence suggests that the paternal microbiome has a critical role in offspring development30.

In the current study, we aimed to: (1) measure the impact of paternal HFD feeding on offspring gut microbiome diversity and community composition; (2) explore the impact and overlap of early-life rearing environment and maternal care on the offspring gut microbiome; and (3) identify potential interactions between paternal diet and postnatal rearing conditions on offspring gut microbiome and their response to predator odor-induced stress. As described previously11, we fed F0 males either control diet or HFD, bred them with females, and then measured maternal care of the offspring in the context of standard or semi-naturalistic housing (SNH) without the presence of the F0 male, and we determined that the diversity and community structure of the F1 offspring microbiome were significantly influenced by both paternal diet and maternal rearing environment. Together, these data support the hypothesis that paternal and maternal factors influence offspring gut microbiome and these changes influence behavior of the adult offspring.

All experimental procedures were performed in accordance with the guidelines of the Canadian Council on Animal Care and were approved by the Dalhousie University Committee on Laboratory Animals. Male (34) and female (30) Long-Evans hooded rats (64) (Charles River Canada, Sherbrooke, QC, Canada) were delivered to the vivarium at ~ 21–28 days old and maintained in the vivarium as same-sex pairs until adulthood (56 days old). All rats were maintained at 21 ± 2 °C under a 12 h reversed light cycle (lights off at 0930 h local time) in standard housing (SH), which consisted of polypropylene cages (47 cm length × 24 cm width × 20.5 cm height), wire lids, pine shavings for bedding (Hefler Forest Products, Inc., Sackville, NS, Canada), and a black polyvinyl chloride (PVC) tube (12 cm length × 9 cm diameter) for environmental enrichment, unless otherwise described (see below). For all rats, chow (Purina Lab Chow, Cat. No. 5001, Clarence Farm Services Ltd., Truro, NS, Canada) and water were supplied ad libitum. The research described here was conducted in compliance with the ARRIVE 2.0 Guidelines for Reporting Animal Research66,67. All efforts were made to limit the number of animals used and their suffering. Animals used in this study are identical to those used in a previous report; for a detailed description of animal procedures, see Korgan et al.11.

A timeline of the experimental procedures is shown in Fig. 1A,B. F0 males began either high-fat (60 kcal %; Product No. D12492) or protein/carbohydrate-matched control diet (10 kcal%; Product No. D12450J) feeding on PD35 and remained on this diet for 60 days (Research Diets, Inc., New Brunswick, NJ, USA). This diet is commonly used to induce DIO in rodents and mirrors the increased dietary fat and sugar content of a western diet11,68,69. Paired F0 male cage-mates were randomly assigned either control diet (CD, n = 17) or high-fat diet (HFD, n = 17). On day 0, all F0 males were supplied with standard rodent chow (Purina Lab Chow, Cat. No. 5001, Clarence Farm Services Ltd., Truro, NS, Canada) and water ad libitum until sacrifice.

For breeding (Fig. 1A), one male and one naïve female (~ 56 days old), determined to be in estrus, were housed together for seven consecutive days; the male was then removed from the maternal cage. The day of birth was defined as postnatal day (PD) 0; pups remained with the dam until weaning at PD21 (Fig. 1B), upon which the F1 offspring were re-housed in same-sex littermate pairs.

F0 females mated with CD and HFD F0 males were observed daily for pups beginning at gestational day 20 (GD20), near the beginning of the dark cycle11. Once F1 offspring arrived (PD0), the litter was counted, sexed, and weighed as quickly as possible to minimize disruption. F0 females and F1 offspring randomly designated for the SNH condition (n = 9 dams, n = 40 offspring) were transferred to SNH cages on PD0. Dams and pups in the SH condition (n = 10 dams, n = 38 offspring) were placed in clean SH (Fig. 1C). All F0 dams and F1 pups were left undisturbed until the pups were weaned at PD21. The SNH (Fig. 1C) consisted of two sections: an upper section (50.5 cm width × 50.5 cm length × 33.5 cm height) containing chow food and water ad libitum and a lower section (50.5 cm width × 50.5 cm length × 14 cm height) filled with pine shavings and a polyvinyl chloride (PVC) tube.

Maternal behaviors of F0 females were scored daily in real-time for 72 min at 0800 h, 1100 h, 1300 h, 1500 h, and 2130 h from PD1 to PD7 (Fig. 1B). During each observation period, the frequencies of the behaviors were determined using an instantaneous sampling method, recording the behavior occurring every 3 min11,47. For the current study, we assessed arched-back-nursing (ABN), with licking and grooming (LG) of pups. ABN consisted of graded degrees of arching, levels 2–4, based on the presence of kyphosis (bending of the knees and back arching) while nursing F1 offspring. The sum of high-quality maternal behaviors towards the offspring (i.e., the total number of occurrences of LG, ABN2, and ABN3; representing moderate and moderate/high degrees of kyphosis) were divided into three groups to form equal sized “high”, “medium”, and “low” maternal care groups for further analyses.

The following four groups of F1 male and F1 female offspring were utilized: (1) CD-SH—F0 male exposed to control diet and F0 female housed in standard housing (n = 14 males, 11 females); (2) CD-SNH—F0 male exposed to control diet and F0 female housed in semi-naturalistic housing (n = 8 males, n = 10 females); (3) HFD-SH—F0 male exposed to high-fat diet and F0 female housed in standard housing (n = 6 males, n = 7 females); and (4) HFD-SNH—F0 male exposed to high-fat diet and F0 female housed in semi-naturalistic housing (n = 10 males, n = 12 females). Groups of F1 offspring contained n = 2–4 (per sex) from multiple litters: CD-SH (n = 6 litters); CD-SNH (n = 4 litters); HFD-SH (n = 4 litters); and HFD-SNH (n = 5 litters).

We used the Predator Odor Exposure Test to identify ethologically relevant differences in responses to acute stress exposure43,70. Testing of responses to acute stress exposure in F1 offspring in the odor exposure (OE) arena (clear Plexiglas walls and lid with ventilation holes and white Plexiglas floor; 60 cm × 27 cm × 35.5 cm) was conducted on PD42. F1 offspring were randomly assigned to either predator odor (PO; cat urine) or control odor (CO) exposure (n = 3–7 per sex, per group). Offspring were exposed for one 30-min trial. Fecal samples from each F1 offspring rat were removed directly from the OE arena and immediately frozen at − 80 °C until further processing. At harvest, whole stomachs were dissected and flash-frozen on dry-ice and shipped to the University of Colorado Boulder. Between each trial, the OE arena was cleaned with 30% ethanol solution.

Stomach microbiome sample collection was conducted in a sterile BSL2 cabinet using sterile technique. Stomachs, individually wrapped in aluminum foil, were removed from the − 80 °C freezer, thawed on wet ice, and then dissected along the lesser curvature with a sterile scalpel blade (Cat. No. 320001, Fisher Scientific LLC, Denver, CO, USA). To minimize risk of inter-sample contamination, scalpel blades were discarded immediately after use into a sharps container to prevent each blade from being used more than once. The incision along the lesser curvature was held open with sterile, disposable forceps while a BD BBL™ CultureSwab™ EZ sterile polyurethane single swab (Cat No. 220144, Becton, Dickinson and Company, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA) was used to swab the gastric mucosal surface and contents of the stomach. The swabs were immediately placed in individual sterile tubes (Cat. No. 76332–058 2 ml tubes, VWR), labeled, and frozen at − 80 °C until molecular processing for analysis of the stomach microbiome.

DNA from stomach and fecal samples was extracted using a PowerSoil DNA extraction kit (Cat. Nos. 12888-100 and 12955-4, MoBio Laboratories, Carlsbad, CA, USA) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Marker genes in isolated DNA were PCR-amplified using GoTaq® Master Mix (Cat. No. M7133, Promega, Madison, WI, USA) and 515-bp forward (5ʹ-GTGCCAGCMGCCGCGGTAA-3ʹ)/806-bp reverse (5ʹ-GGACTACHVGGGTWTCTAAT-3ʹ) primer pair (Integrated DNA Technologies, Coralville, IA, USA) targeting the V4 hypervariable region of the 16 small subunit ribosomal RNA (16S rRNA) gene, modified with a unique 12-base sequence identifier for each sample and the Illumina adapter, as previously described by Caporaso et al.71. The thermal cycling program consisted of an initial step at 94 °C for 3 min, followed by 35 cycles (94 °C for 45 s, 55 °C for 1 min, and 72 °C for 1.5 min) and a final extension at 72 °C for 10 min. PCR reactions were run in duplicate; products from the duplicate reactions were pooled and visualized on an agarose gel to ensure successful amplification. PCR products were cleaned and normalized using a SequalPrep Normalization Kit (Cat. No. A1051001, ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA, USA) following manufacturer’s instructions. The normalized amplicon pool was sequenced on an Illumina MiSeq, run using V3 chemistry, 600 cycles, and 2 × 250-bp paired-end sequencing. All sequencing and quality control assessments were conducted at the University of Colorado Boulder BioFrontiers Institute Next-Gen Sequencing Core Facility (Boulder, CO, USA).

Demultiplexed, quality-filtered reads were analyzed using the QIIME 2 2019.4 workflow with default parameters72, generating error-corrected amplicon sequence variants (ASVs) using the DADA2 (ver. 1.10.0) denoising and dereplication workflow73.

Fecal samples averaged 9381.3 ± 619.7 (mean ± standard error of the mean) sequences per sample, with the minimum number of sequences required to retain a sample in the study set at 3136 reads to maximize the number of samples retained. Four samples were excluded due to insufficient sequence reads (less than 2000) from the following animal subjects: Rat IDs 43, 59, 67, and 77. Reads from the 44 remaining fecal samples were clustered into sub-OTUs against the Greengenes 13/8 reference database75,76. Representative sequences were then aligned with MAFFT (ver.7.0)77, and a phylogenetic tree was constructed with FastTree 2 (ver. 2.0)78 for phylogenetic diversity calculations. In summary, microbial data from 44 of the original 48 fecal samples were analyzed for a variety of alpha diversity and beta diversity metrics (for details, see below). Additionally, we utilized a supervised machine-learning algorithm to predictively classify individual fecal microbiome samples of male and female offspring as belonging to either F0 paternal CD or HFD, F0 maternal/ early-life F1 offspring housing SH or SNH, or F0 maternal care quality; high, medium, or low. Using a nested cross-validated (k = fivefold) strategy, the receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) area-under-the-curve (AUC) values for the ASV-based models that were used to calculate feature importances varied between 0.77 and 0.95.

Statistical analysis in QIIME2 of each alpha-diversity metric made available in the command-line interface was conducted on both the stomach and fecal microbiome sequencing data (Chao1 richness estimator, Shannon’s entropy Hʹ, Menhinick’s richness index, and Simpson’s evenness index.

Additional statistical analysis of core and commonly reported alpha-diversity metrics (number of distinct features, Shannon’s entropy, and Faith’s phylogenetic diversity) using 3-way linear mixed effects models and post hoc pairwise t-tests without adjustment for multiple testing were also conducted on the fecal microbiome sequencing data. Following rarefaction of the ASV table generated by 16S rRNA gene sequencing of all fecal samples briefly described above, we conducted a linear mixed effects model-based 3-way analysis of F0 paternal diet (CD or HFD), F0 maternal/early-life F1 offspring housing (SH or SNH), and F1 stress exposure conditions (CO or PO). For beta diversity distances, such as weighted and unweighted UniFrac, similarly structured 3-way permutational analyses of variance of F0 paternal diet, F0 maternal/early-life F1 offspring housing, and F1 stress exposure conditions were conducted using the R package adonis (999 Monte Carlo permutations).

We showed that male and female F1 offspring of F0 HFD sires were significantly heavier on PD42 compared to offspring of F0 CD sires (one-way analysis of variance, F(3, 44) = 17.91, p < 0.0001; Fig. 2A). We also showed that F1 male offspring weighed more than F1 female offspring (two-way analysis of variance, F(1,44), p = 0.0004) and that male and female F1 offspring of F0 HFD sires were significantly heavier on PD42 compared to male and female offspring, respectively, of F0 CD sires (two-way analysis of variance, F(1, 44) = 17.91, p < 0.0001; Fig. 2A); this is despite the fact that F1 offspring were fed control chow from weaning through PD42. These data are consistent with previous findings indicating that F0 paternal HFD feeding negatively impacted mating success and subsequent F0 maternal care of F1 offspring11,43 which has also been shown to affect F1 offspring bodyweight51. Additionally, we examined whether correlations exist between maternal care, F0 paternal HFD treatment, offspring anxiety-related defensive behavioral responses, and F1 offspring weight (PD42). Pearson’s correlation analysis demonstrated that increased frequency of F0 maternal behaviors scored pre-weaning (PD1–7) were inversely associated with F1 offspring weights taken at PD42 (r =  − 0.614, p < 0.0001; Fig. 2B). Further, body weight was negatively correlated with percentage of time in the open arms of the elevated plus-maze, (r =  − 0.263, p = 0.0003; Fig. 2C). Together, these results highlight the link between F0 maternal care, F0 paternal diet, and anxiety-like behavior in F1 offspring.

Although the stomach microbiome is known to have lower diversity than the intestinal microbiome, we selected the stomach microbiome as representative of the microbial continuity of the aerodigestive tract79, which is thought to play an important, albeit understudied, role in modulation of physiology and behavior. We conducted Kruskal–Wallis tests and post hoc pairwise Mann–Whitney U tests with adjustment for multiple testing on all categorical variables in the metadata describing each sample submitted for 16S rRNA gene sequencing of the stomach microbiomes. Samples were collected from F0 CD and HFD sires and F1 offspring from F0 paternal diet (CD or HFD), F0 maternal/ early-life F1 offspring housing (SH or SNH), and F1 stress exposure conditions (CO or PO). A full summary of significant findings for F0 CD and HFD sires is in Supplemental Table 1; significant findings for F1 offspring are summarized in Supplemental Table 2.

Differences in multiple alpha-diversity measures of evenness and richness were also observed to be associated with early-life environmental and behavioral test outcomes in the F1 offspring population. These included: F0 maternal/F1 early-life housing conditions (Chao1, p = 0.027, H = 4.86 and Simpson’s evenness, p = 0.007, H = 7.34), rearing in the open-field arena (Chao1, p = 0.014, H = 6.06 and Menhinick, p = 0.023, H = 5.14), and rearing in the elevated plus-maze (Simpson’s evenness, p = 0.041, H = 4.18). Interestingly, differences in alpha-diversity due to sex (p = 0.023, H = 5.14) and stress response in the odor exposure test (p = 0.023, H = 5.14) were observed in Simpson’s evenness for F1 offspring.

Because previous literature indicates that changes in stress responsivity and body weight may be associated with changes in the gut microbiome, we conducted three-way linear mixed-effects models to evaluate the potential main and interactive effects of F0 paternal diet (CD or HFD), F0 maternal/early-life F1 offspring housing (SH or SNH), and F1 stress exposure conditions (CO or PO) on microbial alpha-diversity. As described in “Molecular processing of microbiome samples” section, the 16S rRNA gene V4 amplicon data were first subsampled at a rarefaction depth of 3136 reads per fecal sample collected from 44 F1 offspring in the test arena at the conclusion of the odor exposure (OE) test, immediately prior to sacrifice.

Analysis of Faith’s phylogenetic diversity revealed interaction effects of paternal diet × maternal housing × stress exposure (F(1,36) = 6.2, p = 0.018; Fig. 3A), paternal diet × stress exposure (F(1,36) = 5.3, p = 0.016; Fig. 3A), and maternal housing × stress exposure (F(1,36) = 6.4, p = 0.027; Fig. 3A). Analysis of Shannon’s entropy revealed the presence of significant interaction effects of maternal housing × stress exposure (F(1,36) = 4.2, p = 0.049; Fig. 3B), while analysis of the number of distinct features revealed a paternal diet × stress exposure interaction (F(1, 36) = 4.9, p = 0.034; Fig. 3C). However, no main effects of F0 paternal diet, F0 maternal/ early-life F1 offspring housing, or F1 stress exposure were found in any of the linear mixed-effects models described above.

To assess effects of paternal diet, maternal housing conditions, and stress exposure on the community composition of fecal microbiomes, we conducted three-way permutational analysis of variance (999 permutations) using the R package adonis on the unweighted and weighted UniFrac distance matrices generated from the rarefied feature table. Analysis of weighted UniFrac in the between-subjects comparisons showed no significant differences in microbial beta-diversity (data not shown). However, we demonstrated the presence of an interaction effect of paternal diet × maternal housing condition (F(1,36) = 1.59, r2 = 0.036, p = 0.044; Fig. 4A,B) and paternal diet × stress exposure (F(1,36) = 1.52, r2 = 0.034, p = 0.050; Fig. 4A,C) in the unweighted UniFrac distance matrix data.

The relative abundances of all phyla identified in the rarefied feature table of offspring fecal microbiomes are shown in Fig. 5A. From the stacked barplot, over 90% of the gut microbiota of all 44 F1 offspring fecal samples were members of the phyla Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, and Verrucomicrobia. We generated a principal coordinates analysis (PCoA) plot of the unweighted unique fraction metric (UniFrac) distances with compositional biplot vectors representing the contributions of these 3 phyla to beta-diversity clustering patterns in the offspring of CD and HFD sires (Figs.
4A,
5B). Here, we demonstrated that high levels of Firmicutes corresponded to fecal samples belonging to F1 offspring of HFD sires (Fig. 5B). Analyses of the fecal samples of F1 offspring with log-transformed relative abundance ratios of Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes (log10F:B ratio) > 0 demonstrated that 16 samples belonged to progeny of F0 HFD sires and an additional 11 samples with (log10F:B ratios) > 0 belonging to progeny of F0 CD sires had greater than 10% prevalence of Verrucomicrobia (Fig. 5A,C). Fisher’s Exact probability test identified a significant difference between the relative abundance ratios of Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes (log10F:B ratio) > 0 for CD and HFD F1 offspring (OR 4.49, p = 0.033), with a greater number of F0 HFD sires having Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes (log10F:B ratio) > 0.

A nested cross-validation random forest approach (5 k-mers) was used to evaluate sample classification by F0 condition (paternal diet, Fig. 6A–C; maternal housing condition, Fig. 6D–F; maternal care index, F
ig. 6G–I). Unbiased classification of samples based on microbial composition extended our understanding of how the fecal microbiota of F1 rat offspring in this study were influenced by F0 conditions beyond core diversity analyses and relied on predictive accuracy scores and machine learning model performance indicators in the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) scores (Fig. 6A,D,G).

Linear mixed-effects model analysis of paternal diet and maternal housing condition using ANCOM-II identified one significant feature above the coefficient of concordance threshold of 0.9 in the F1 fecal microbiome data (Fig. 7A). The observed relative abundance of Bifidobacterium pseudolongum (W-statistic = 40) in the offspring of HFD sires was significantly higher compared to offspring of CD sires in all subgroups irrespective of maternal housing condition or odor exposure prior to sacrifice (Fig. 7B).

In the current study, we have identified novel interactions between preconception paternal diet, postnatal rearing conditions, maternal care, and predator odor-induced stress that impact the offspring microbiome. Specifically, we have identified correlations between paternal diet factors and maternal investment which influence offspring weight and anxiety-like behavior, microbiome alpha- and beta-diversity, and Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes ratios. Further, we identified that compositional dynamics between members of the phyla Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes principally drove these treatment group differences, while also identifying Bifidobacterium pseudolongum, a member of the phylum Actinobacteria, as an important individual species that was differentially-abundant based on paternal diet condition.

Recent research has identified several potential routes for non-genetic inheritance of paternal experience, including the seminal microbiome, epigenetic alterations to sperm, paternal inheritance of mitochondrial DNA, and maternal investment. For example, diet-induced alterations to paternal microbiome may be transferred to offspring via the seminal fluid microbiome28,104. Others have identified specific alterations in sperm epigenetic mechanisms, including small noncoding RNAs (sncRNAs), tRNAs22,24,29, and microRNAs25,26,105; these mechanisms alter gene expression of developing embyos106 and likely contribute to metabolic insults in offspring10,25,86. However, the role of maternal investment should not be overlooked. We have previously demonstrated that female rats have a preference for lean males when given the option between a lean vs. DIO male11 and this is reflected in quality of maternal care. Others have identified increased maternal behavior based on the female’s perceived quality of a mate19–21. However, the total impact of transgenerational insults has not been explored in the context of mate preference. The influence of maternal preference can be reduced by utilizing in vitro fertilization9,24,107 or cross-fostering techniques105–109, though both of these techniques can alter development110,111. Maternal investment can also be manipulated by the quality of the environment, as an enriched or naturalistic rearing environment will promote a higher proportion of high-quality vs. low-quality maternal care11,43,51,83.

While the statistical analyses and data reported here are robust and replicable, we acknowledge that there are some limitations to this study that prevent us from concluding the underlying functional mechanism(s) by which paternal high fat diet, maternal housing, and acute stress (predator odor exposure) influence the gut microbiota throughout the offspring lifespan. Fecal and stomach sampling took place at a single discrete timepoint in F1 offspring peri-adolescence112; future studies using longitudinal sampling would permit us to determine if factors such as maternal care or rearing condition immediately impact the offspring microbiome or if these changes are the result of gradual interactions between maternal care and rearing condition. Future work should also consider longer-lasting and aging-related changes in offspring as they progress from peri-adolescence to adulthood while considering the possibility that these changes may expand to future generations as well. Moving forward, careful design and implementation of experiments investigating these complex and interacting factors will be required to fully elucidate the influence of paternal experience on maternal investment and rearing environment on offspring metabolism and behavior.

Preconception and early-life factors have a significant influence on the development and adult behavior of many organisms, including mammals. Here, we show that preconception paternal HFD feeding, early-life rearing environment, and maternal care influence offspring weight, behavior and the diversity of their microbiome. Specifically, we have identified that paternal HFD positively associates with offspring weight and anxiety-like behaviors in peri-adolescence, and maternal investment inversely associates with offspring weight. We show that predator odor exposure is an acute stressor that impacts offspring gut microbiota as assessed by richness and evenness indices of alpha-diversity as well as global compositional changes in beta-diversity measurements. These data suggest that parental conditions such as paternal HFD and maternal care, together with acute stress exposures during early life, could potentially impact the gut microbiota through adulthood. Future studies are required to determine the germline mechanisms driving these generational, and potential transgenerational, effects. However, the role of maternal investment should not be overlooked21 when determining priming of offspring development and behavior by paternal experience. Overall, these data support the hypothesis that both paternal diet and maternal care have profound influence on offspring microbiota diversity and community composition, and that these changes influence the behavior of peri-adolescent offspring.



Publisher's note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

These authors contributed equally: Austin C. Korgan, Christine L. Foxx, Christopher A. Lowry and Ian C. G. Weaver.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41598-022-14095-z.

