Beneficial Effects of a Dietary Weight Loss Intervention on Human Gut Microbiome Diversity and Metabolism Are Not Sustained during Weight Maintenance

In the present study, we examined the effect of a very low-calorie diet(VLCD)-based obesity program on human gut microbiome diversity and metabolism during weight loss and weight maintenance.

Obese subjects underwent 3 months of VLCD followed by 3 months of weight maintenance. A lean and an obese control group were included. The microbiome was characterized by performing high-throughput dual-indexed 16S rDNA amplicon sequencing.

At baseline, a significant difference in the Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio between the lean and obese individuals was observed (p = 0.047). The VLCD resulted in significant alterations in gut microbiome diversity from baseline to 3 months (p = 0.0053). Acinetobacter represented an indicator species for the observed effect (indicator value = 0.998, p = 0.006). Metabolic analyses revealed alterations of the bacterial riboflavin pathway from baseline to 3 months (pnom = 0.0078). These changes in diversity and bacterial metabolism induced by VLCD diminished during the weight maintenance phase, despite sustained reductions in body weight and sustained improvements of insulin sensitivity.

The present data show that a VLCD is able to beneficially alter both gut microbiome diversity and metabolism in obese humans, but that these changes are not sustained during weight maintenance. This finding might suggest that the microbiome should be targeted during obesity programs.

Obesity is caused by an imbalance of energy intake and energy expenditure, and it is showing an increasing prevalence. Between 1980 and 2014, obesity has doubled worldwide [1]. Given this epidemic increase, it is important to identify the factors regulating the balance between energy intake and expenditure. In particular, there has been much interest in the gut microbiome recently. The gut microbiome is a complex ecosystem that consists of an immense number of microorganisms and is composed mainly of bacteria but also includes archaea, viruses, fungi, and protozoa [2]. The collective genomes of the microbiota, the bacterial fraction of the microbiome, significantly expanded the host's genetic and metabolic potential and thus complements the host's physiology [2].

The aim of this study was to examine i) if a structured, multimodal obesity therapy program including a 3-month formula-based very low-calorie diet (VLCD) (approximately 800 kcal/day) [16] significantly altered the gut microbiota diversity and/or metabolism, and ii) if these potentially beneficial changes in the gut microbiota were sustained during an additional 3-month weight maintenance phase.

18 obese human subjects (3 men, 15 women) were included into the dietary intervention group. Dietary intervention included a VLCD for 3 months and a subsequent weight maintenance phase of further 3 months. The VLCD consisted of approximately 800 kcal/day, was formula-based and balanced according to micronutrients. The protein amount in the formula meals and thus the proportional intake of protein according to total daily energy intake was elevated (approximately 33%). The proportion of carbohydrates was approximately 50%, and that of fat approximately 17% of the total energy intake. Fiber intake was approximately 14 g/day during VLCD. The safety and efficacy of the supplement had been considered. During the weight maintenance phase, subjects first gradually replaced the formula meals by conventional meals (reduction of 1 formula meal per week) with increasing energy intake and unchanged proportion of carbohydrates. The protein amount was reduced to 30% of the total energy uptake, and fat was increased up to 20%. After approximately 5 weeks, subjects exclusively consumed conventional food (up to 1,600 kcal/day) for the rest of weight maintenance period. The carbohydrate proportion remained stable, and the remaining 50% of the total energy were equally divided into 25% each for fat and protein. The whole intervention was embedded into a commercial multimodal obesity therapy program for at least 6 months, containing nutritional education, behavioral therapy, and an exercise program in order to ensure weight maintenance after inducing a profound weight loss (Optifast 52) [16]. Inclusion criteria were: between 20 and 66 years of age, Caucasian descent and BMI > 30 kg/m2. Baseline characteristics are shown in table
1. Before inclusion into the study, a written confirmed consent was obtained from each subject. The local ethics committee approved the study (No. D474/11). Six of the 18 subjects suffered from hypertension and 4 from diabetes mellitus type 2, 3 subjects had a substituted hypothyroidism, and 1 each had hyperuricemia, gonarthrosis, psoriasis, obstructive sleep apnea, coxarthrosis, and degenerative spine syndrome. In terms of pharmacotherapy, 4 patients were on diabetic therapy, 4 were taking metformin, and 1 each was on insulin therapy and a therapy with incretin mimetics. Three subjects were taking thyroxine, 2 subjects were taking antidepressant agents, 3 subjects were taking angiotensin II receptor antagonists, 2 were on calcium antagonists, 1 was on AT1 blockers, 3 were on beta blockers, 3 on ACE inhibitors, and 3 on proton pump inhibitors. Four subjects were taking any kind of pain killer. Vitamin or mineral supplements were taken by 4 subjects. One each was taking statins, uricostatics, immune suppressive medication, sedatives, and anticoagulants. One subject received a short-term antibiotic treatment during the intervention and was therefore excluded from the analysis. Study participants were advised not to change the dosage throughout the study period to achieve stable conditions.

n.s. = Not significant.

ptotal = p value for overall comparison of the groups determined with the Kruskal-Wallis test with significance level set at p < 0.05.

p1–3 = p-values for comparison of the single groups determined with the Mann-Whitney U test with p < 0.017 due to the Bonferroni adjustment: p1 = VLCD group versus LC group; p2 = VLCD group versus OC group; p3 = LC group versus OC group.

Two control groups were used in the present study: i) a lean control group (LC, BMI ℋ 25 kg/m2) and ii) an obese control group (OC, BMI > 30 kg/m2). Both control groups did not receive any intervention, and therefore their body weight maintained stable throughout the study period of 6 months. Each group included 13 subjects (2 men, 11 women). Inclusion criteria were: between 20 and 66 years of age, Caucasian descent, and BMI ℋ 25 kg/m2 (LC) or BMI > 30 kg/m2 (OC). The baseline characteristics of the control groups are shown in table
1. The controls were embedded in the ‘Kiel intervention cohort’ as part of the ‘Food Chain Plus’ study [17]. A written informed consent was obtained from each subject before they were included into this study. 11 of the 26 subjects suffered from hypertension, and 7 showed high blood lipids. Two subjects each had diabetes mellitus, liver disease, migraine, acne, psoriasis, neurodermatitis, and gall stones. One each had cardiac insufficiency, multiple sclerosis, and urticaria. In the past, 3 subjects had cancer and biliary operations, and 2 had venous thrombosis. In terms of pharmacotherapy, 7 patients were taking beta blockers, and 6 subjects were taking thyroxine. Five subjects each were on ACE inhibitors and proton pump inhibitors. Three each were taking statins and glucocorticoids. Two were on diabetic therapy, 1 was taking metformin, and 1 was on insulin therapy. Four were taking antidepressant agents, and 5 were taking diuretics. One each was taking sedatives, uricostatics, chelating agents, calcium antagonists, anticholinergic agents, symphatomimetic drugs, antihistamines, uricosuric agents, and fibrates. Four subjects each were taking vitamin or mineral supplements and angiotensin II receptor antagonists. Two each were on pain killers and anticoagulants. Subjects were advised not to change the dosage throughout the study period to achieve stable conditions.

DNA was extracted using the QIAamp DNA stool mini kit automated on the QIAcube (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). Approximately 200 mg stool was transferred to 0.70 mm Garnet Bead tubes (Dianova, Hamburg, Germany) filled with 1.1 ml ASL lysis buffer. Bead beating was performed using the a SpeedMill PLUS (Analytik Jena, Jena, Germany) for 45 s at 50 Hz. Samples were then heated to 95 °C for 5 min with subsequent continuation of the manufacturer's protocol.

Variable regions V1 and V2 of the 16S rRNA gene were amplified using the primer pair 27F-338R in a dual-barcoding approach according to Caporaso et al. [18]. PCR products were normalized using the SequalPrep Normalization Plate Kit (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), pooled equimolarily and sequenced on the Illumina MiSeq (Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA, USA). Demultiplexing after sequencing was based on 0 mismatches in the barcode sequences. Forward and reverse reads were merged using the FLASh software, allowing an overlap of the reads between 250 and 300 bp [19]. To eliminate low-quality sequences, the data were filtered by removing sequences with a sequence quality of less than 30 in less than 95% of the nucleotides. Chimeras were removed with UCHIME [20].

Taxonomical classification was carried out using the RDP classifier [21], where classifications with low confidence at genus level (ℋ0.8) are organized in an arbitrary taxon of ‘unclassified_[family]’. For each sample, 10,000 sequences were randomly chosen to construct a taxon-by-sample abundance table. To infer functional capabilities from 16S rDNA amplicon sequencing data, reads were matched against the Greengenes OTU database (v13_5) [22], down-sampled to 10,000 reads per sample, and used in the PICRUSt software [23]. To obtain pathway information, the PICRUSt output was used in the HUMAnN software (v0.99) [24].

Body weight was measured with a Tanita Scale (Body Composition Analyzer; Type BC- 418 MA; Tanita Corporation, Tokyo, Japan), and subjects were interviewed to acquire height. Blood serum was stored immediately at −80 °C. After determination of fasting insulin by an electro-chemiluminescence immunoassay (ECLIA; Elecsys system; Roche, Basel, Switzerland) and of fasting glucose by an glucose-hexokinase UV test (Hitachi Modular; Roche), the Homeostasis Model Assessment (HOMA) index was calculated as glucose (mg/dl) × insulin (μU/ml) / 405.

Statistical analyses were carried out with SPSS, version 22.0 for windows (SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA). Graphic data analysis was performed with GraphPad Prism, version 5.0 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA). A test to determine deviations from normal distribution would have had low statistical power due to the small sample size. Therefore, data are shown as median (IQ) due to Tukey, and exclusively statistical tests for non-parametric data were used. Categorical variables are presented as percentages. The overall comparison between the 3 groups (VLDC, LC, OC) was performed by the Kruskal-Wallis test. When significant, the pairwise comparison was carried out by the Mann-Whitney U test. The chi square test was used to determine differences in categorical variables. To identify statistically significant differences between time points, the Friedman test and Wilcoxon signed-rank test were applied. The significance level was set at p ℋ 0.05. If multiple comparisons were made, the significance level was set at p ℋ 0.017, due to the Bonferroni adjustment.

Statistical analyses of the microbiome data were performed in R, using the ‘vegan’ package [25]. A permutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) was performed by applying the ‘adonis’ function to the Bray-Curtis dissimilarity [26]. For the analysis of changes between different time points, individuals with samples available for all time points were included. Unconstrained principal component analysis (PCoA) was carried out using R/vegdist (n = 13 for the OC and LC groups at time points 0 and 6; n = 18, 11 and 16 for the VLCD group at time points 0, 3 and 6, respectively), and the ‘capscale’ function was used for the constrained analysis of principal coordinates (n = 8) [27,28]. The indicator species analysis within the VLCD group was performed using the multi-level pattern analysis method (‘multipatt’), calculating the indicator value (IndVal) metric as implemented in the ‘indicspecies’ package for R [29]. Unfortunately, some patients did not provide the study center with stool samples for every time point. Under these circumstances, a patient was only included into the statistical microbiome analysis if stool samples were available for all 3 time points (0, 3, 6 months) (n = 8).

The present study was conducted to address 2 major questions: i) Does a 3-month formula-based VLCD (approximately 800 kcal/day) obesity program significantly alter the gut microbiota diversity and/or metabolism? ii) Are these potentially beneficial changes in the gut microbiota sustained during an additional 3-month weight maintenance phase? It is important to note that until today, the composition of the ‘normal’ and ‘healthy’ gut microbiome is still unclear. In contrast to a previous report examining a dietary weight loss intervention [30], we therefore included 2 distinct control groups in addition to the VLCD intervention group in our study: the first control group (OC, BMI > 30 kg/m2) consisted of obese individuals having the same body weight as the intervention group, but receiving no VLCD. The second control group (LC, BMI ℋ 25 kg/m2) consisted of lean, metabolically healthy human subjects who did not receive any type of dietary intervention either. While the body weight of the intervention group decreased significantly during the study period, there was no major weight change in either control group. The basic characteristics of the different study groups are shown in table
1.

Three months of a formula-based VLCD intervention resulted in a profound weight loss from 123.75 kg (IQ range 114.08-143.45 kg) to 102.30 kg (87.73-120.25 kg) (p ℋ 0.001). We measured fasting insulin and fasting glucose levels and calculated the HOMA index. This parameter showed a significant reduction due to the dietary intervention from 3.09 (2.61-5.14) to 1.73 (1.03-3.7) (p ℋ 0.01), indicating an improvement of insulin sensitivity. During the following 3 months of weight maintenance, the body weight could be stabilized and accounted to 99.35 kg (87.73-120.05 kg) at the end of the study period. The HOMA index settled at 2.11 (1.51-3.87) during weight maintenance. The bioclinical parameters during intervention are given in table
2. Since the control groups did not undergo an intervention, no significant changes of bioclinical parameters could be observed.

ALT= Alanine-aminotransferase, yGT = γ-glutamyltransferase

On phylum or genus level, a significant difference (p = 0.047) between the LC and VLDC group could be observed at baseline, when calculating the Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio, while no significant difference was found between the OC and VLDC group. We next performed a PERMANOVA analysis, using the Bray-Curtis dissimilarity, which is a beta-diversity measure that reflects inter-individual variability, in order to examine differences within the groups during the time period of the study. For LC, this analysis did not show a significant change in variance over time (R2 = 0.00788, p = 0.8622). In addition, for OC, no significant change occurred over time either (R2 = 0.02731, p = 0.3312). In contrast, the VLCD intervention group exhibited a significant correlation between the time points and the Bray-Curtis dissimilarity (R2 = 0.11074, p = 0.009799). A subsequent analysis revealed the significant difference in diversity in the VLCD group between baseline (0 months) and the end of the nutritional intervention (3 months; R2 = 0.076763, p = 0.005299), while no significant differences between the end of the nutritional intervention (3 months) and the end of the weight maintenance phase (6 months; R2 = 0.04317, p = 0.08309) or between baseline (0 months) and the end of the weight maintenance phase were detected (6 months; R2 = 0.02045, p = 0.2679). In a constrained analysis of principal coordinates (CAP), the first coordinate explained 6.22% (p = 0.048) of the variance in the microbiota due to the VLCD intervention, whereas the second coordinate explained only 3.01% and was not significant (p = 0.9422) (fig.
1). It has to be pointed out that neither at baseline (0 months) nor at the end of the study period (6 months) significant differences between the 3 groups could be observed on phylum or genus level, indicating that the significant changes induced by the VLCD intervention completely disappeared within the weight maintenance phase (fig.
2). Taken together, significant changes in the gut microbiome diversity were only detected in the VLCD group directly after the VLCD intervention. During the following weight maintenance period, these changes regressed towards the measurements at baseline.

Having identified significant changes in gut microbiome diversity due to the VLCD intervention, we next used IndVal in order to identify indicator species accounting for the diversity change within the intervention group at 3 months of the study period. Only genera with an abundance of at least 1% in one of the samples were included in this analysis. Interestingly, this analysis identified a significant association with the genus Acinetobacter (IndVal = 0.998, p = 0.006, after Benjamini-Hochberg adjustment). This statistically significant association was confirmed by a Wilcoxon rank-sum test (p = 0.042). Figure
3 shows the abundance of Acinetobacter over time due to VLCD intervention.

From a pathophysiological point of view, not the presence or absence of a certain microorganism might be of importance, but the metabolic capacity of the microbiota because it might be possible that 2 different bacteria share the same major metabolic capacity. In that case, the absence of one organism might be compensated by the presence of the other, resulting in similar overall metabolic activity of the gut microbiome. For that reason, we also performed a PICRUSt/HUMAnN analysis, using the KEGG database for metabolic pathways. Amongst other things, this analysis revealed changes in the riboflavin pathway and the chlorocyclohexane and chlorobenzene degradation pathways at 3 months of the study period. These changes were nominal statistically significant (pnom = 0.0078 and pnom = 0.039) but not robust to multiple testing. During the weight maintenance phase, these metabolic changes diminished, showing a time course pattern comparable to the diversity measures (fig.
4).

While several mouse studies exhibited a significant association of the gut microbiome with metabolic abnormalities like obesity and insulin resistance [7], data in humans are still conflicting [9,10,11]. In the present study we used a VLCD-based obesity program in obese subjects for two reasons: i) This kind of diet is completely standardized and fully balanced with micro- and macronutrients, excluding inter-individual differences in food consumption, and ii) it results in a profound weight loss in a short period of time, inducing an enormous shift in the human metabolic phenotype [31,32].

It also should be mentioned that our study has limitations: i) The number of subjects is limited, ii) several obese subjects were suffering from additional diseases and were taking medication, and iii) the number of male subjects was limited in our cohorts. However, we feel that the results of the present study indicate that a VLCD-based obesity program is able to alter both gut microbiome diversity and metabolism in obese humans, but that these changes are not sustained during weight maintenance. This suggests that targeting the microbiome (e.g., by probiotics or fecal transplantation) in addition to restricting the caloric intake might be a promising future approach for maintaining a significant weight loss after a dietary intervention.

Matthias Laudes, Dominik Schulte, and Ute Settgast are providers of the Optifast 52 Obesity Therapy Program at the University Hospital in Kiel. No other authors declare a conflict of interest.

