The gut microbiota-bile acid axis links the positive association between chronic insomnia and cardiometabolic diseases

Evidence from human cohorts indicates that chronic insomnia is associated with higher risk of cardiometabolic diseases (CMD), yet whether gut microbiota plays a role is unclear. Here, in a longitudinal cohort (n = 1809), we find that the gut microbiota-bile acid axis may link the positive association between chronic insomnia and CMD. Ruminococcaceae UCG-002 and Ruminococcaceae UCG-003 are the main genera mediating the positive association between chronic insomnia and CMD. These results are also observed in an independent cross-sectional cohort (n = 6122). The inverse associations between those gut microbial biomarkers and CMD are mediated by certain bile acids (isolithocholic acid, muro cholic acid and nor cholic acid). Habitual tea consumption is prospectively associated with the identified gut microbiota and bile acids in an opposite direction compared with chronic insomnia. Our work suggests that microbiota-bile acid axis may be a potential intervention target for reducing the impact of chronic insomnia on cardiometabolic health.

Chronic insomnia is a common sleep disorder with a current estimated global prevalence rate of ~10–20% 1–3. Features of chronic insomnia include difficulty falling asleep, difficulty maintaining sleep, and awakening in the early morning, together with daytime fatigue, attention deficits and mood instability4. In the past decade, numerous observational studies have indicated that chronic insomnia is associated with higher risk of cardiometabolic diseases (CMD), such as type 2 diabetes (T2D) and cardiovascular diseases5–9. However, the mechanism that underlies the association between chronic insomnia and CMD has yet to be identified, so novel cost-effective therapeutic strategies have yet to be developed.

In the present study, we examined the longitudinal association of chronic insomnia status over ~6 years with gut microbiota and bile acid profiles in a Chinese prospective cohort study, including 1809 participants from the Guangzhou Nutrition and Health Study (GNHS)37. We further investigated whether these altered gut microbiota or bile acids could mediate the chronic insomnia-CMD association in the GNHS. Validation of the above associations was conducted in an independent large cross-sectional study involving 6122 participants from the Guangdong Gut Microbiome Project (GGMP)38.

The present study was based on the GNHS, a community-based prospective cohort including 4048 participants of Han Chinese ethnicity, who were recruited between 2008 and 2013. Validation of the results from GNHS was based on data from the GGMP, a large community-based cross-sectional cohort conducted between 2015 and 2016 including 7,009 participants with high quality gut microbiome data. We profiled the gut microbiota (16S rRNA sequencing) in the GNHS (n = 1809) and GGMP (n = 6122) cohort participants, who provided detailed information on chronic insomnia status, CMD and related risk factors (Fig. 1a, and Tables 1 and
2). We also performed targeted fecal bile acid metabolome analyses among 954 participants from the GNHS cohort (Fig. 1a). In the GNHS, the participants were divided into four groups according to their chronic insomnia status over a period of 6 years prior to the collection of stool samples: (i) Long-term healthy group (i.e., without chronic insomnia at baseline or follow-up), (ii) Recovery group (i.e., from chronic insomnia at baseline to normal at follow-up), (iii) New-onset group (i.e., without chronic insomnia at baseline but with chronic insomnia at follow-up), and (iv) Long-term chronic insomnia group (i.e., with chronic insomnia at baseline and follow-up) (Fig. 1a and Methods). For the GGMP, given the cross-sectional study design, the participants were divided into two groups: (i) Non-chronic insomnia group, and (ii) Chronic insomnia group (Methods).

We first investigated the longitudinal association of chronic insomnia status of the GNHS participants with microbioal α-/β- diversity. We found that there were significant differences in the microbial β- diversity of the New-onset group and Long-term chronic insomnia group, compared to the Long-term healthy group (Fig. 1b). The α-diversity parameters (Observed species, Chao 1 index and ACE index) of the New-onset group and Long-term chronic insomnia group were significantly lower than those of the Long-term healthy group (Fig. 1b and Supplementary Fig. 1). The α-diversity parameter the Shannon index of the Long-term chronic insomnia group was significantly lower than that of the Long-term healthy group (Supplementary Fig. 1). The α-diversity parameter the Simpson index was not significantly different among the four chronic insomnia status groups (Supplementary Fig. 1). Consistent results were observed by using three different statistical models (Fig. 1b and Supplementary Fig. 1), suggesting that chronic insomnia was robustly associated with the gut microbiota structure.

We combined the New-onset group and Long-term chronic insomnia group into one Chronic insomnia group to increase the sample size, given that there was no significant difference in the microbiota structure between the two groups. Chronic insomnia in the GNHS participants was associated with lower levels of Observed species (p < 0.01), Shannon index (p < 0.05), Chao 1 index (p < 0.001) and ACE index (p < 0.001), respectively (Fig. 2a and Supplementary Fig. 2). Principal coordinate analysis of the gut microbial profiles in the GNHS showed a significant shift in the gut microbiota composition of the Chronic insomnia group compared to the Long-term healthy group (p < 0.01; PERMANOVA test with 999 permutations) (Fig. 2b). A similar pattern was observed for the shift in the structure of the gut microbiota in the GGMP (Fig. 2a, b and Supplementary Fig. 3).

We used Multivariate Analysis by Linear Models (MaAsLin) adjusted for potential confounders to identify potential microbial biomarkers (as outcome variables) of chronic insomnia (as a predictor in the model). Ruminococcaceae UCG-002 and Ruminococcaceae UCG-003 were identified as the microbial biomarkers of chronic insomnia (Fig. 2c and Supplementary Table 1). In the GNHS, Chronic insomnia group was associated with lower levels of Ruminococcaceae UCG-002 (β: −0.19, 95% CI: −0.32 to −0.06) and Ruminococcaceae UCG-003 (β: −0.20, 95% CI: −0.33 to −0.07), compared with the Long-term healthy group (Fig. 2d). These results were also observed in the GGMP (Fig. 2d). The results of the sensitivity analysis suggested that different covariate adjustments did not substantially affect the results in the GGMP (Supplementary Fig. 4). In addition, chronic insomnia had no interactions with age or sex for Ruminococcaceae UCG-002 and Ruminococcaceae UCG-003 (Supplementary Table 2). To assess the potential influence of the number of insomnia symptoms, we conducted a secondary analysis of the GGMP participants, for whom the data were available, and found that the per unit change in the chronic insomnia symptom score was inversely associated with a per 1-SD change in Ruminococcaceae UCG-002 (β: −0.04, 95% CI: −0.06 to −0.02, p < 0.001) and Ruminococcaceae UCG-003 (β: −0.04, 95% CI: −0.07 to −0.01, p = 0.002) (Supplementary Table 3).

We next used orthogonal partial least squares discrimination analysis (OPLS-DA) to identify potential fecal bile acids associated with chronic insomnia (Supplementary Fig. 5) and then used linear regression to confirm the chronic insomnia-bile acid associations in the GNHS (Fig. 2e). Chronic insomnia was associated with higher levels of muro cholic acid (MCA, p = 0.046) and nor cholic acid (NorCA, p = 0.046) and with lower levels of isolithocholic acid (IsoLCA, p = 0.029), lithocholic acid (LCA, p = 0.035) and ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA, p = 0.039) (Fig. 2e). The results of the sensitivity analysis showed that adding dietary cholesterol intake and fiber intake as additional covariates did not substantially affect the association of chronic insomnia with bile acids (Supplementary Table 4). Co-occurrence network analysis based on the partial correlation coefficient showed that Ruminococcaceae UCG-002 and Ruminococcaceae UCG-003 were positively associated with secondary bile acids (IsoLCA, LCA, and UDCA), and inversely associated with primary bile acids (MCA and NorCA) (p < 0.001) (Fig. 2f). In addition, chronic insomnia was not associated with short-chain fatty acids, aromatic amino acids, or their derivatives (Supplementary Table 5). These results indicated that chronic insomnia might have a significant impact on the gut microbiota-bile acid axis.

To further investigate whether the chronic insomnia-related gut microbiota or bile acids play a role in CMD, we used multivariable logistic regression to examine the association of the chronic insomnia-related gut microbiota or bile acids with CMD. In the cross-sectional analysis of the GNHS participants, a per standard deviation (SD)-unit increment in Ruminococcaceae UCG-002 was associated with a 24% lower risk of metabolic syndrome (MetS) (OR: 0.76, 95% CI: 0.66–0.86), a 22% lower risk of T2D (OR: 0.78, 95% CI: 0.67–0.91), and 13% lower risk of dyslipidemia (OR: 0.87, 95% CI: 0.79–0.97) (Fig. 3a). Each per SD-unit increment in Ruminococcaceae UCG-003 was associated with a 23% lower risk of MetS (OR: 0.77, 95% CI: 0.67–0.88) (Fig. 3b). IsoLCA was inversely associated with T2D (OR: 0.74, 95% CI: 0.61–0.90) (Fig. 3c). MCA and NorCA were positively associated with MetS (OR: 1.33, 95% CI: 1.13–1.58; OR: 1.36, 95% CI: 1.15–1.61), respectively (Fig. 3c).

To evaluate whether bile acids can mediate the relationship between the gut microbiota and CMD (Fig. 3f), we applied mediation analysis, which showed that the inverse association of the chronic insomnia-related gut microbial biomarkers with MetS and T2D were mediated by some specific bile acids (Fig. 3g, h). MCA mediated the association of Ruminococcaceae UCG-002 and Ruminococcaceae UCG-003 with the risk of MetS (50.8%, pmediation < 0.001; 39.5%, pmediation < 0.001, respectively, Fig. 3g, h). NorCA mediated the association of Ruminococcaceae UCG-002 and Ruminococcaceae UCG-003 with the MetS risk (32.9%, pmediation < 0.001; 31.9%, pmediation < 0.001, respectively, Fig. 3g, h). In addition, IsoLCA mediated the association of Ruminococcaceae UCG-002 and Ruminococcaceae UCG-003 with the risk of T2D (41.7%, pmediation = 0.040; 53.2%, pmediation < 0.001, respectively, Fig. 3g, h). Sensitivity analysis for mediation effects indicated that the results of the above mediation analysis were relatively robust to the possible existence of an unmeasured confounder (Supplementary Table 7).

We used multivariable linear regression models to investigate the longitudinal association of dietary factors with chronic insomnia-related microbial and bile acid biomarkers in the GNHS participants without chronic insomnia or CMD at baseline. Among different food groups, we found that only tea consumption was positively significantly associated with Ruminococcaceae UCG-002 (β: 0.28, 95% CI: 0.13–0.43; p = 0.002), and inversely associated with bile acid NorCA (β: −0.22, 95% CI: −0.42 to −0.02; p = 0.029, which was positively associated with chronic insomnia) (Fig. 4a, b and Supplementary Fig. 7). The tea consumption-Ruminococcaceae UCG-002 association was also observed in the GGMP (β: 0.27, 95% CI: 0.08–0.47; p = 0.002) (Fig. 4a). Furthermore, a stratified analysis by tea consumption (yes versus no) among the GNHS participants showed that the inverse association between Ruminococcaceae UCG-002 and CMD risk factors (especially for T2D (OR: 0.73, 95% CI: 0.60–0.89, p = 0.002) and dyslipidemia (OR: 0.85, 95% CI: 0.74–0.98, p = 0.024)) were generally stronger among those with habitual tea consumption (Table 3). In addition, meta-analysis of the results of the tea consumption-chronic insomnia association from the two cohorts showed that tea consumption (yes versus no) was inversely associated with the risk of chronic insomnia (Pooled OR: 0.72, 95% CI: 0.55–0.95, p = 0.020) (Supplementary Table 8). The results indicated that habitual tea consumption was associated with the gut microbiota-bile acid axis, which may potentially underlie the association between chronic insomnia and CMD (Fig. 4c).

In the present study, we demonstrated that chronic insomnia was significantly associated with the structure and composition of the gut microbiota and specific bile acids. The chronic insomnia inverse-related gut microbiota Ruminococcaceae UCG-002 and Ruminococcaceae UCG-003 were significantly inversely associated with CMD and related traits. The gut microbial features of chronic insomnia and their relationships with CMD traits were also observed in an independent cohort (GGMP). Furthermore, we found that chronic insomnia-related bile acids (MCA, NorCA, and IsoLCA) may mediate the association of the identified microbial features with CMD traits. Finally, habitual tea consumption was associated with higher levels of Ruminococcaceae UCG-002 and lower levels of the bile acid NorCA, and the tea drinking-Ruminococcaceae UCG-002 association was also observed in the GGMP.

In summary, the present study indicates that chronic insomnia is associated with the structure and composition of the gut microbiota and specific bile acids. The gut microbiota-bile acid axis may play an essential role in linking chronic insomnia and CMD outcomes. Habitual tea consumption has an inverse association with chronic insomnia-disrupted gut microbiota and bile acids. Our results suggest that the gut microbiota-bile acid axis may be an important preventive target for mitigating the detrimental impact of chronic insomnia on cardiometabolic health.

We used two human cohorts in the present study: GNHS, as a discovery cohort37 and GGMP, as a validation cohort38. We integrated multi-omics data from the GNHS to investigate whether the gut microbiota-bile acid axis contributed to the positive association between chronic insomnia and CMD, and to explore dietary approaches that could alleviate the association between chronic insomnia and CMD. We then validated these associations in an independent large cross-sectional cohort study: GGMP. The study protocol for the GNHS was approved by the Ethics Committee of the School of Public Health at Sun Yat-sen University and Ethics Committee of Westlake University, and all participants provided written informed consent. The study protocol for the GGMP was approved by the Ethical Review Committee of Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention (Beijing, China), and all the participants provided written informed consent.

For both cohorts, T2D was defined as fasting blood glucose ≥ 7.0 mmol/L, HbA1c ≥ 6.5% or diabetic medication74. Hypertension was defined as systolic blood pressure (SBP)/diastolic blood pressure (DBP) ≥ 140/90 mmHg or medical history75. Dyslipidemia was defined as total cholesterol (TC) ≥ 6.2 mmol/L or triglycerides (TG) ≥ 2.3 mmol/L or low density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL) ≥ 4.1 mmol/L or high density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL) < 1.0 mmol/L or medical history76. MetS was defined as meeting three of the five following criteria: (i) waist > 90 cm (male) or waist  >85 cm (female), (ii) fasting blood glucose (FBG) ≥ 6.1 mmol/L (110 mg/dl) or previously diagnosed with T2D, (iii) TG  ≥ 1.7 mmol/L (150 mg/dl), (iv) HDL < 1.04 mmol/L (40 mg/dl) and (v) SBP/DBP ≥ 130/85 mmHg or previously diagnosed with hypertension76. CHD and stroke were determined by self-report (conformed with previous diagnosis).

For the GNHS, during the on-site face-to-face questionnaire interviews, we collected information on sociodemographic, lifestyle, dietary factors, and medical history. Anthropometric parameters, including weight, height, waist circumference, and hip circumference, were measured by trained staff. Total energy intake was calculated according to the Chinese Food Consumption Table, 200277. Physical activity was assessed as the total metabolic equivalent for task hours per day based on a questionnaire for physical activity78.

Fasting venous blood samples were taken at the recruitment and follow-up visits and were aliquoted and stored in a −80 °C freezer prior to analysis. FBG, TG, TC, HDL, and LDL were measured by colorimetric methods using a Roche Cobas 8000 c702 automated analyzer (Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Shanghai, China). Insulin was measured by electrochemiluminescence immunoassay methods using a Roche Cobas 8000 e602 automated analyzer (Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Shanghai, China). High-performance liquid chromatography was used to measure the HbA1c level using the Bole D-10 Hemoglobin A1c Program on a Bole D-10 Hemoglobin Testing System.

During a follow-up visit to the study center, the participants were given a stool sampler and provided detailed instructions for stool sample collection. Briefly, each participant collected their stool sample after defecation and gave the sample to the staff immediately. The stool samples with ice bags were transported to the research laboratory and stored in a −80 °C freezer within 4 h. Detailed information regarding DNA extraction and gut microbiota 16S rRNA gene sequencing in the GNHS is provided in the Supplementary methods.

Targeted bile acid profiling of fecal samples (n = 954) was performed with an ultra-performance liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (UPLC-MS/MS) system (ACQUITY UPLC-Xevo TQ-S, Waters Corp., Milford, MA, USA) at Metabo-Profile Biotechnology Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China) (Supplementary methods).

The GGMP is a large community-based cross-sectional cohort conducted between 2015 and 2016 including 7009 participants with high quality gut microbiome data38. The GGMP participants were from 14 randomly selected districts or counties in Guangdong Province, China. In face-to-face questionnaire interviews, the host metadata, including socio-demographic features, disease status, lifestyle and dietary information, were collected. We excluded participants (1) without chronic insomnia information (n = 633); and (2) with missing covariates (age, sex, BMI, education, smoking status, alcohol status) (n = 254). Finally, we included 6122 participants (52.8 ± 14.7 y, 55.2% of women) from the GGMP in our analysis as an independent validation cohort. The characteristics of the included participants in the GGMP are presented in Table 2. Detailed information regarding the host metadata and stool sample collection and the 16S rRNA gene sequencing process in the GGMP have been reported previously38.

We compared differences between four groups using the chi-square test for categorical variables and ANOVA for continuous variables. In the GNHS, we examined the association of chronic insomnia with gut microbial α-diversity indices (Observed species, Shannon index, Chao 1 index, ACE index and Simpson index) among the four groups using a multivariable linear regression with three different statistical models. Model 1 was adjusted for age, sex, BMI, smoking status, alcohol status, physical activity, education, income and total energy intake at baseline. Model 2 was additionally controlled for hypertension, hyperlipidemia, MetS, T2D, CHD, stroke, and medication for T2D. Model 3 was further adjusted for dietary intake of vegetables, fruits, red and processed meat, fish, dairy products, coffee and tea. The association between chronic insomnia and β-diversity dissimilarity based on genus-level Bray-Curtis distance was examined using permutational ANOVA (PERMANOVA) (999 permutations).

In the GNHS, we used the co-occurrence network analysis based on the above partial correlation coefficient to demonstrate the interaction of the above gut microbiota and bile acid biomarkers, and only the significant correlations (larger than 0.1 or smaller than −0.1) were used for network construction. The networks were further visualized in Cytoscape software version 3.7.2. We used R version 3.6.3 for statistical analysis unless otherwise specified, and p value < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.



Source Data(22M, xlsx)

Nature Communications thanks Tianyi Huang, Matthew Valente, and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Peer reviewer reports are available.

Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

These authors contributed equally: Zengliang Jiang, Lai-bao Zhuo, Yan He.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41467-022-30712-x.

