Interactions between the Gut Microbiome, Lung Conditions, and Coronary Heart Disease and How Probiotics Affect These

The importance of a healthy microbiome cannot be overemphasized. Disturbances in its composition can lead to a variety of symptoms that can extend to other organs. Likewise, acute or chronic conditions in other organs can affect the composition and physiology of the gut microbiome. Here, we discuss interorgan communication along the gut–lung axis, as well as interactions between lung and coronary heart diseases and between cardiovascular disease and the gut microbiome. This triangle of organs, which also affects the clinical outcome of COVID-19 infections, is connected by means of numerous receptors and effectors, including immune cells and immune-modulating factors such as short chain fatty acids (SCFA) and trimethlamine–N–oxide (TMAO). The gut microbiome plays an important role in each of these, thus affecting the health of the lungs and the heart, and this interplay occurs in both directions. The gut microbiome can be influenced by the oral uptake of probiotics. With an improved understanding of the mechanisms responsible for interorgan communication, we can start to define what requirements an ‘ideal’ probiotic should have and its role in this triangle.

The gut microbiome is a crucial factor for the overall health of an individual, but its relationship with a wide variety of medical and psychosomatic conditions is complex. The variation in microbiome constituents between healthy individuals is extensive [1]. This interindividual variation is the result of many factors including diet, genetics, exposure to microbial communities and infections, and medication [2,3]. Despite the variation in microbiome makeup, common patterns can be recognized, which roughly correlate with the health status of individuals and a range of disease states. The gut microbiome can become distorted by a large number of conditions and their treatments, but microbiome distortions can also contribute to the onset or severity of such conditions, so that it is sometimes difficult to unravel cause and effect. The gut microbiome is in constant direct communication with the immune and neuroendocrine systems and also exchanges information indirectly with the brain via the vagus nerve, in addition to supplying nutrients and other ingested compounds to the bloodstream. As such, it is a key player involved in both surveillance and mitigation of general physiology and health. Except for temporal distortions, the individual gut microbiome is relatively stable from around the age of three years onwards [4]. Thus, throughout life the metabolic capacity of an individual’s gut microbiome remains fairly constant, as long as diet and health status do not change. However, its composition can be affected by pathogens (bacterial, fungal, viral, and parasitic), drugs with intentional or accidental antimicrobial activity, or by intake of nonpathogenic or probiotic organisms.

A link between CVD and COVID-19 (and other viral lung infections) is also clear, as both blood clotting and infection of cardiac tissue are common complications of COVID-19, both strongly contributing to its mortality. The SARS-CoV-2 infection indirectly results in endothelial cell damage of the capillaries that contribute to the micro-thrombosis that causes multiple organ damage that is the hallmark of severe COVID-19 [8]. Risk factors for CVD, such as obesity or diabetes, are also risk factors for increasing the severity and mortality of COVID-19. As will be discussed here, the gut microbiome regulates responses involving the immune system, cardiovascular disease, and lung health, for which the mechanisms are now better understood. This opens the possibility to target the health of the gut microbiome with probiotics, as it is becoming clear which functions are mainly responsible for their health benefits.

It is well established that there is a relationship between the gut microbiome and CVD. The most detailed insights on the human gut microbiome stem from metagenomic investigations. By deep-sequencing or shotgun metagenomics the sequence of all microbial DNA in a given sample is determined. Metagenomic (shotgun) sequencing has been used to define a normal (healthy) gut microbiome [9]. Such work has illustrated that there is a vast variation among individuals, even though the method suffers from a lack of sequencing depth of the bacterial community, so that low abundant species are likely to be missed. The human microbiome is more often studied by sequencing a 16S rRNA gene fragment amplified by PCR using ‘universal’ primers. The sequences from these short 16S fragments reveal far less organism information than shotgun sequencing, so the precise species often cannot be determined.

To complicate the interplay between heart and gut, cardiac dysfunction can damage gut functions and cause a leaky gut, resulting in endotoxemia that then negatively affects the heart again. Gut ischemia can develop as a result of elevated gut venous pressure and decreased blood flow [28]. The resulting changes in gut physiology (e.g., sodium secretion and electrolyte absorption) can then affect the function and composition of the gut microbiome, and with such feedback loops in place, it can be difficult to unravel cause and effect, but an altered gut microbiome frequently accompanies chronic heart failure.

During embryonic development, both the gut and the lungs are formed from the same primitive foregut. After birth, both organs function as a mucosal barrier between deeper tissue and the external environment, and they must both keep local microbial populations in check; at the same time, they must allow the passage of essential nutrients (the gut) and gases (the lungs) [29]. The developing fetus is already potentially exposed to a microbiome, although this has been debated [30]. Regardless, immediately after birth, both the lungs and the intestines are colonized with an early microbiome, which, in terms of dominant bacterial phyla, in both organs resemble each other at that stage [29,31].

The interconnections between the gut and the lungs have been investigated in detail in mice whose gut microbiota is altered by antibiotics. This treatment results in increased susceptibility for respiratory infections such as the influenza virus. Further, abiotic mice artificially lacking a gut microbiota have macrophages in their alveoli with changed transcriptomes that are less able to phagocytose bacteria, indicating the gut microflora is essential for correct macrophage function in the lungs. The interplay between the lungs and the gut is particularly important at both ends of the age spectrum: a diverse gut microbiome at an early age, for instance as a result of growing up on a farm, is protective of allergic asthma [36], while the common condition of dysbiosis in aging populations (associated with limited diet diversity) has been found to correlate to increased sensitivity to lung infections [37].

A number of acute viral and bacterial lung infections can result in myocarditis, and viral airway infections are among the more common causes of this condition. Some viruses can infect the heart (as some herpesvirus or enterovirus species do), while others (e.g., influenzavirus) induce myocarditis as a result of an overreactive immune response [38]. In their review, Favere et al. discuss in detail the role of TLRs in the onset of viral myocarditis. Most of the virus species that result in myocarditis are quite common, but animal experiments suggest genetic predisposition may provide a trigger to this potentially serious complication.

Although much attention has been given to ACE2 expression in the respiratory tract, it is expressed at log-order higher levels in the intestinal system and gallbladder [45]. It has been demonstrated that, at least in mice, a deficiency of ACE2 causes inflammation, resulting in harmful alterations in the gut microbiome [46], which may be why gastrointestinal symptoms often accompany even mild cases of COVID-19. In the gut, ACE2 exopeptidase activity controls the local production of pro-inflammatory peptides by the gut epithelia and neuroendocrine cells; in addition, it enables the release of antimicrobial peptides by immune cells that combine to affect the daily healthy composition of the microbiome [47]. ACE2 also regulates immune responses via altering the regulation of gut tryptophan uptake by amino acid transporters. In summary, ACE2 is a key regulator of amino acid homeostasis, innate immunity, and gut (and probably lung) microbial ecology, in addition to being a key factor of RAS.

The previous section on CVD demonstrates that the study of a diseased state can lead to insights on health, too. This applies to the chronic diseased states of both the gut and the lung. Chronic inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD), such as Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) in the lungs, are associated with persistent local dysbiosis and have similar underlying mechanisms and risk factors. Both chronic disorders are associated with smoking and with certain genetic predispositions.

Dysbiosis in the gut has also been associated with obesity and diabetes, and obese individuals have an elevated pro-inflammatory state and a higher incidence of asthma, while weight loss (for instance by bariatric surgery) can reduce asthma [50,51]. The lung epithelium controls the local immune activities of IgA antibodies, defensins, and lysozymes, and regulates their production via cytokines that also stimulate a Th2-type inflammation, which in turn is implicated in the development of asthma [49]. The gut microbiome influences the Th2-immune response, and its composition may thus affect the onset of asthma, although the condition is thought to mainly originate from inhalation.

So far, correlations between various health or disease states and gut microbiome observations have been mentioned and mechanisms of interorgan crosstalk have briefly been outlined. The larger question that remains to be answered is, can the gut microbiome be manipulated in such a way that the health status of an individual can be improved? This is what probiotics are considered to do.

Examples of randomized clinical trials performed with the usual suspects for probiotics are more abundant, and a large number of meta-analyses have been published that assessed their effects on conditions of relevance here. These are summarized in Table 1. Since meta-analyses combine the results of past studies in an accumulative manner, only those published since 2016 were included in the table. Far more meta-analyses did find an effect of probiotics, for a variety of conditions, compared to those that did not find significant overall effects. Any subgroup analyses that may have been reported are not considered here. There are noted limitations for this sort of research: the effects scored in meta-analyses are often minor, study design and quality of the investigated trials vary considerably, and trials are often highly heterogeneous, with multiple probiotic species, strains and doses being tested. Nevertheless, we conclude that an overwhelming number of clinical trials have now been published that report functionality of probiotics for the conditions of interest here.

Abbreviations: BMI: body mass index; T2D: Type 2 diabetes; NAFLD: non-alcoholic fatty-liver disease; LDL: low-density lipoprotein; RTI: respiratory tract infections; UC ulcerative colitis; IBD: inflammatory bowel disease; IBS: irritable bowel syndrome; BP: blood pressure. (1) Any reported effects of subgroup analyses are not included in the table.

It would be naive to think that probiotics can completely prevent SARS-CoV-2 infection or COVID-19 symptoms, but since a healthy gut microbiome has obvious health benefits to multiple organs, probiotics have been proposed as one of the multiple strategies to ameliorate SARS-CoV-2 infections [6,114,115,116,117,118].

Lastly, patients who only experienced relatively mild or no symptoms during the acute phase of a SARS-CoV-2 infection, can later develop a variety of symptoms for a prolonged period of time that are collectively described as ‘long COVID-19’ [124]. The true burden of this postinfectious sequel is not yet clear. Symptoms can last for months, but anecdotal evidence suggests that the condition can improve after receiving a COVID-19 vaccination. It appears that, at least in some individuals, dysfunctional checks and balances in the complex immune system can be reset by the right input, likely via immune regulation. In this context, it would be interesting to see if probiotics can assist in a faster recovery of long-COVID-19 patients.

For decades, probiotics have been suggested as solutions for a wide variety of medical conditions, thereby providing a solution for problems that kept changing, ranging from severe chronic diseases to a general and nondefined ‘improvements in health’. This has understandably resulted in a degree of well-deserved skepticism, in particular when activities in organs other than the gut were supposedly targeted. However, with a better understanding of the interconnectedness of organs, via chemokines, cytokines, neuroendocrine molecules, migrating immune cells, specific metabolites, and even the nervous system, it is now becoming clear that bacteria in the gut can indeed have far-reaching and systemic consequences, and that a healthy gut microbiome can contribute to the prevention, mitigation, and healing of a number of conditions. Novel insights have also resulted in a better-defined ‘wish list’ for an ideal probiotic. It is unlikely that we have as yet identified the best candidates for the most beneficial bacteria for different conditions, as the usual candidates were selected for based on criteria other than their functional properties. Naturally, safety was the utmost important criterion, and industrially-used bacteria that were already considered safe upon oral intake were the logical first choice candidates. The research conducted with these probiotic bacteria has admittedly led to valuable insights. Now that we have started to better understand exactly how probiotic bacteria work, the next decade of research may result in more suitable and more potent candidates. At least it is no longer a mystery if and how gut bacteria can be beneficial for lung conditions or heart disease. If these novel proffered insights are used to guide the next phase of hypothesis-driven research, more breakthroughs can be expected.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

