The Role of the Gut Microbiome in Cow’s Milk Allergy: A Clinical Approach

Cow’s milk allergy (CMA) is the most prevalent food allergy (FA) in infancy and early childhood and can be present with various clinical phenotypes. The significant increase in FA rates recorded in recent decades has been associated with environmental and lifestyle changes that limit microbial exposure in early life and induce changes in gut microbiome composition. Gut microbiome is a diverse community of microbes that colonize the gastrointestinal tract (GIT) and perform beneficial functions for the host. This complex ecosystem interacts with the immune system and has a pivotal role in the development of oral tolerance to food antigens. Emerging evidence indicates that alterations of the gut microbiome (dysbiosis) in early life cause immune dysregulation and render the host susceptible to immune-mediated diseases later in life. Therefore, the colonization of the gut by “healthy” microbes that occurs in the first years of life determines the lifelong health of the host. Here, we present current data on the possible role of the gut microbiome in the development of CMA. Furthermore, we discuss how gut microbiome modification might be a potential strategy for CMA prevention and treatment.

Food allergy (FA) is characterized as an adverse immune reaction to specific food antigens. Its incidence has been rising during the last two decades, and it now represents a considerable health problem affecting nearly 5% of adults and 8% of children worldwide [1]. Cow’s milk allergy (CMA) is the most common FA in infancy and early childhood, with an estimated prevalence in children under three years ranging from 0.5% to 3% in developed countries [2,3,4,5]. However, higher estimates have also been reported, mainly in studies evaluating the self-reported prevalence [6]. It usually occurs within the first year of life with a mean age of onset of 3.9 months [7] and has a favorable prognosis as the majority of children develop tolerance by the age of four [8,9]. However, in a subset of patients, CMA does not resolve until adolescence and adulthood, and patients experience severe allergic reactions to even traces of milk [10].

This paper aims to review the current state of knowledge regarding the potential role of the gut microbiome in the acquisition of oral tolerance and the pathogenesis of CMA. Furthermore, it aims to examine how modifying the microbiome composition could be a potential strategy for the prevention and treatment of CMA.

From a clinical point of view, patients with CMA may present with a variety of symptoms linked to the immune mechanism underlying the allergic reaction. Based on the mechanism involved, CMA can be further classified into (a) IgE-mediated, which is caused by antibodies against milk proteins belonging to IgE, (b) non-IgE (or cell-mediated), where the cellular immune system, and especially T-cells, are responsible for the allergic reaction, and (c) mixed type when both IgE and immune cells are involved [18].

Lactose intolerance (LI) is a common gastrointestinal disorder that is caused by lactase deficiency and the inability to digest and absorb dietary lactose [34]. Lactose is the major carbohydrate in human and mammalian milk and is absorbed in the small intestine after first being hydrolyzed into D-glucose and D-galactose by the enzyme lactase [35]. Lactase expression is genetically programmed to decline gradually after weaning in about 70% of the world’s population [36]. As a result, lactase levels progressively decrease over time and its deficiency leads to lactose malabsorption and subsequent microbial fermentation of unabsorbed lactose in the colon [34]. Fermentation products, especially gasses, affect gastrointestinal function and may lead to the development of clinical symptoms, such as abdominal pain, flatulence, and diarrhea after consuming milk and dairy products. Despite similarities in clinical presentation with CMA, LI does not affect the immune system and is therefore not considered a FA. Moreover, it rarely manifests clinically in children younger than five years of age [37] and can be diagnosed by a variety of diagnostic methods, such as the hydrogen breath test [38].

The GIT is colonized by a wide variety of microorganisms, mainly bacteria, which perform substantial metabolic, immunological, and gut protective functions. The structure of these complex microbial communities varies along the GIT and shows greater diversity in the colon where the bacterial density reaches 1012 colony-forming units (CFU)/mL [39]. Despite the large diversity, only four major phyla, Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, Actinobacteria, and Proteobacteria, are represented in the human gut [40]. However, the exact taxonomic composition depends on many host-related factors, including genetic variation, age, diet, and geographic location, and thus varies significantly among healthy individuals [41].

In conclusion, studies have shown that the most “beneficial” gut microbiome in infancy is that of exclusively breastfed, vaginally delivered term infants which are characterized by the highest abundance of Bifidobacterium and the lowest amounts of Clostridium difficile and Escherichia coli [68].

Recent data indicate that the composition and metabolic activities of the gut microbiome are inextricably linked to the development of oral tolerance, which is defined as an active process of local and systemic immune unresponsiveness to food antigens [69]. Studies in animal models revealed that germ-free mice were more likely to be sensitized to CM proteins than those whose gut was colonized with microbes, suggesting a protective effect exerted by the gut microbiome [70,71]. Remarkably, the transfer of fecal samples from healthy infants to germ-free mice reduced the risk of CM sensitization and the occurrence of anaphylaxis when exposed to beta-lactalbumin [72]. These findings suggest that the commensal microbial community drives the host towards the development of oral tolerance. However, the exact mechanism by which this is achieved remains to be further elucidated.

These data demonstrate a causal role for the gut microbiome in protecting against allergic responses to food antigens. Consequently, alterations in its composition, collectively referred to as dysbiosis, lead to immune dysfunction and predispose the host to the development of FA.

The prevalence of allergic diseases has increased significantly in recent decades, placing a substantial burden on health care systems in Western societies [85]. This increase has been attributed to environmental and lifestyle changes such as relocation from rural to urban settings, diets high in fat and protein, and the widespread and increasing use of antibiotics [86] that limit exposure to microbes in early life and result in the loss of gut microbial biodiversity [87,88]. In particular, antibiotic administration during early life has been associated with the development of FA, asthma, and allergic rhinitis later in life [89,90,91].

In a large prospective cohort study of 319 infants, a selective reduction in the relative abundance of bacteria from the genera Lachnospira, Veillonela, Faecalibacterium, and Rothia was observed in samples obtained at 3 months of age from infants who developed wheezing and positive allergen SPTs at 12 months compared to those who did not. This selective reduction in bacterial taxa was also accompanied by reduced fecal acetate levels. However, these alterations were no longer detected in fecal samples obtained at 12 months of age, suggesting that the first 100 days of life represent a window of opportunity for immune regulation [102]. Therefore, understanding the gut colonization process and microbiome function in early life is likely to contribute to the further understanding of allergic diseases, particularly FA, as well as to the design of microbe-based therapies to prevent them.

Several studies have revealed that children with CMA present with an altered gut microbiome at the time of diagnosis. However, it is uncertain whether dysbiosis is the cause or consequence of disease, mainly because the precise molecular pathways through which altered gut microbiome can cause various diseases remain unknown [103].

On the other hand, it has been shown that butyrate produced by bacteria in the Firmicutes phylum can cause mucosal injury in newborn rabbits and thus possibly increase the permeability of the intestinal epithelium, resulting in higher concentrations of food antigens reaching the bloodstream [127]. In addition, an increased abundance of Clostridium coccoides, along with higher levels of butyrate, has been found in the gut of infants with CMA [110]. Another study also showed increased levels of Clostridium coccoides in children with non-IgE CMA who did not develop tolerance, leading to the conclusion that this bacterial species may be harmful and negatively affect the outcome of CMA [121]. It is likely that potential harmful effects are limited only to certain species and even strains of clostridia and their metabolites.

Studies evaluating the gut microbiome in infants with IgE-mediated CMA are rare and have yielded conflicting results. This is due to methodological issues and mainly to the use of different techniques for studying the microbiome. For example, culture-based techniques used in the past can only detect 30–50% of the bacteria that inhabit the gut, while the introduction of next-generation sequencing and genomic analysis allows us to identify more microbial species [41]. Furthermore, temporal variability in the human gut microbiome is a serious limitation in studies with a single measurement design [128].

Finally, another prospective case-control study compared the gut microbiome of infants with CMA (both IgE and non-IgE mediated) at the time of diagnosis and after six months of treatment with a hypoallergenic formula using 16S rRNA sequencing. The authors found that infants with CMA had lower gut microbiome diversity and increased E/B ratio at the time of diagnosis compared to healthy controls. Of note, after six months of follow-up, there was no significant difference in the E/B ratio between the two groups, although the allergic infants had higher concentrations of Lactobacillaceae and lower concentrations of Bifidobacteriaceae and Ruminococcaceae than the healthy infants [112].

Results are less clear in the case of non-IgE-mediated types of CMA, not only because of the use of different microbiome analysis techniques, but also because of the wide heterogeneity of non-IgE-mediated types and the difficulties in establishing a correct diagnosis [122,129,130,131]. Nevertheless, there is evidence that food-allergic infants display specific microbial signatures related to the underlying immune mechanism (IgE-mediated and non-IgE-mediated), which could be used as potential biomarkers for the diagnosis of FA [131].

Of note, some preliminary results that have not yet been corroborated showed that, at the phylum level, children with non-IgE-mediated FA show a higher relative abundance of Proteobacteria in the gut compared to healthy controls [132]. Of the four phyla that predominate in the human gut, the Proteobacteria phylum is the most unstable over time and is considered the first line of response to environmental factors [133]. These bacteria are innocuous when present in small amounts, but under certain conditions they can induce inflammatory responses [134]. Hence, chronic enrichment of Proteobacteria in the gut indicates an imbalanced unstable microbial community structure and has been associated with several diseases [135,136].

Some children with CMA can tolerate extensively heated milk as well as small amounts of milk and dairy products. However, complete avoidance of CM proteins is currently the only treatment for patients with severe CMA. In these cases, children must avoid a variety of foods, which is challenging and stressful for both children and their caregivers, as even traces of milk can induce severe allergic reactions. In addition, milk and dairy products are essential components of children’s diets and prolonged abstinence may have harmful effects on their growth and nutritional balance [137,138]. As a result, a hypoallergenic formula (EHCF or AAF) must be administered as a substitute for CM, with a consequent increase in the cost of disease management. Hence, there is an apparent need to move from CM avoidance to active treatments [139].

Despite the promising results of these treatments, none is yet fully effective and all present significant limitations and drawbacks. In the future, the modification of the gut microbiome through personalized nutrition will probably be the key to the prevention and treatment of CMA. To achieve this, however, we must first understand the microbial taxa involved in CMA and how these microbes interact with different foods (diet-microbiome interactions) [147].

CMA is a common allergic disease in infancy and early childhood that has a significant impact on the quality of life of children and their families. Growing evidence suggests a central role of the gut microbiome in the development of CMA through its close and decisive interaction with the immune system. Several studies have been conducted on the effect of various factors on the gut microbiome and how its modification through different methods in early life contributes to the prevention and treatment of CMA. However, there are currently no recommendations for clinicians, as we still have much to learn about the complex crosstalk between the gut microbiome and the immune system (which will shed light on the development of new strategies).

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

