Enabling rational gut microbiome manipulations by understanding gut ecology through experimentally-evidenced in silico models

The gut microbiome has emerged as a contributing factor in non-communicable disease, rendering it a target of health-promoting interventions. Yet current understanding of the host-microbiome dynamic is insufficient to predict the variation in intervention outcomes across individuals. We explore the mechanisms that underpin the gut bacterial ecosystem and highlight how a more complete understanding of this ecology will enable improved intervention outcomes. This ecology varies within the gut over space and time. Interventions disrupt these processes, with cascading consequences throughout the ecosystem. In vivo studies cannot isolate and probe these processes at the required spatiotemporal resolutions, and in vitro studies lack the representative complexity required. However, we highlight that, together, both approaches can inform in silico models that integrate cellular-level dynamics, can extrapolate to explain bacterial community outcomes, permit experimentation and observation over ecological processes at high spatiotemporal resolution, and can serve as predictive platforms on which to prototype interventions. Thus, it is a concerted integration of these techniques that will enable rational targeted manipulations of the gut ecosystem.

A growing body of evidence implicates the gut ‘microbiome’, the complex ecosystem comprising the human gut and the microorganisms inhabiting it, as a contributing factor in the etiology of non-communicable diseases,1–8 thus positioning it as a potential therapeutic target. For instance, diet readily modulates the gut microbiome and could thus be used to intervene in microbiome–host interactions. However, whilst broad modulators of microbiome composition and metabolism are known, inter-individual variations complicate the design and targeting of beneficial interventions.9,10 People are unique organisms harboring individualized microbiomes, and their diverging intervention outcomes stem from variation in gut ecosystem constituents and processes. However, comprehensive understanding of the gut ecosystem is presently lacking and difficult to obtain. In vivo study lacks the necessary spatiotemporal sampling and observation capacity, and in vitro models cannot recapitulate the host’s complexity. Yet, they offer complementary perspectives, informing both mechanistic understanding of the microbiome’s influence on host health and cell-specific models. We propose that, by encapsulating this information, in silico models that enable the experimentation, insight, and predictive capacity needed to rationally design and target interventions are now possible. Whilst we focus primarily on bacterial taxa, as the most abundant and most studied portion of the microbiome, we note that archaea,7 eukaryotes,8,11,12 and viruses6 (e.g. phages) that co-inhabit the gut are gaining attention and are being found to also influence host health status.

In vivo studies associate host health outcomes with strains and molecular products, outcomes that originate from individual microbe-level behaviors. These factors form targets for control through intervention. In vitro culturing studies can reveal how specific strains respond to, and in turn modify, their environments. Understanding how and why interventions alter community-level emergent properties is not possible without detailed characterization of individual strain response dynamics. In silico modeling techniques deliver the integrative perspective of how cell-level behaviors scale up to the community-level phenomena that drive health outcomes. Models encode cell-level behaviors and replicate environment conditions, and then reveal spatiotemporal community outcomes.

Non-communicable diseases are host organism-level properties manifesting, in part, from how microbiome and host interact to shape one another.13 In vivo study outcomes reflect an implicit integration of these factors. Of particular relevance is microbiome community composition. Host disease status has been associated with microbiome structural qualities including variation in strain relative abundances14–19 and/or microbial community diversity.1–5,19,20 Effects have occasionally been ascribed to individual strains: Christensenella minuta was found enriched in lean twins relative to their obese siblings, and inoculation of this strain into “obese” microbiomes transferred into mice reduced subsequent adiposity gains in recipient animals.21 However, isolating effects to specific microbial strains is difficult because strains overlap considerably in function. Yet it is pertinent to account for the effects of all strains, as an intervention may have no effect in a community if suppression of one strain elevates another of similar functional capacity.

Targeted intervention design requires that we account for the effects of luminal and mucosal-associated strains on host health, and the various interacting dietary and host processes that shape the microbiome. Community and gut environmental contexts dictate which molecular products are produced, and what their contributions to health status are. In vivo study caries the advantage of integrating all such relevant factors in revealing host outcomes. Yet isolating specific causative factors is admittedly challenging as health status is rarely attributable to singular molecules and strains.

In vivo research has revealed the complexity of the host–microbiome signal exchange that modulates health outcomes, which interventions should seek to manipulate. For instance, whilst the SCFA butyrate, as a primary colonocyte energy source, is protective against colorectal cancer,53,54 it also delays wound repair during overt inflammation or damage to the intestinal mucosa.55 Hydrogen sulfide, derived from bacterial metabolism,56 can accelerate the ulcer healing process observed in colitis,57 but also upregulate colorectal cancer cell division when compared to regular colonocytes.58 Single metabolites are not ubiquitously deleterious or beneficial. Again, the broader context matters, and targeted interventions must account for this.

In summary, in vivo studies reveal system tipping points whose breech negatively impacts the host. The profile of molecular interactions between host and microbiome underlie these phenomena but are spatiotemporally variable. Further, no single molecule is uniformly beneficial or deleterious: context is key. Controlling these interactions is non-trivial as microbiome molecular output stems from community-wide ecological interactions, and these are difficult to study in vivo.

Fermentative microbes have evolved a spectrum of survival strategies that rely on shorter/incomplete metabolic pathways81 that output metabolites such as SCFAs,81–83 that other microbes can further metabolize. A whole community engaging in such strategies yields complex inter-microbial dependencies. The profile of metabolites produced is difficult to forecast as it is sensitive to interactions among the microbial cells present, along with host diet and endogenous secretions. For instance, hydrogen sulfide can result from metabolism of endogenous and dietary cysteine and bile acids, thus its production depends on dietary protein84 and fat consumption,33 and the presence of sulfur-reducing organisms including Clostridium and Enterobacter.33,34

Any intervention that modulates a strain’s growth dynamics, in terms of prevalence and output, has the potential for cascading effects through the microbial community. Nutrient availability and competition dynamics shift, as will the profile of metabolites contributed back into the environment (Figure 1). These manifest as localized effects but can permeate more broadly through time and space. To rationally design interventions with predictable outcomes requires these ecological processes be characterized and their integrative consequences understood. This is extremely difficult to achieve in the real world, but possible in silico with support from in vitro studies that comprehensively map out strain-level growth dynamics.

The growth dynamics of individual strains, and their interactions with one another and specific host processes, can be characterized in detail outside of the living host. Environments reflecting locales in the gut can be imposed, controlling for nutritional context, water content, pH and selective inclusion of particular host factors. Strain growth rates, substrate utilization, and metabolic output can be quantified. In vitro technologies afford a comprehensive mapping of how given strains respond to changing environments. Thus, mucin and high pH were identified as fundamental requirements for A. muciniphila colonization, explaining its prevalence in the distal colon.93,94 Capturing strain growth requirements is essential for intervention design, as they determine whether or not a particular strain can grow given a particular nutrient context, with downstream implications for community composition and metabolic output.

These in vitro approaches represent ‘reductionist’ science: isolating and manipulating pathways and microbes to probe their dynamics. They offer insights that cannot be accurately generated through other means, but they also face limitations of scale. Complete characterization of strain dynamics necessitates wide, systematic exploration of environmental contexts and strain responses. It is impractical, even with advances in modern robotic fermentation systems, to conduct such broad experimentation for each of the thousands of strains occupying the gut. When compounded with the range of unique consortia that can be assembled and investigated, the experimental burden is staggering. For instance, to map the growth requirements around the eight B vitamins would entail 255 unique inclusion/exclusion combinations, which if applied to 400 strains (approximate richness of the human microbiome108) entails 102,000 cultures. A second key challenge is one of complexity; comprehensive characterization of strain dynamics is vital to understanding the principles of community organization and function, but there remains a sizable leap in scaling from these strain-level dynamics to predicting community outcomes. Reassembling and integrating these pathways to study how they deliver emergent behaviors and system-wide consequences is a ‘constructionist’ task. In silico techniques, fusing biological data with modeling, can accomplish this.

In silico modeling relies on computer algorithms that recapitulate microbial and host dynamics. Such models integrate data from different modes of study and at varying biological scales, spanning metabolites, cells, communities, and the entire gut ecosystem with the aim of reproducing outcomes observed in real-world systems. In so doing, they seek to explain these emergent outcomes as manifesting from individual molecule- and cell-level dynamics. Validated models can be tremendously insightful: being computer code, they present no limits for intervention or spatiotemporal observation scope. Putative targets for intervention can be rapidly and systematically explored for their effects. Models can be used in a predictive capacity, exploring possible interventions to achieve a desired outcome.

In silico approaches offer continuous observation, at high spatiotemporal resolution, of the nutritional environment, cellular interactions, internal cell state and competition dynamics, and facilitate simulation of multifactorial interventions. They cannot (yet) simulate ‘health outcomes’, as these are emergent from the holistic host at a breadth current models do not capture. But they can model the profile of health-impacting community composition and metabolic output and the ecological dynamics responsible for them. GSMs are close to predicting these profiles for previously unobserved contexts, which would prove transformative for targeted intervention discovery.123 This could be accomplished through systematic exploration of intervention space (e.g. the space of possible dietary interventions). For example, a computer model of an individual’s gut microbiome (profiling of in vivo communities) could be constructed and used to predict the outcomes for an intervention based on the fiber inulin, accounting for: which strains can catabolize it (based on in vitro experimentation) and are they competitive to do so given the community; which metabolites will be generated from inulin based on this profile; how these metabolites will impact other strains and how this will ultimately impact the community’s composition and metabolic output. Such study is easily repeated with variation to investigate how outcomes relate, potentially non-linearly, with fiber dosage. To conclude, evidence-based in silico methods can offer unparalleled experimental resolution and traceability at the spatial-temporal and biological levels.

ABM encompasses considerable flexibility in how the target biology is represented within the model, and this translates to models that require substantial custom computer code to implement. Which cells, pathways, molecules, and environmental features a given model captures is typically entirely bespoke to the given research context. Such flexibility complicates the generation of ‘one size fits all’ generalized simulation frameworks – lacking a standardization of what should be simulated and how, such frameworks would need to be vastly complicated in catering for all possibilities, and thus they instead typically represent very abstract and general tools that can require considerable custom code to adopt into a specific simulation.126 Our lab’s ARTIMMUS127 and MotiliSim128 agent-based models are built atop the MASON agent-based simulation framework,129 and yet encompass several thousand lines of custom Java code each. The GutSim simulation is entirely custom code, written in Python.40 Whilst existing ABM models can certainly be adapted to different research questions, engaging with the ABM paradigm can necessitate a considerable aptitude for writing computer code.

GSM technology can be relatively straightforward to engage with. GSMs are built upon individual strain genomes, independently of one another, forming modules that can then be simulated individually or combined into communities in a ‘plug and play’ fashion. The COBRA132 and COBRApy133 toolboxes cater for individual GSM simulations, and frameworks such as MICOM115 and µbialSim138 support GSM simulations of communities. Coding proficiency in Python or MATLAB is required. Simulations of individual GSMs or simple consortia can be conducted on a personal computer, but HPC access is advisable for large communities or very broad experimental designs, such as extensive systematic exploration of nutritional variations or community memberships.

The gut microbiome impacts host health and has emerged as a therapeutic target. The therapeutic value of currently available interventions, e.g. prebiotics, probiotics, or diet, is contingent on how they integrate within a host’s existing gut ecosystem.9 Yet this differs between hosts, and as such outcomes are divergent. Better design and targeting of interventions requires improved understanding of the ecological processes underlying microbiome composition and function. In vivo approaches have revealed the breadth and nature of interactions between host and microbiome; these are multiple and have non-linear, context-dependent effects. These interactions are a culmination of intertwined processes that shape both host and microbiome. However, in vivo approaches struggle to isolate and probe individual ecological processes at fine spatiotemporal resolution. Through in vivo approaches we understand which microbial outputs impact host health, but not why or how such outputs emerge as key factors across differing contexts and individuals. In vitro approaches permit isolation and study of particular microbes and pathways in broad environmental contexts. They reveal the cellular behaviors upon which an ecology is built. Yet the number of microbes, unique consortia and unique environmental contexts that exist represent a combinatorial explosion that is insurmountable to study purely in vitro. Further, in vitro technologies cannot capture the breadth of complexity within the host, and thus cannot integrate all relevant pathways, or reveal critical ecological parameters such as cellular nutritional state and competition dynamics, without disturbing or destroying the system. We have argued here that in silico approaches can span this divide. Genome-scale models can broadly supplement in vitro culturing efforts, though tuning and corroboration through in vitro means are necessary. In silico models enable observation and experimentation that reveal how cell-level behaviors underpin ecological processes to generate community-level outputs of relevance to the host (Figure 2). In silico techniques are undergoing rapid advancement and their full potential is as yet untapped. Efforts to functionally annotate genomes are accelerating, giving rise to increasing numbers of bacteria GSMs.120 Yet, their adoption is sparse relative to in vitro and in vivo experimental research.

Scientific investigations that integrate in vitro, in vivo and in silico perspectives are key to enable the knowledge that would move the field of personalized interventions forward. However, such efforts are exceedingly rare as research groups seldom possess deep capacity in all three. This is necessarily a broadly inter-disciplinary venture encompassing clinical and animal studies, anaerobic microbial culturing and bioengineering, omics, mathematics, and computer science. Dialog between these disciplines is not always easily established but should be encouraged, as should collaboration between research groups that specialize in these techniques. Education is already shifting to i) give biologists and health-care practitioners exposure to data and modeling, and ii) give a greater focus on clinical and biological application in engineering programs. The forthcoming convergence between disciplines together with our proposed integration of in vivo, in vitro, and in silico technologies will reveal the mechanistic underpinnings required for the design of rational interventions targeting the diet-gut microbiome-host system.

SCFAs: Short-chain fatty acids

HGT: Horizontal gene transfer

MNR conceived of the study. JPMO reviewed the literature. JPMO and MNR wrote the manuscript with input from all authors.

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).

