Seeking the Psilocybiome: Psychedelics meet the microbiota-gut-brain axis

Moving towards a systems psychiatry paradigm embraces the inherent complex interactions across all levels from micro to macro and necessitates an integrated approach to treatment. Cortical 5-HT2A receptors are key primary targets for the effects of serotonergic psychedelics. However, the therapeutic mechanisms underlying psychedelic therapy are complex and traverse molecular, cellular, and network levels, under the influence of biofeedback signals from the periphery and the environment. At the interface between the individual and the environment, the gut microbiome, via the gut-brain axis, plays an important role in the unconscious parallel processing systems regulating host neurophysiology. While psychedelic and microbial signalling systems operate over different timescales, the microbiota-gut-brain (MGB) axis, as a convergence hub between multiple biofeedback systems may play a role in the preparatory phase, the acute administration phase, and the integration phase of psychedelic therapy. In keeping with an interconnected systems-based approach, this review will discuss the gut microbiome and mycobiome and pathways of the MGB axis, and then explore the potential interaction between psychedelic therapy and the MGB axis and how this might influence mechanism of action and treatment response. Finally, we will discuss the possible implications for a precision medicine-based psychedelic therapy paradigm.



A systems-based approach that encompasses the MGB axis and its relationship to the continuum of acute and sustained responses to psychedelic therapy provides an intriguing and potentially clinically useful avenue of further exploration. It has previously been proposed that sustained therapeutic effects of “regular and low doses of psychedelics” particularly those related to sleep, diet and lifestyle factors, could be mediated via the MGB axis (Kuypers, 2019), and that modulation of the gut microbiome by psychedelics (Inserra 2022) may influence immune functions (Thompson & Szabo, 2020). This review of the psilocybiome as a broad concept of reciprocal host-microbiota-psychedelic interactions (Fig. 1) will first discuss the microbiome and pathways of the MGB axis, before moving on to an exploration of the interaction between psychedelic therapy and the MGB axis and how this might influence acute and sustained changes in stress-, social- and reward-processing systems. Finally, we will discuss the implications of the MGB axis for a precision medicine-based psychedelic therapy paradigm.

Microbes have inhabited the planet for approximately 3.5–3.7 billion of the earth's 4.5 billion years (Grosberg & Strathmann, 2007; Nutman et al., 2016). The first animals emerged 800 million years ago, with homo sapiens relative latecomers at 350,000 years old (Hublin et al., 2017). Every stage of the co-evolutionary timeline of increasing complexity occurred in a microbial world, which has led to an interconnected physiology between microbes and hosts. There are as many microbial cells in the human body as human cells, numbering 40 trillion (Sender & Fuchs, 2016). This complex composite of microbial and human cells and genes, known as the “holobiont”, expands the organismic boundaries and confines of the self to encompass bidirectional information exchange processes with our microbial ecosystem (Cryan et al., 2019; Theis et al., 2016).

This co-evolutionary lineage of increasing layers of interconnected material complexity and communication pathways between micro and macro levels – each influencing each other, to eventually culminate in processing systems that are able to reflect on the entire (known) evolutionary journey and alter its direction – is all the more important in this era of ecosystem disequilibrium (Almond & Petersen, 2020; Ceballos et al., 2017; Cobb, 2020; Johnson et al., 2020; Lent, 2017; Sheldrake, 2020; Watts et al., 2021). Analogous to the proposed synergistic relationship between contact with the natural environment and psychedelics (Gandy et al., 2020; Kettner et al., 2019; Lyons & Carhart-Harris, 2018), exploration of the molecular constellations and associated information pathways of interconnectivity between the microbial ecosystem and psychedelic therapy is at the forefront of systems neuroscience.

At 1 billion years old, fungi are evolutionary younger microorganisms than bacteria (Bonneville et al., 2020; Loron et al., 2019). They form enmeshed relationships with bacteria (Deveau et al., 2018) and plants (Kiers et al., 2011) and are especially important for decomposition and regeneration, including the degradation of various environmental pollutants (Akhtar & Mannan, 2020; Dusengemungu et al., 2021; Sheldrake, 2020). There are 120,000 known species of fungi, but escalating estimates based on high-throughput sequencing techniques suggest as many as 12 million, revised from previous estimates of 5.1 million (Hawksworth, 2001; Wu et al., 2019). Mushrooms containing psilocybin, numbering approximately 200, mostly from the genus Psilocybe, are estimated to be 10–20 million years old and may have evolved separately more than once (Kosentka et al., 2013). It is not known why some mushrooms produce psilocybin. An intriguing, though tenuous, evolutionary theory based on a comparative genomic analysis of hallucinogenic fungi with non-hallucinogenic relatives posited that psilocybin may have provided a fitness advantage in certain environments by altering the behaviour of predatory insects, to decrease the chances of the fungi getting eaten (Awan et al., 2018; Reynolds et al., 2018).

Psychoactive fungi can also alter human behaviour. Accidental consumption of the alkaloid ergotamine – a precursor to lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), which is produced by the fungus Claviceps purpurea that grows on grains/rye – can alter human behaviour and perception (Correia et al., 2003; Eadie, 2003). More subtle unintentional ingestion of toxic fungal secondary metabolites or mycotoxins in food contaminants occurs today (Eskola et al., 2020; Lindell et al., 2022). While the contribution of psychedelic mushrooms to the evolutionary shaping of human faculties is speculative (Rodríguez Arce & Winkelman, 2021), intentional consumption in ritual/ceremonial settings by humans is thought to have occurred for several millennia (Miller et al., 2019; Robinson et al., 2020; Rodríguez Arce & Winkelman, 2021).

Most of the human body's microbes reside in the gastrointestinal tract (GIT). The vast majority are bacteria (Zhernakova et al., 2016). Viruses and bacteriophages, protozoa, archaea, and indeed fungi are also present but in much smaller proportions (Lankelma et al., 2015). Fungal populations or the mycobiome within the microbiota comprise 0.001–0.1% of the total gut microbiome and are dominated by yeasts (Hallen-Adams & Suhr, 2017; Nash et al., 2017). The mycobiome is less stable than the microbiome, with less, if any colonization continuity (Auchtung et al., 2018; Hallen-Adams & Suhr, 2017; Lavrinienko et al., 2021; Suhr & Hallen-Adams, 2015). Similar to the gut microbiome, the gut mycobiome is shaped by geography, urbanization, ethnicity, and diet (Sun et al., 2021). Both the microbiome and the less studied mycobiome interact in complex ways to collectively shape host homeostasis, especially that of immune (Leonardi et al., 2018; van Tilburg Bernardes et al., 2020) and metabolic systems (Mims et al., 2021; Sanna et al., 2019).

Defining the optimal gut microbiome is challenging given the extensive individual differences between the microbiomes of healthy people (Falony et al., 2016; Gacesa et al., 2022; The Human Microbiome Project et al., 2012). However, it is generally thought that diverse gut microbiome composition and stability are beneficial for human health (Bäckhed et al., 2012; Lozupone et al., 2012). There are some indicators that certain gut microbial species have been lost and alpha-diversity (distribution of species abundances within a sample) reduced as humans entered the industrialized age, but the precise implications for human health are not fully known (De Filippo et al., 2010; Moeller et al., 2014; Olm et al., 2022; Smits et al., 2017).

Over the last two decades, notwithstanding the aforementioned challenges in translation, there have been advances in the mechanistic understanding of how the gut microbiota communicate with the brain (Forssten et al., 2022; Nagpal & Cryan, 2021). Germ-free (GF) rodents (born and raised without microbes), antibiotics, probiotics, gastrointestinal (GI) infection studies, and Fecal Microbiota Transplantation (FMT) rodent studies have progressed the understanding of the mechanisms by which the gut microbiota can influence brain development and function via the gut-brain axis. This MGB signalling system communicates with the brain via stimulation of immune pathways (Erny et al., 2015), vagus nerve activation (Fülling et al., 2019), production of circulating microbial metabolites and/or microbial induction of host molecules (short-chain fatty acids (SCFA's), (O'Riordan et al., 2022), amino acid derivatives (catecholamines, and other indole derivatives), and secondary bile acids, as well as stimulation of enteroendocrine cells and enteric nervous system signalling (Ye et al., 2021), tryptophan metabolism (O'Mahony et al., 2015) and the HPA axis (Sudo et al., 2004). Some of these pathways may serve as overlapping, indirect points of convergence in the trajectory of psychedelic therapy.

Psilocybin and psilocin are tryptamines or tryptophan indole-based monoamine alkaloids (indolalkylamines) (Lenz et al., 2021). Tryptamines are derived from the decarboxylation of tryptophan, which is an essential amino acid acquired from the diet, and the precursor for serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine) and melatonin (Fricke et al., 2017; Sherwood et al., 2020). After ingestion, psilocybin is rapidly dephosphorylated by alkaline phosphatases in the intestine and liver to the biologically active psilocin, which is then absorbed from the stomach and small intestine into circulation and can cross the blood brain barrier (BBB) (Dinis-Oliveira, 2017). Psilocin can be further metabolized by a demethylation and oxidative deamination catalysed by liver Monoamine oxidases (MAO) or aldehyde dehydrogenase (Dinis-Oliveira, 2017). Further metabolism of psilocin by glucuronidation of the hydroxyl group to psilocin O-glucuronide occurs by UDP glucuronosyltransferases (UGT)1A10 in the small intestine and likely UGT1A9 in the circulation (Dinis-Oliveira, 2017; Manevski et al., 2010). (For a detailed review of the metabolism of psilocybin and psilocin see Dinis-Oliveira 2017). Certain psychotropics are subject to glucuronidation, a process which may be influenced by the gut microbiota (Clarke, et al., 2019; Cussotto et al., 2021). But it is not yet known whether microbes play a role in the glucuronidation of psilocin.

Monoamine oxidases (MAO) A and B are the primary enzymes involved in tryptamine metabolism to produce indole-3-acetaldehyde (MetaCyc, 2022). A recent study indicated that some Psilocybe species (P. cubensis, P. Mexicana, P. semilanceata, P. cyanescens) produce harmane, harmine, and other l-tryptophan-derived β-carbolines (Blei et al., 2020), which act as reversible MAO-A inhibitors. There are indications that host-microbiota-metabolome interactions may have implications for inter-individual variability in the metabolism of tryptamines. For example, a study in mice showed that Morganella morganii, a gram-negative gut commensal, converted the essential amino acid L-Pheinto phenethylamine into the potent psychoactive trace amine phenethylamine (Chen et al., 2019). When combined with the non-selective and irreversible MAO inhibitor (MAO-I) phenelzine, M. morganii triggered phenethylamine toxicity (Chen et al., 2019). Taken together, it is conceivable that certain gut microbiota configurations and associated signalling pathways may play a subtle role in the inter-individual variability of psychedelic metabolism. However, the landscape for host-microbiota-psychedelic interactions in drug metabolism has yet to be fully explored.

The kynurenine pathway (KP) is an alternative metabolic route for tryptophan. A large majority of tryptophan is metabolized along the KP giving rise to molecules collectively referred to as “kynurenines” (Gheorghe et al., 2019). Enzymes of the KP are immune- and stress-responsive (O'Mahony et al., 2015) and are partially regulated by the gut microbiota (O'Mahony et al., 2015). As discussed above, the availability of tryptophan is also altered by gut microbes generating either indole and its derivatives, tryptamine or 5-HT, which can affect GI function (Gheorghe et al., 2019). Dysregulated tryptophan metabolism can occur under conditions of stress or inflammation in both the gut and the brain to alter gut-brain axis signalling. During stress or immune activation, tryptophan can be preferentially converted to kynurenine rather than 5-HT in the gut, with implications for GI motility and function. Tryptophan is metabolized along the KP by microglia and astrocytes in the brain leading to the formation of either kynurenic acid (KYNA) or quinolinic acid (QUIN) (Gheorghe et al., 2019). The KYNA and QUIN balance has implications for psychiatric disorders (Gheorghe et al., 2019; Savitz, 2020). For a detailed review on microbial regulation of tryptophan and KP metabolism, see (Gheorghe et al., 2019).

Previous studies suggest that KP metabolites may play a role in SSRI (Bhattacharyya et al., 2019; Erabi et al., 2020) and ketamine treatment response (Verdonk et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2018). In a single-arm, open-label study of 84 medicated patients with unipolar and bipolar depression, intravenous (IV) ketamine increased serum KYNA levels and the KYNA/kynurenine ratio at 24 h following the first infusion in responders compared to non-responders, and this elevation lasted up to 14 days, associated with improvements in depressive symptoms (Zhou et al., 2018). In mice, a single dose of intraperitoneal (IP) ketamine restored lipopolysaccharide (LPS) induced depressive-like alterations and decreased cytokine production, microglial activation in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) and QUIN production (Verdonk et al., 2019). In the human part of the same study, which included 15 medicated inpatients with TRD (and 15 age and sex matched healthy controls), plasma KYNA/QUIN predicted (IV) ketamine response, and a reduction in QUIN was associated with a reduction in depressive symptoms (Verdonk et al., 2019). These studies did not explore the gut microbiota, but preclinical studies indicate that ketamine can alter the gut microbiota (Table 1). It is not yet known whether the serotonergic psychedelics influence host-microbe control over tryptophan and KP metabolism, and whether this would have any clinically relevant impact on response rates in psychedelic therapy.

MDMA; 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine, DOI; 2,5-dimethoxy-4-iodophenyl-2-aminopropane, IP; intraperitoneally, SSRI; Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor, CUMS; chronic unpredictable mild stress, Ami; amitriptyline, Flu; Fluoxetine, PCP; phencyclidine.

The gut microbiota plays a key role in regulating immune system homeostasis by maintaining pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory signalling in the GIT (Ansaldo et al., 2021; Schirmer et al., 2016). The immune system is regulated by a plethora of ligands and signalling molecules produced by microorganisms in the gut, such as SCFA's, including butyrate, propionate, and acetate. Other examples include polyamines, linoleic acid metabolites, tryptophan metabolites, trimethylamine-N-oxide, vitamins, and secondary bile acids (Hertli & Zimmermann, 2022). Lack of balanced gut microbiota plays a role in various autoimmune diseases and given the role of T cells in classical neuroinflammatory diseases, there is a growing awareness of the likely relevance of the gut-brain axis in immune dysregulation that affects CNS function via microglial activation, pro-inflammatory cytokine expression, molecular mimicry, anti-neuronal antibodies, self-reactive T cells and disturbance of intestinal and BBB in psychiatric disorders (Ivanov et al., 2022; Medina-Rodriguez et al., 2020; Pape et al., 2019; Pearson-Leary et al., 2020).

Interestingly, the prebiotic (galacto-oligosaccharides) prevented an LPS-mediated increase in 5-HT2A receptor density in the frontal cortex in mice (Savignac et al., 2016), whereas the antibiotic ampicillin abolished an impairment in novel object recognition induced by sub-chronic doses of the non-competitive N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist phencyclidine in rats (Pyndt Jorgensen et al., 2015) (Table 1). In humans, an exploratory study of the short-acting psychedelic 5-MeO-DMT in healthy volunteers (n = 11) found a significant decrease in salivary IL-6, but no changes in CRP and IL-1β, and increases in salivary cortisol levels (Uthaug et al., 2020) (Table 2). Ayahuasca reduced CRP levels in both TRD patients, and a comparison group of healthy adults compared to placebo, though there were no significant changes in IL-6 levels (Galvão-Coelho et al., 2020; Palhano-Fontes et al., 2019). Further exploration of the immuno-modulatory effects of serotonergic psychedelics and how they may be influenced by the gut microbiota could advance mechanistic insights.

TRD, HC, CRP; reduced C-reactive protein, IL; interleukin, TSH; thyroid stimulating hormone, h; hours, CAR; cortisol awakening response, BDNF; brain-derived neurotrophic factor, ACTH; adrenocorticotropic hormone, 5-MeO-DMT; 5-methoxy-N,N-dimethyltryptamine, N,N-dimethyltryptamine, min; minutes, IV; intravenous, vs; versus.

It has long been established that chronic exposure to stress, which exceeds the individual's coping capacity (allostatic load) can lead to adverse mental health outcomes (McEwen, 2017). The MGB axis is one of the systems that plays a role in stress regulation. Stress alters the gut microbiota, and alteration of the microbiota mediates stress responsivity (Foster et al., 2017), particularly the HPA axis (Sudo et al., 2004), the main neuroendocrine regulator of stress responses. Early life stressors are especially potent sensitizers of the stress response system, including the MGB axis (Clarke et al., 2013).

Stress-induced alterations in amygdala 5-HT2A receptor-signalling may be one point of convergence between the serotonergic psychedelics and the MGB axis. Preclinical data suggests that the gut microbiota influences amygdala structure and function (Hoban et al., 2017; Luczynski et al., 2016; Pinto-Sanchez et al., 2017; Stilling et al., 2018). Psychedelics acutely alter amygdala reactivity, with sustained effects of at least one month in some people (Barrett et al., 2020). This may be associated with a shift in emotional reactivity from a negative to a positive bias (Grimm et al., 2018; Kometer et al., 2012; Kraehenmann et al., 2015). Given the aforementioned perturbations of the gut microbiota in stress-related psychiatric disorders (Borkent et al., 2022; McGuinness et al., 2022; Nguyen et al., 2018; Nikolova et al., 2021; Valles-Colomer et al., 2019), exploration of the interaction of the MGB axis and peripheral and central components of the stress response system could potentially increase overlapping resilience strategies to decreased rates of relapse in stress-related psychiatric disorders after psychedelic therapy.

Social processes involve a complex interplay of social reward circuits, molecular signalling pathways, and environmental cues. Social network interconnectivity includes socially distributed symbiotic microbes, required for the development and maintenance of social processes (Buffington et al., 2016; Desbonnet et al., 2014; Sherwin et al., 2019; Stilling et al., 2018). In a human study (n = 655), people with larger social networks had more diverse gut microbiota composition (Johnson, 2020). Conversely, anxiety and stress were associated with reduced gut microbiota profiles (Johnson, 2020). A number of pathways of the MGB axis can influence social behaviour. The HPA axis is intertwined with the expression of social behaviours. A recent study in male mice showed that reducing HPA axis-mediated production of corticosterone via the gut microbiota altered social behaviour (Wu et al., 2021). The same study suggested that Enterococcus faecalis restored social deficits and reduced corticosterone levels following social stress (Wu et al., 2021).

In addition to the HPA stress response, other overlapping signalling pathways, such as oxytocin, which are under the partial influence of the gut microbiota, influence social processes (Erdman, 2021; Sgritta et al., 2019). Serotonergic psychedelics can increase oxytocin (Schmid et al., 2015), but similar to acute activation of the HPA axis, the implications for psychedelic therapy have yet to be established. Although not a classical psychedelic, 3,4-ethylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA) can modulate oxytocin-mediated synaptic plasticity in the nucleus accumbens in mice, which is necessary for social reward learning (Nardou et al., 2019). The gut microbiota was not measured in this study, but another preclinical study showed that MDMA increased Proteus mirabilis in the caecum, while treatment with antibiotics reduced MDMA-induced hyperthermia, suggesting a role of the MGB axis in thermoregulation (Ridge et al., 2019). These studies prompt further investigation into the MGB axis and its interaction with neuroendocrine responses in contributing to the potential alterations in social processing over the trajectory of psychedelic therapy.

Preliminary clinical studies show that psychedelic therapy may have a therapeutic role in overcoming alcohol use disorder (Bogenschutz et al., 2022; Krebs & Johansen, 2012) and nicotine addiction (Garcia-Romeu et al., 2014; Johnson et al., 2014; Noorani et al., 2018). Several trials are underway to explore psychedelic therapy for other addiction disorders (e.g. cocaine, methamphetamine, opioids). There has been increasing interest in the role of the MGB axis in the various aspects of reward processing (García-Cabrerizo et al., 2021; Han et al., 2018). Microbiome depletion antibiotic rodent models indicate that the microbiome may play a role in sensitising rodents to cocaine reward (Kiraly et al., 2016), and variability in gut microbiota profiles may be associated with altered cocaine consumption in rats (Suess et al., 2021). Similarly, microbiome depletion rodent models suggest the gut microbiome alters brain circuitry in opioid (oxycodone) intoxication and withdrawal (Simpson et al., 2020).

While the central activity of psychedelic compounds are primary, these studies propose that the MGB axis might play an overlapping role, albeit over different time scales, with psychedelic therapy in gating reward valence and therefore in the modulation of complex reward-related behavioural patterns or habits (Dong et al., 2022; García-Cabrerizo et al., 2021; Meckel & Kiraly, 2019; Salavrakos et al., 2021). This synergistic combination of MGB axis and psychedelic therapy could help to restructure reward-processing pathways to overcome various addiction cycles, particularly in maintaining abstinence in the post-psychedelic therapy phase.

There is increasing recognition that diet, via multiple overlapping biological pathways may be a modifiable risk factor for mental health disorders. Notwithstanding subtle personalised gut microbiota signatures and associated metabolic function (Liu et al., 2020), there are broad dietary inputs that are optimal for system homeostasis, such as plant-based diets with a high content of grains/fibres, fermented foods and fish (Deehan et al., 2020; Dinan et al., 2019; Reynolds et al., 2019). Conversely, it is established that processed or fried foods, refined grains and sugary products are broadly detrimental to mental health (Khambadkone et al., 2020; Oddy et al., 2018).

Of course, each psychedelic therapy experience is complex, unique, and dependent on the individual's psycho-biologically encoded life narrative and priors. Yet, it raises interesting implications for conscious and unconscious information processing pathways between central and peripheral systems. The degree to which intent or conscious priors drive the self-reported improvements in diet and exercise in the aforementioned studies is not clear (Garcia-Romeu et al., 2020, 2019). But, as articulated by Teixeira and colleagues, this may open opportunities for behavioural therapy to further improve lifestyle factors (Teixeira et al., 2022). Moreover, psychedelic therapy induced expansion of the confines of the self to encompass an appreciation of the complex interconnectivity between micro and macro levels, inclusive of the microbiome, could potentially enhance the re-establishment and maintenance of diet-MGB and exercise-MBG axis patterns that are more homeostatically favourable to the individual.

When discussing side-effects, it is important to draw distinctions between clinical trials in which participants are thoroughly screened and supported and the potential side-effects from recreational use (Schlag et al., 2022). For example, most clinical studies exclude people with a family history of psychosis and major cardiac problems. Even with recreational use, reports of psychosis (Dos Santos et al., 2017), mania (Hendin & Penn, 2021), disturbed/unpredictable behaviour (Giancola et al., 2021; Honyiglo et al., 2019), serotonin syndrome (Schifano et al., 2021) and Hallucinogen Persisting Perception Disorder (HPPD) (Litjens et al., 2014) are seemingly rare. Data from the 2017 Global Drug Survey of 9233 past year magic mushroom users, 0.2% of respondents reported having sought emergency medical treatment, mainly for anxiety/panic and paranoia/suspiciousness (Kopra et al., 2022). This was associated with inadequate set and setting and consumption with other substances (Kopra et al., 2022).

The emergence of clinical trial data is beginning to provide a clearer scientific picture of the side-effects of psilocybin therapy, though large studies with extended periods of follow-up are still lacking. Although limited by a relatively small sample of 89 healthy volunteers, there were no serious adverse effects and no treatment-emergent adverse events (TEAEs) that led to study withdrawal in a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study of a single oral dose of psilocybin 10 mg or 25 mg or placebo (Rucker et al., 2022). Preliminary data from the largest double-blind placebo-controlled dosing finding psilocybin therapy trial (n = 233) reported the most common side effects in the 25 mg group on dosing day were headache (24.1%), nausea (21.5%), dizziness (6.3%), and fatigue (6.3%), with 3.8% experiencing anxiety (Goodwin, et al., 2020). In the subgroup of TRD who continued SSRI's (n = 19), psilocybin was well-tolerated, with 11 (58%) participants reporting TEAEs, of which a majority (81%) were of mild severity (COMPASS, 2021). Given the role of serotonin in the stimulation of gut motility, it raises interesting questions of whether the diet-MGB axis may have subtle implications for the modulation of transient GI side-effects or autonomic nervous system effects in psychedelic therapy (Holze et al., 2021; Mörkl et al., 2022; Olbrich et al., 2021).

The operation of clinical psychiatry requires a reductionistic approach to demarcate subjective experiences and observable behaviour according to severity of impairment and distress, and the application of the best available evidence-based treatment strategies. However, this “discipline of the unexplained” (Kelly, 2021) will only fully be explicated by understanding the complex constellation of fluctuating transitions of information processing across all levels from micro to macro (Fried, 2022; Fried & Robinaugh, 2020; Topol, 2014). In keeping with this interconnected systems-based approach, the microbiome has been proposed as an additional transdiagnostic unit of analysis in the Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) framework (Kelly et al., 2018). This evolving neuroscientific framework aims to integrate developmental processes and environmental inputs over the trajectory of the life course to determine the mechanisms underlying normal-range functioning, and then how disruptions correspond to dimensional psychopathology (Insel et al., 2010). It is hoped that the identification of targetable biosignatures that either cut across traditional disorder categories or that are unique to specific clinical phenomenona will lead to personalised treatment strategies and improve outcomes for people with mental health disorders (Krystal et al., 2020; Medeiros et al., 2020).

Clinical psychedelic research is still at a relatively early stage, and it is essential to continuously improve the methodological rigour of clinical trials, with particular attention to challenges related to treatment masking/blinding, self-selection bias, and patient expectations (Aday et al., 2022; Hayes et al., 2022). Preliminary results from the largest and most methodologically rigorous trial to date in TRD, which compared single doses of 25 mg, 10 mg and 1 mg showed a 37% response rate (MADRS) at 3 weeks in the 25 mg group compared to 18% in the 10 mg group and 17% in the 1 mg group (Goodwin, et al., 2020). Interestingly, in a separate open label pilot study of TRD participants who received psilocybin (25 mg) along with their SSRI medications (of at least 6 weeks) showed a similar response rate of 42% at 3 weeks (COMPASS, 2021). It remains to be seen whether the incorporation of the diet-MGB and exercise-MGB axis into psychedelic therapy will improve these response rates.

The complex therapeutic mechanisms underlying psychedelic therapy traverse molecular, cellular, and network levels, under the influence of biofeedback signals from peripheral networks and the environment. Deciphering the clinical relevance of acute and transient changes in peripheral markers in healthy people and in those with dysregulated profiles associated with mental health disorders and their relationship with central markers in psychedelic therapy could lead to clinical benefits. As we have outlined, the gut microbial matrix influences overlapping neuroimmune, neuro-endocrine and transmitter signalling pathways of indirect applicability to the preparatory phase, the acute administration phase, and the integration phase of psychedelic therapy. This may occur even in the context of 1–3 dosing sessions.

From a mindful microbes perspective, it is interesting to note that it has taken 350 years from the first human observation of microbes (Lane, 2015) to the current burgeoning implementation of the microbial system into the complex algorithms attempting to predict human emotion, cognition, and behaviour. Elucidating the precise constellation of molecular configurations and associated information signalling pathways of the psilocybiome, as an example of systems interconnectivity, will require an integrated multiomics approach. The future integration of the gut microbiome in studies implementing a dimensional approach would push the frontiers of an interconnected precise-personalised-systems based psychedelic therapy paradigm and further open the “doors of perception”.

This is a narrative review exploring the potential role of the MGB axis in psychedelic therapy.

JK was the sub-PI on the COMPASS trials (COMP 001, 003, 004) in Ireland. JFC & TGD have research funding from Dupont Nutrition Biosciences APS, Cremo SA, Mead Johnson Nutrition, Nutricia Danone. JFC, TGD & GC have spoken at meetings sponsored by food and pharmaceutical companies. VO'K was supported through HRB Grant Code: 201,651.12553 and the Meath Foundation, Tallaght University Hospital. VO'K was the Principal Investigator (PI) on the COMPASS trials (COMP001, 003, 004) in Ireland.

John R. Kelly: Writing – original draft. Gerard Clarke: Writing – review & editing. Andrew Harkin: Writing – review & editing. Sinead C. Corr: Writing – review & editing. Stephen Galvin: Writing – review & editing. Vishnu Pradeep: Writing – review & editing. John F. Cryan: Writing – review & editing. Veronica O'Keane: Writing – review & editing. Timothy G. Dinan: Writing – review & editing.

