Habitat and seasonality shape the structure of tench (Tinca tinca L.) gut microbiome

Tench (Tinca tinca L.) is one of the most valued species of the Cyprinidae. This species is commercially important and has been intensively domesticated in recent years. To avoid excessive production losses, the health of farm fish must be maintained. Characterization of the tench gut microbiome can help achieve this goal, as the gastrointestinal microbiome plays an important role in host health. As part of this characterization, investigating the influence of the environment and season will help to understand the interrelationship between host and gut microbiota. Therefore, our aim was to use high-throughput 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing to profile the gut microbiome of tench. We studied two populations in summer and autumn: wild tench living in a lake and tench living in a pond in a semi-intensive fish farm. We found that, in the gut microbiome of all fish, the most abundant phylum was Proteobacteria, followed by Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes and Actinobacteria. Together, these phyla constituted up to 90% of the microbial communities. The abundance of Candidatus Xiphinematobacter differed significantly between lake and pond fish in summer, but not in autumn. In pond tench, Methylobacterium abundance was significantly lower in summer than in autumn. Mean Shannon, Chao1 indices and observed OTU’s indicated that microbial biodiversity was greater in the gut of lake fish than in that of pond fish. Beta-diversity analysis showed significant divergence between groups with both weighted and unweighted UniFrac distance matrices. Principal coordinates analysis revealed that more of the variance in microbial diversity was attributable to environment than to season. Although some of the diversity in lake tench gut microbiota could be attributable to feeding preferences of individual fish, our results suggest that environment is the main factor in determining gut microbiome diversity in tench.

Tench (Tinca tinca L.) is one of the most valued species of Cyprinidae fish and has great commercial importance1. Tench is generally considered to be one of the original European cyprinid species, which most likely evolved from primitive Tertiary Paleoleuciscus in large lake systems of Central Europe2. This species plays important roles in the environment, local economies and research. Tench provide many benefits to their ecosystems, effectively preventing blooms of algae, and recirculating minerals and nutrients that are deposited on the bottom of lakes and streams when they stir up the muddy bottoms in search of food3. This behavior helps reduce eutrophication. In Europe, tench are utilized as food, as ornamental fish and for leisure purposes such as angling, and have been used as an indicator of water quality in the context of fish assemblage2. In several European countries, tench have been reared in farm ponds, either in monoculture or alongside common carp (Cyprinus carpio L.). In recent years, tench have undergone intensive domestication, similar to that of common carp centuries ago. Due to their flavor, the production of tench for consumers is increasing, which may, in the near future, lead to rearing of this species in recirculating aquaculture systems4.

Recently, thanks to access to mass sequencing techniques, it has become possible to get detailed information about the structure of the gut microbiome and its changes. Therefore, in this work we characterized the gastrointestinal microbiome of tench (T. tinca L.) using a mass sequencing approach based on gene coding for 16S rRNA. We compared the microbiomes of the gastrointestinal tracts of tench from a semi-intensive farm (pond) and those from a natural body of water (lake). Moreover, we examined the influence of seasonality on the fish gut microbiome by analysis of fish caught in Autumn and Summer. Information concerning the influence of habitat and seasonality on the fish gut microbiome may help to understand how the microbiome is affected by these factors, which microorganisms are dominant and which are most beneficial for the host. Moreover, it can be used to enhance the economic benefits of aquaculture by supplementing the feed of farmed fish species with the necessary probiotics.

This study was carried out on fish caught from a natural body of water – Kortowskie Lake and Pond. Kortowskie Lake is a flow lake with an area of 89.7 ha located in the south-western part of Olsztyn (N 53 °45′43″ E 20 °26′44″). The maximum depth of Kortowskie lake is 17.2 m with an average depth 5.2 m. The location of the pond from which fish were obtained is N 53 °57′46″ E 21 °5′47″. This pond is a mid-forest body of water with an area of 4 ha, a maximum depth of 2 m and an average depth of 1.1 m. In the pond, fry of the following species were co-cultured: tench (T. tinca L.), common crucian (Carassius carassius L.), carp (Cyprinus carpio L.) and grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon idella). In the growing season (May–September), the fish were fed twice a week with a mixture of grain (wheat, barley and maize) that weighed approx. 10% of the stocking weight.

In autumn 2017 and summer 2018, 25 farm fish from the pond and 38 wild fish from the lake were randomly caught. Next, fish were weighed and measured. The final mean body weight and body length are shown in Table 1. After measurements, fish were stunned and decapitated quickly and correctly. The ventral body surface was wiped with a paper towel to remove excess mucus. All instruments, surfaces and the exterior of each fish were treated with 70% ethanol to sanitize the skin surface, and instruments were flame-sterilized prior to dissection. The ventral body surface was dried with a paper towel to remove any remaining ethanol. After opening the body cavity, the entire gastrointestinal tract and its contents were aseptically removed from each individual fish. The gut content was obtained by squeezing it into sterile tubes, after which it was stored at −20 °C until analysis.

An ethics statement is not required for this type of research. No specific permissions were required for the described studies. The habitats of the fish are not protected in any way and they do not contain endangered or protected species. Fish from Kortowskie Lake were caught with the permission of the local authorities (Faculty of Environmental Sciences, University of Warmia and Mazury in Olsztyn). Fish from the pond were captured with the permission of co-author KK, an owner of the pond.

For isolation, we weighed around 100 mg gut content of each fish. Before isolation, samples of gastrointestinal contents were homogenized using plastic spatulas. Metagenomic DNA extractions were then performed with a QIAmp DNA Stool Mini Kit (Qiagen, Germany) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Qubit 2·0 Fluorometer (Invitrogen, Poland) was used to obtain accurate DNA quantification. The integrity of each DNA sample was assessed using 1% agarose gel electrophoresis. The purified DNA was suspended in 60 𝜇l of elution buffer and stored at −20 °C.

To check the quality and to be sure that the isolated DNA belongs to bacteria, we performed a PCR reaction using two universal 16S rRNA primers: 8 F and 534R14. Based on the results from PCR amplification and DNA yield we choose 32 samples from four groups (8 per group: Lake_Autumn_2017; Pond_Autumn_2017; Lake_Summer_2018; Pond_Summer_2018) for mass sequencing of 16S rRNA amplicons, which was done by an outside company (Genomed S.A, Poland). The Illumina protocol “16S Metagenomic Sequencing Library Preparation” was applied to prepare the 16S rRNA gene amplicons for the Illumina MiSeq system. The variable V3 and V4 regions of the 16S rRNA gene were amplified from bacterial DNA obtained from fish gut content samples. The PCR reactions were performed using 16S rRNA forward (5′ CCTACGGGNGGCWGCAG 3′) and reverse primers (5′ GACTACHVGGTATCTAATCC 3′) that were given by Klindworth et al.15. PCR amplification was performed accordingly to Illumina protocol. Amplicons were indexed using Nextera®XTIndex Kit accordingly to producer’s instructions. DNA was sequenced on an Illumina MiSeq instrument using 2 × 250 paired-end protocol. For sequencing, a Miseq Reagent Kit v3 (Illumina, San Diego, USA) was used for library sequencing.

Raw paired-end sequences (3,620,064 reads from 32 samples) were processed using the QIIME 216 software package (https://qiime2.org; version: 2018.8). Using Qiime 2 software, paired-end sequences were merged. This step reduced the 3,620,064 reads to 3,383,070 reads. Reads that software could not merge were excluded from further analyses. Next the data sequences underwent quality control using Deblur plugin in Qiime 217. Deblur uses sequence error profiles to associate erroneous sequence reads with the true biological sequence from which they are derived, resulting in high quality sequence variant data. Quality control was performed in two steps. First, an initial filtering process quality score (q = 20) was applied18. This step removed 539,889 reads (15.96% data). Second, Deblur workflow was applied. In this step based on the median quality score, all reads were trimmed to 435 bp length. Also chimeric sequences were detected and excluded from analyses. 16S rRNA OTUs were picked from the Illumina reads using a closed-reference OTU picking protocol against the Greengenes database (https://docs.qiime2.org/2018.8/data-resources; data files: 13_8) clustered at 97% identity and trimmed to span only the 16S rRNA V4 region flanked by sequencing primers 515F-806R. Taxonomy assignments were associated with OTUs based on the taxonomy associated with the Greengenes reference sequence defining each OTU. Out of the 283,854 Illumina reads from the V4 region of the bacterial 16S rRNA genes that passed the QIIME quality filters, 53.3% (151,382 reads) matched a reference sequence at 97% nucleotide sequence identity. Next, OTU counts were binned into genus-level taxonomic groups for plots preparation.

Sequencing data were exported as individual fastq files and have been deposited in Sequence Read Archive (SRA) NCBI (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) as Bioproject under the accession code: PRJNA542255.

Normality and homogeneity of variance of all weight and length data of fish were checked by Shapiro-Wilk’s and Levene’s test, respectively, using STATISTICA v.13.1 (StatSoft, Inc). To get a reliable statistical analysis, we rejected 4 samples with less than 1483 reads (3 from Lake_Autumn_2017 and 1 Pond_Autumn_2017) from the analysis due to the low number of reads assigned to taxon levels. The number of reads across samples was normalized by sample size and the relative abundance (%) of each taxon was calculated. All taxa present in the gut microbiome were considered for statistical analysis. Statistical analysis of intestinal microbial profiles was performed using the Statistical Analysis of Metagenomics Profiles (STAMP) program (http://kiwi.cs.dal.ca/Software/STAMP), retaining unclassified reads19. P-values were calculated by ANOVA followed by Tukey-Kramer post-hoc test and corrected for multiple comparisons using the Benjamini-Hochberg method for a False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 5%20. Furthermore, t-tests was used to check statistical differences between fish with extreme values of body weight and length in each group.

Beta-diversity metrics are an estimate of between-sample diversity of microbial profile and they were calculated by QIIME 2 “diversity beta-group-significance” script. We used both weighted (presence/absence/abundance matrix) and unweighted (presence/absence matrix) UniFrac distances21,22. The distance matrices were graphically visualized by three-dimensional PCoA representations.

The sequence fastq files from the Illumina MiSeq were analyzed using QIIME 2 software. After filtering for quality, trimming length, and assigning taxonomies, the number of reads taxonomically classified according to the Greengenes database was 150,761 (Table 2). This value corresponded to an average number of 5384 ± 3298.33 per sample (range 1483–14,984). We identified 587 OTUs at 97% nucleotide sequence identity in tench gut content samples. After rarefaction, normalizing to the sample with the mean number of reads (4500), the observed species number per sample was between 7 and 89, corresponding to average number of counts per group between 31 and 49 (Table 2). Good’s coverage values for all groups were ≥ 0.99, indicating that sequencing coverage was attained and that the OTUs found in the samples were representative of the sampled population (Table 2). Although we observed that the mean values of observed species as well as Shannon diversity index (which reflects both the abundance and evenness of the species present) differed between environments (Table 2), these differences were not statistically significant. However, analyzing statistically the Chao1 index of the examined groups, we found that environment was a factor which affected species richness (P = 0.000036). Seasonality did not significantly affect the indices used in this study.

A Venn diagram (Fig. 1) was constructed to visualize OTUs common to each group of fish and present in the gut microbial community regardless of investigated factors and to find those unique to each specific group. The number of common OTUs presented in all groups was 26 and unique OTUs for each group varied from 14 to 55 (Fig. 1). List of the common and unique OTUs present in groups was reported in Supplementary Material (Table S1).

The gut microbiome of 32 fish representing four groups divided depending on environment and season of sampling were examined to characterize their structure and to reveal the differences between them. We successfully described the microbiome structure of each investigated group of fish at the phylum and genus level, and classified 13 phyla and 125 genera. The gut microbial communities of each group and of individual fish are presented at the phylum (Fig. 2) and genus (Fig. 3) levels.

The statistical analysis (permutation multivariate analysis PERMANOVA) reflected the PCoA plot results, indicating a significant divergence between groups for both weighted (P = 0.001; Pseudo-F = 4.71) and unweighted (P = 0.001; Pseudo-F = 3.37) UniFrac distance matrices (Table 5). Result of pairwise test on unweighted and weighted UniFrac data revealed, that all group were significantly diverged (Table 5).

Recent studies of the fish-gut microbiota of many species have focused on examining how environmental factors (e.g. diet, habitat) affect microbial communities and how changes in these factors influence the gut microbiome23,24. Since environmental factors are thought to play a role in shaping the intestinal microbiota of fish, we hypothesized that the gut microbiota of tench living in a semi-intensive pond differs from that of tench living in a lake, and that the gut microbiota will change across the seasons. Our results provide information on the gut microbiota of tench and highlight associations between environmental factors and gut microbiota. An understanding of these associations provides information that may be useful for addressing problems during the domestication of these valuable freshwater fish.

It could be hypothesized that factors like body weight and length may also affect the fish gut microbiota and influence its composition and diversity, similarly to the factors described in this paper. To exclude the influence of these factors, we took the extreme values of body weight and length in each group and analyze them. We did not found statistically significant differences between the gut microbiome composition of these fish, which indicates that the observed differences are due to the analyzed factors. However, because we analyzed fry from a pond and wild fish at various stages of development, ontogeny might also have influenced the fish gut microbiota, as has been previously reported48.

To sum up, our research provides the first detailed description of the microbiome structure of tench (T. tinca L.) from different habitats. Alpha-diversity analysis based on the metrics used in our study found no statistically significant differences between the gut microbiome compositions of fish from different seasons. Only the environment had a significant effect on species richness. Analysis of percent abundance showed some significant differences between groups with respect to Methylobacterium and Candidatus Xiphinematibacter. Beta-diversity analysis on unweighted and weighted UniFrac showed statistically significant differences between each pair of groups that were compared. Both seasonality and environment had a significant influence on the microbiome structure. However, the environment had a stronger effect than seasonality, as is clearly shown in Fig. 4, where samples are clustered more tightly when classified by environment and less tightly when classified by season. However, the results of this study should be treated with caution. It cannot be excluded that ontogeny had an effect on gut microbiota structure. Nevertheless, future interspecific studies with large representative samples of individuals from different geographical areas and habitat types are needed to precisely define the role of these factors in shaping the gut microbial composition. Studies on fish gut microbiota may help to improve the welfare of fish and aquaculture practices. Future research on the specific functional role of these microorganisms within the tench gut microbiome is needed.



Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

is available for this paper at 10.1038/s41598-020-61351-1.

