Space-type radiation induces multimodal responses in the mouse gut microbiome and metabolome



Space travel is associated with continuous low dose rate exposure to high linear energy transfer (LET) radiation. Pathophysiological manifestations after low dose radiation exposure are strongly influenced by non-cytocidal radiation effects, including changes in the microbiome and host gene expression. Although the importance of the gut microbiome in the maintenance of human health is well established, little is known about the role of radiation in altering the microbiome during deep-space travel.

Using a mouse model for exposure to high LET radiation, we observed substantial changes in the composition and functional potential of the gut microbiome. These were accompanied by changes in the abundance of multiple metabolites, which were related to the enzymatic activity of the predicted metagenome by means of metabolic network modeling. There was a complex dynamic in microbial and metabolic composition at different radiation doses, suggestive of transient, dose-dependent interactions between microbial ecology and signals from the host’s cellular damage repair processes. The observed radiation-induced changes in microbiota diversity and composition were analyzed at the functional level. A constitutive change in activity was found for several pathways dominated by microbiome-specific enzymatic reactions like carbohydrate digestion and absorption and lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis, while the activity in other radiation-responsive pathways like phosphatidylinositol signaling could be linked to dose-dependent changes in the abundance of specific taxa.

The implication of microbiome-mediated pathophysiology after low dose ionizing radiation may be an unappreciated biologic hazard of space travel and deserves experimental validation. This study provides a conceptual and analytical basis of further investigations to increase our understanding of the chronic effects of space radiation on human health, and points to potential new targets for intervention in adverse radiation effects.

The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s40168-017-0325-z) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

In the context of ongoing programs for human exploration mission to Mars and deep space, there is an emerging interest in how the microbiome may predispose an individual to radiation injury and how radiation-induced modifications in the microbiome affect the individual’s overall response to radiation [1, 2]. Together with microgravity and other environmental factors in space, ionizing radiation is a likely contributor to alterations in the microbiome. The gut microbiome has evolved as a symbiotic ecosystem that contributes specific and essential biochemical reactions to its host [3]. One can therefore anticipate that protracted low dose exposures to radiation can potentially induce long-term alterations in gut homeostasis; however, radiation-induced alterations along the host-microbiome axis associated with health risks have not been fully characterized. Although the importance of the microbiome in the maintenance of human health during space travel has been recognized [4, 5], little is known about the role of radiation in altering the microbiome during deep-space travel [6–8]. Previously, we have shown that exposure to heavy ions (56Fe) causes oxidative stress and dysregulated prostanoid biosynthesis in the mouse intestinal metabolome [9]. However, the correlation and the impact of the microbiota remained to be elucidated.

Herein, we used 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing, untargeted metabolomics, and metabolic network modeling (Fig.
1) to produce a multi-omics narrative of intestinal metabolism in a mouse model of (heavy ion) extra-terrestrial irradiation exposure (16O). We report a complex dynamics of the gut ecosystem post-radiation, with time-modulated abundances for both commensal and opportunistic microbial species. Concomitant with these changes, we observed a shift on the abundance of multiple metabolites, which could contribute to the onset and progression of radiation-induced disorders in a dose- and time-dependent manner. Metabolic network modeling suggested that the inferred metagenome is a good predictor of the observed metabolic state. Finally, we found a dose-dependent response to radiation in the microbiome, with increased sensitivity at lower doses (0.1 and 0.25 Gy). This threshold-like behavior is suggestive of a complex host-microbiome interaction in response to radiation that might result from signals involved in DNA damage and cell survival. This work provides a framework to identify host-microbiome responses that might elevate health risks after exposure to space-type ionizing radiation.

We started by asking if the composition of the fecal microbiota was modulated by exposure to charged particle radiation. We collected fecal samples from mice after 10 and 30 days of exposure to 16O (600 MeV/n) at 0.1, 0.25, and 1 Gy or sham-treatment (non-irradiated mice; Fig.
1). Bacterial composition was inferred from the analysis of 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing data. Diversity analysis revealed an intricate relationship between bacterial richness and radiation dose. Overall, mice subjected to radiation showed a slight decrease in bacterial diversity (Fig.
2a) as compared to non-irradiated controls. Moreover, alpha diversity was significantly different (p value < 0.006; nonparametric t test of phylogenetic diversity) between the 10- and 30-day samples, mostly due to a marked increase in diversity at 30 days for mice radiated at 0.1 Gy (Fig.
2a).

Collectively, our ecological analysis revealed an intricate dose-dependent response to ionizing radiation in the gut microbiome, with enhanced sensitivity for the lowest doses employed here. On the other hand, a distinct reorganization of the microbiota was observed at different doses as soon as 10 days post-radiation. This initial perturbation was followed by a restrained modulation at later times (30 days) without appreciable changes in community structure.

To characterize bacterial homeostasis post-radiation, we next determined the specific taxonomies that were significantly regulated in our samples. As expected, the normal gut microbiota commensals, Bacteroidetes (40 and 44%) and Firmicutes (56 and 51%) phyla dominated the fecal microbiota of non-irradiated mice at 10 and 30 days (Additional file 2: Table S2). Exposure to low dose high LET radiation was observed to induce significant fluctuations on the prevalence of highly abundant phyla, with a concomitant variation in rare taxa. In fact, group significance analysis showed a significant perturbation on the relative abundance of bacteria in the order of Bifidobacteriales and Coriobacteriales (Actinobacteria), and Verrucomicrobiales (Verrucomicrobia), along with Lactobacillales (Firmicutes). Figure
2c shows the relative abundance of bacterial families that tested significant in our factorial design (Bonferroni p value < 0.05, Kruskal-Wallis test, Additional file 2: Table S2). The preceding findings were recapitulated from the results of linear discriminant analysis (LDA) effect size (LEfSe) analysis (Additional file 3: Table S3 and Additional file 4: Figure S1). In particular, the relative abundance of Verrucomicrobia species increased to prominent levels for specific combinations of dose and time (e.g., up to ~ 18% for 0.1 Gy at 10 days, as compared to < 1% for non-irradiated controls). As a result, LEfSe classified the order of Verrucomicrobiales with maximal positive LDA effect size in some cases, suggesting a prominent role of Verrucomicrobia in the opportunistic colonization of the mouse gut after exposure to low doses of high LET radiation.

Overall, model-based classification and db-RDA at the phylotype level suggest a model in which different radiation doses initiate a distinct reorganization of the microbial composition. In fact, phylotypes with significant association with a given condition showed good performance as condition-specific classifiers in receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis (Fig.
3c). This new dose-dependent state seems to be followed by a time-modulated transition towards a new, yet unknown ecological equilibrium post-irradiation.

Our next goal was to determine if the observed variations in radiation-responsive taxa contribute to community-wide functional shifts. In order to account for the compositional nature of the data, we employed the FishTaco framework [15], a recently developed approach that deconvolves predicted functional shifts into taxon-level contributions along with their statistical significance (see Methods for details). Figure
4a shows the net magnitude W (Wilcoxon test statistic) for predicted shifts in irradiated samples as compared to non-irradiated, time-matched samples (full results are provided in Additional file 7: Table S6). These results predict that the functional potential of the gut microbiome is pushed far from its equilibrium even at low doses of high LET radiation and that this departure from the equilibrium seems to mimic the dose-dependent behavior observed at the species level.

The previous activity pattern (early upregulation followed by a decrease pathway activity at 30 days) was observed in numerous cases (Fig.
4a) and is likely to be a consequence of a transient dysbiotic microbiome after radiation exposure. However, the long-term clinical consequences of such functional shifts in the host are largely unknown and will probably be a function of the duration of this transient state and the stability of the altered microbiota.

Next, we hypothesized that irradiated samples could be characterized by the differential abundance of specific metabolic products and that some of the metabolic perturbations would correlate with the changes observed in the gut microbiome. Hence, we interrogated the fecal metabolome from the same mice using untargeted metabolic profiling. We detected more than 4500 features by LC-MS and compiled putative annotations based on accurate mass from various databases (see Methods and Additional file 8: Table S7). We first aimed to produce an unsupervised classification of metabolite abundance profiles, in order to look for potential parallelisms with the previously described variations in the microbiome. Multivariate regression followed by unsupervised clustering confirmed that highly variable features (FDR < 10e−4 for at least one covariate in the linear regression model) showed similar dose-dependent responses (Additional file 4: Figure S3a). In particular, a significant fraction of highly variable features (284 out of 331) were regulated for the lowest dose (0.1 Gy), and 152 features were statistically significant at this dose only.

Therefore, untargeted metabolomics lend credence to the widespread metabolic shift predicted from variations in microbial species, which in turn has an impact in a heterogeneous array of gut signaling pathways. Although a substantial number of spectral features could not be annotated in current metabolomics reference databases, these results reveal a radiation-induced breakdown in the symbiotic homeostatic control of several gut metabolic pathways and provide insights for future mechanistic and interventional studies.

The impact of the microbiome on the host’s metabolic activity has been extensively studied and reviewed, and is known to affect both local and systemic metabolism [17, 18]. Moreover, the individual or collective contribution of microbial taxa to specific metabolic pathways has been established in numerous settings [17, 19]. However, the functional redundancy of the gut microbiome and the complex interactions along the host-microbiome axis can result in a separation between microbial composition and overall metabolic turnover [20, 21]. We have shown above that high LET radiation induces (1) significant changes in the fecal microbial composition, concomitant with a shift in its predicted functional potential and (2) shifts in the combined host-microbiome metabolic output. We next aimed to integrate our data to establish whether radiation-induced alterations in microbial composition (community structure) can predict variations in specific metabolic shifts (community metabolism). To this end, we employed metabolic network modeling [22–24] to estimate the community-wide metabolic output of our inferred metagenomes and compared these predictions with the abundance of metabolites (validated using tandem MS), in our LC-MS dataset.

In summary, the enzymatic potential of the irradiated microbiome is a good predictor of the metabolic output. Combined, the observed functional and metabolic shifts parallel previous observations on the relationship between dysbiosis of the gut microbiota and disease, as discussed below.

In this study, we report the results from a murine model-based study aimed at delineating the modulation of the gut microbiome and metabolome after exposure to different levels of ionizing radiation. Somewhat unexpectedly, our model showed a higher sensitivity of the gut ecosystem to lower doses—0.1 and 0.25 Gy as compared to the highest dose—1 Gy. This threshold-like response was recapitulated at the (predicted) functional and metabolome levels. Although the basis for this behavior in our system is uncertain, non-linear responses in the range 0.1–1 Gy have been previously reported and explained in terms of a transition from low-dose hyper-radiosensitivity (HRS) to increased radioresistance (IRR) at doses of ~ 0.3 Gy in mammalian cells (initially observed by Marples et al. [28] and extensively reviewed thereafter [29]). The HRS regime seemed to be indicative of adaptive-like responses aimed to block low-dose damage propagation from DNA to cells and tissues. These could involve time-delayed signals that can span from hours (e.g., scavenging of toxins) to months (e.g., immune responses). At higher doses, DNA repair mechanisms were fully in effect and resulted in a seemingly reduction in radiosensitivity, or IRR. Here, we have presented data in the range 0–1 Gy and up to 30 days after radiation; our results suggest an emergent HRS/IRR behavior in the complex gut ecosystem, where protective signals in the range 0.1–0.25 Gy would be able to induce ecological, functional, and metabolic shifts in the gut that are not present under an IRR regime at 1 Gy. The behavior of the gut ecosystem under substantially higher doses than those employed here (such as 5 Gy and above) remains an open question.

The previous remarks raise a number of open-ended relevant questions, in particular about the transient or permanent nature of a radiation-induced dysbiotic state under space travel conditions. First, and due to experimental constraints, the 16O exposures in this study were performed at high dose rates, since chronic or fractionated exposures to oxygen ion irradiation were not feasible at the time of these studies. However, heavy ion radiation in space occurs continuously and at lower dose rates, and although a reduced diversity on the microbiota has been reported following space flight [67], little is known about how the microbiome and its metabolic output are modulated under chronic, low dose rate exposures. Additionally, space travel conditions constitute a highly unusual environment for the microbiome. The lack of exposure to microbial diversity due to a limited diet and extremely sterile habitat could amplify the effect of harmful, opportunistic pathogens [68], or impede the correction of an otherwise transient dysbiotic state. Studies are under way to evaluate the feasibility of dietary interventions to improve astronaut health [68]. However, the translational potential of our findings regarding exposure to high LET radiation should be studied in the future. Of particular relevance for space travel applications, it would be informative to extend the scope of our integrative approach by evaluating additional tissue function outcomes from the same cohort, such as intestinal structure, cognitive function, and cardiovascular function and structure. Still, our data show for the first time that even small doses of high LET radiation constitute a challenge to the functional resilience of the gut ecosystem.

Our integrative analysis underscored several points; firstly, there were robust changes in ecological communities harboring the gut microbiota as a consequence of high LET exposures (16 O); secondly, these changes seem to shift the equilibrium towards an increase in opportunistic pathogens with a concomitant decrease in normal microbiota upon irradiation; finally, these changes were predicted to induce functional shifts in metabolism, both at the level of the predicted enzymatic potential of the perturbed microbiome and of the metabolome. Most importantly, metabolic network modeling showed that specific changes in the metabolome are connected to irradiation-induced changes in the abundance of specific taxa. Our model suggests an emergent, dose-dependent hyper-radiosensitivity behavior of the gut ecosystem. Regardless of the specific mechanisms involved in these singular responses, our exploratory study clearly establishes that high LET radiation induces a metabolite-mediated, convoluted reorganization of the gut ecosystem. Therefore, the implication of microbiome-mediated host pathophysiology after low-dose ionizing radiation may be an unappreciated biologic hazard of space travel and deserves experimental validation. This study provides a conceptual and analytical framework to increase our understanding of the chronic effects of space radiation on human health.

Male C57BL/6J mice (Jackson Laboratory) were purchased at 4 weeks of age and housed at the Division of Laboratory Animal Medicine, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences (UAMS), on a 12:12 light-to-dark cycle with free access to food (soy-free rodent diet 2020X, Harlan Teklad) and water. At 6 months of age, mice were transported to Brookhaven National Laboratories (BNL) and housed under comparable conditions (12:12 light-to-dark cycle, free access to rodent diet 2020X and water). After a one-week acclimation period, mice were individually placed in well-ventilated clear Lucite cubes (3 × 1½ × 1½ in.) and exposed to whole-body 16O irradiation (600 MeV/n; 0.1, 0.25, or 1.0 Gy, 0.21–0.28 Gy/min) at the NASA Space Radiation Laboratory. Sham-irradiated mice were placed in the same holders, but were not exposed to radiation. A total of 10 mice per dose group were used. Dosimetry details and schematics along with dose distribution curves are reported elsewhere [69]. One day after (sham-) irradiation, all mice were returned to UAMS and placed on 2020X diet containing 0.68 g/kg fenbendazole (Harlan Teklad) as part of the standard UAMS rodent quarantine procedure. At 10 and 30 days after irradiation, mice were individually placed in a Plexiglas box to obtain fresh fecal pellets. Fecal pellets were stored at −80 °C until processing. Each pellet was divided into two parts under liquid nitrogen, one halve was shipped to the University of California Los Angeles for 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing and the other halve to Georgetown University for metabolomics.

Genomic DNA was extracted using the PowerSoil DNA Isolation Kit (MO BIO Laboratories, Carlsbad, CA, USA) with a 30-s beat-beating step using a Mini-Beadbeater-16 (BioSpec Products, Bartlesville, OK, USA). Polymerase chain reaction amplification of bacterial 16S rRNA genes was performed using extracted genomic DNA as the template. The 100 μl reactions contained 50 mM Tris (pH 8.3), 500 μg/ml bovine serum albumin, 2.5 mM MgCl2, 250 μM of each deoxynucleotide triphosphate, 400 nM of each primer, 4 μl of DNA template, and 2.5 units JumpStart Taq DNA polymerase (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). The PCR primers (F515/R806) targeted the V4 hypervariable region of the 16S rRNA gene, with the reverse primers including a 12-bp Golay barcode. Thermal cycling were performed in an MJ Research PTC-200 (Bio-Rad Inc., Hercules, CA, USA) with the following parameters: 94 °C for 5 min; 35 cycles of 94 °C for 20 s, 50 °C for 20 s, and 72 °C for 30 s; 72 °C for 5 min. PCR products were purified using the MinElute 96 UF PCR Purification Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA). DNA sequencing was performed using an Illumina HiSeq 2500 (Illumina, Inc., San Diego, CA, USA), in paired-ended mode. Clusters were created using template concentrations of 4 pM and PhiX at 65 K/mm2. Sequencing primers targeted 101 base pair reads of the 5′ end of the amplicons and 7 base pair barcode reads. Reads were filtered using the following parameters: minimum Q-score—30, maximum number of consecutive low-quality base calls allowed before truncating—3, and maximum number of N characters allowed—0. All filtered V4 reads had a length of 150 bp.

De-multiplexing and paired-end joining of 80 sequencing libraries was performed in QIIME [70] using default parameters. Sequencing reads were classified and summarized at different phylogenetic levels down to Operational Taxonomic Units (OTUs) [71, 72] using a similarity threshold of 97% within the GreenGenes [73] v13_8 reference database. One sample with less than 60,000 classified sequences was removed. The average number of OTUs detected per sample was 862.4 ± 88.4, and the mean counts per sample was 100,745.5. The number of detected OTUs (counts > 0 in at least one sample) was 7377, for an OTU table density of 0.117. Therefore, independent filtering was applied as recommended for Illumina amplicon data [74] by removing low abundance OTUs (those with < 0.0005% of reads in the total dataset). The resulting matrix provides a highly replicated, deeply sequenced dataset with 1260 OTUs (average number of OTUs detected per sample 718.1 ± 60.0, mean counts per sample = 100,536.4, final OTU table density of 0.57), which allowed us to perform differential abundance analysis with increased detection sensitivity. Downstream analysis (see below) was always performed from randomly rarefied tables at a depth of 60,000 reads per sample.

PICRUSt [78] was used to predict the metagenome in terms of Kegg Orthology (KO) terms for each 16S rRNA sample. The output from PICRUSt was further normalized using MUSICC [79] for downstream analyses, obtaining both intra- and inter-sample corrections. Microbiome functional shifts and phylotype-level contributions to functional shifts were obtained using the FishTaco framework [15]. Input for FishTaco included a pre-computed OTU-KO table from the PICRUSt analysis, output from MUSICC, and OTU relative abundances. FishTaco was run on multi-taxa mode for each pairwise comparison between irradiated and non-irradiated samples. For each KEGG pathway, we estimated both positive and negative functional shifts using two different metrics (Wilcoxon and log-ratio tests). In order to overcome the computational cost of the FishTaco deconvolution approach, we estimated the functional shifts for the top 100 phylotypes with the maximum relative abundance across our dataset, and the set of all possible independent tests were analyzed in parallel in a computer cluster. FishTaco deconvolves each functional shift in pairwise case vs. control comparisons into four different modes: (1) case-associated taxa driving functional shift (taxa over-represented in cases with enzymatic activity in pathway); (2) case-associated taxa reducing functional shift (taxa over-represented in cases but with no enzymatic activity in pathway); (3) control-associated taxa driving functional shift (taxa over-represented in controls with no enzymatic activity in pathway); and (4) control-associated taxa reducing functional shift (taxa over-represented in controls with enzymatic activity in pathway). Figure
4a shows the net functional shift in terms of Wilcoxon test statistics. For greater clarity, Fig.
4b summarizes taxon-level percent contributions to the net functional shifts only for phylotypes with functional activity in the pathway.

Fecal samples were processed by initially homogenizing in extraction solvent containing 50% methanol, 30% isopropanol, and 20% chloroform and internal standards [80]. The samples were centrifuged and chilled 1:1 acetonitrile was added to the Eppendorf vials. The samples were incubated at −20 °C overnight to allow protein precipitation followed by centrifugation. The supernatant was combined and dried under vacuum and resuspended in water containing 50% methanol for MS analysis. The sample queue was randomized to avoid bias. Each sample (2 μl) was injected onto a reverse-phase 50 × 2.1 mm Acquity 1.7 μm BEH C18 column (Waters Corp, Milford, MA) using an Acquity UPLC (Waters Corporation, USA) system online with an electrospray quadrupole time-of-flight tandem mass spectrometer (ESI-Q-TOF) (Xevo–G2, Waters Corporation USA) operating in positive and negative ion mode, the details of tune page parameters have been described before [81–83]. A 0.2 ng/ul/μL solution of Leucine-Enkaphlin in 50% acetonitrile in water ([M + H] +, m/z 556.2771 and [M-H]−, m/z 554.2615) was infused at 5 μL/min flow rate as the reference mass (lock mass) for accurate mass measurements. The quality control (QC) samples for each matrix comprised an aliquot of all samples in the study set, thus representing a universal set of metabolites. Initially the column was conditioned using this QC sample and thereafter it was injected after every ten injections to account for reproducibility of the LC-MS data [84]. The overlay of total ion chromatograms showing chromatographic reproducibility and mass error using mixture of standards (metmix) is detailed in Additional file 4: Figure S4.

All initial analyses were performed with putative annotated metabolites; however, a subset of significantly dysregulated metabolites was subsequently confirmed by tandem mass spectrometry (see Computational analysis of metabolomics data). The UPLC-QTOF raw data files were converted into NetCDF format (Network Common Data Form) using the data bridge function incorporated in the MassLynx software (Waters Corp, Milford, MA). Subsequently, the LC-MS data were preprocessed using XCMS software, as has been described [85]. R script used for data pre-processing is provided in Additional file 4. The data were normalized to the ion intensity of the internal standards (debrisoquine and 4, Nitrobenzoic acid) and weight of the fecal pellet.

Normalized LC-MS data were employed for all downstream analyses. We employed mass search to assign putative metabolite identifications from the Metlin and HMDB databases [86, 87]. We performed searches for both positive and negative modes with mass tolerance thresholds in the range 1 to 7.5 ppm. The final identification was based on either minimal mass difference or manual curation using the fragmentation spectrum of the standard metabolites. The identities of all significantly dysregulated metabolites were confirmed using tandem mass spectrometry. The fragmentation information for a subset of metabolites that were significantly dysregulated is included in Additional file 11: Table S10. For metabolic network modeling and metabolite class enrichment, all putative annotations were tested in order to maximize enrichment and overlap with reactions encoded by the inferred metagenome [24], with little differences for different mass tolerance thresholds. Multivariate linear regression, ordination and discriminant analysis were performed as before in R. Enrichment on metabolites classes was performed using chemical taxonomies downloaded from the HMDB database version 3.6.

Metabolic network modeling was performed using the Predicted Relative Metabolic Turnover framework [23] in terms of KEGG enzymatic reactions. We computed Community-wide Metabolic Potential (CMP) scores [24] using in-house scripts in Matlab (R2015a, The MathWorks Inc.). Our implementation was based on a database of irreversible enzymatic reactions from the KEGG database [26] (release 77.1) obtained using the KEGG REST API. The reaction database was represented in terms of a stoichiometric matrix M, which links KEGG compound with KO terms. The final normalized form [23] of the matrix M (where all positive coefficients are re-scaled to sum 1, or −1 for negative coefficients) represents the relative contribution of each KO gene to the production or depletion of each compound. CMP scores were computed as the matrix multiplication of M and G, where the latter represents MUSICC-corrected KO-relative abundances. Final integration with metabolomics data was performed by comparing CMP scores to actual LC-MS normalized metabolite abundances, by matching metabolite putative ids with KEGG compound ids. For each metabolite, we performed a Mantel test between the vector of CMP scores and normalized abundance across all samples as before [24]. P values from the Mantel test were further corrected for multiple testing using bootstraps to estimate false discovery rates (FDR). Compounds were classified as well predicted if Mantel p value < 0.01 and FDR < 0.01. Identification of key phylotypes contributing to a particular CMP score was based on the correlation between community-wide and single-phylotype CMP scores. These were computed as before using a matrix G representing the enzymatic content of a single phylotype. Key contributors associated to a given metabolite were selected as the phylotypes with the maximum correlation between community-wide and single-phylotype scores.



This study was supported by the National Space Biomedical Research Institute [RE03701 through NCC 9–58] and the NIH National Center for Advancing Translational Science (NCATS) UCLA CTSI Grant Number UL1TR00188. The authors would also like to acknowledge the Metabolomics Shared Resource in Georgetown University (Washington DC, USA) partially supported by NIH/NCI/CCSG grant P30-CA051008.

Raw sequencing files and associated metadata have been deposited in NCBI’s Sequence Read Archive (accession SRP098151), https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra. LC-MS metabolomics data will be made available on Dryad, http://datadryad.org/.

The animal experimentation was approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees of Brookhaven National Laboratory (approval number 477) and the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences (approval number 3523).

Not applicable.

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s40168-017-0325-z) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

