Human matters in asthma: Considering the microbiome in pulmonary health



Microbial communities form an important symbiotic ecosystem within humans and have direct effects on health and well-being. Numerous exogenous factors including airborne triggers, diet, and drugs impact these established, but fragile communities across the human lifespan. Crosstalk between the mucosal microbiota and the immune system as well as the gut-lung axis have direct correlations to immune bias that may promote chronic diseases like asthma. Asthma initiation and pathogenesis are multifaceted and complex with input from genetic, epigenetic, and environmental components. In this review, we summarize and discuss the role of the airway microbiome in asthma, and how the environment, diet and therapeutics impact this low biomass community of microorganisms. We also focus this review on the pediatric and Black populations as high-risk groups requiring special attention, emphasizing that the whole patient must be considered during treatment. Although new culture-independent techniques have been developed and are more accessible to researchers, the exact contribution the airway microbiome makes in asthma pathogenesis is not well understood. Understanding how the airway microbiome, as a living entity in the respiratory tract, participates in lung immunity during the development and progression of asthma may lead to critical new treatments for asthma, including population-targeted interventions, or even more effective administration of currently available therapeutics.



The respiratory system, a member of the mucosal organ systems, is structurally and functionally complex with its own barrier and immune defenses. The large surface area, the continual availability of airway surface fluids, and perhaps constant ‘seeding’ from the ambient environment and microaspiration from the oro-gastro-intestinal system, establishes and maintains the respiratory system microbiome (Man et al., 2017) that begins colonizing shortly after birth (Senn et al., 2020). The basic definition of the microbiome as the “characteristic microbial community occupying a reasonably well-defined habitat which has distinct physio-chemical properties” (Whipps et al., 1988) may be extended based on ecological, host/environmental interactions, and genomic/methodological details (Berg et al., 2020). It is now well established that microbiota occupying various niches in the body play important roles in maintaining physical and mental health (Lynch and Pedersen, 2016; Man et al., 2017; Rieder et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2018; Halverson and Alagiakrishnan, 2020; Jarbrink-Sehgal and Andreasson, 2020; El-Sayed et al., 2021). Early life exposure to microorganisms is essential to train and shape the immune system, while microbial colonization acts like a barrier conferring protection against environmental pathogens (Nino et al., 2021). Conversely, some bacteria, viruses and fungi contribute to the development and pathogenesis of diseases. While the current literature on the airway microbiome has not provided definitive conclusions, it is strongly suggestive that the respiratory microbiome plays a role in the pathogenesis and control of chronic lung diseases like asthma. Currently, much of the published microbiome research is focused on the gut, where sampling techniques and sample acquisition are standardized. We anticipate that respiratory microbiome research will soon follow with the advent of more streamlined airway sampling methods and hypothesis-driven study designs (Carney et al., 2020). The airway microbiome has defined roles in lung diseases like cystic fibrosis (Lynch and Bruce, 2013), cancer (Goto, 2020), idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (Amati et al., 2022), chronic obstructive pulmonary syndrome (Budden et al., 2019), and asthma, the focus of this manuscript.

There is no cure for asthma, and the choice for treatment management is challenging due to its immunological heterogeneity (Wangberg and Woessner, 2021). Asthma is categorized into two major endotypes; type 2 (T2)-high (eosinophilic) and T2-low (non-eosinophilic) based on their inflammatory profile (Kuruvilla et al., 2019). Although asthma etiology remains unknown, multiple genetic and environmental risk factors have been identified, including genetic and epigenetic variations, early severe viral infections, airborne environmental allergens (Mims, 2015) and particulates (Manisalidis et al., 2020), atopy, diet and nutrition, among others (Mims, 2015). Racial and socioeconomic factors add additional layers of complexity to asthma underscoring the importance of personalized medicine and a holistic approach to personalized treatment. Unfortunately, despite known increased prevalence of asthma, far fewer reports on asthma are focused on the Black population. For example, a PubMed search for ‘asthma children’ resulted in 64,072 hits while a search for ‘asthma children and Black’ only resulted in 1,414 hits (2.20%). Adding on the search term ‘microbiome’ only gave 3 hits, further emphasizing how little attention is paid to understanding apparent racial disparities in the literature. The aim of this review is to summarize and discuss the relationship between the airway microbiome and asthma pathogenesis in the context of extrinsic factors (environmental triggers, diet, medications, and mode of delivery) as well as intrinsic factors (genetics and the gut-lung axis) with a focus on the Black population as an understudied population across the country (Graphical Abstract). Literature on the respiratory tract (RT) clearly demonstrates that the airway microbiome varies by sampling location where the upper RT contains the highest microbial density (Charlson et al., 2011; Beck et al., 2012). As we focus on the impact external factors may have on the airway microbiome, we do not sub-stratify the airway microbiome by location within the RT. However, the reader is referred to a comprehensive review by Abdel-Aziz et al. for details on the airway microbiome by sampling location within the RT in asthma (Abdel-Aziz et al., 2019).

Approximately 15 years ago, the healthy human airways were shown to harbor a microbiome that remains poorly understood today, largely due to technical difficulties in access without contamination (Abdel-Aziz et al., 2019). The development of culture-independent molecular techniques such as the 16S rRNA sequencing have allowed researchers a detailed view of the microbial genome that has rapidly led to a bloom in the microbiome literature over the past decade. Although studies evaluating the respiratory microbiome are numerous, their significance is obscured by heterogeneity in study design including respiratory niche sampled and patient demographics among other variables (Abdel-Aziz et al., 2019; Carney et al., 2020). Microbial exposures/infections during human lung development are also of fundamental importance to the composition of the airway microbiome as rigorously reviewed by Mthembu et al. (Mthembu et al., 2021). As asthma exacerbations lead to muco-immuno-physiologic changes in the airways and lungs, the time at which the airway microbiome is sampled is of importance to capture waxing and waning communities that may correlate with disease severity. Furthermore, there may be significant differences in airway microbiome in asthma patients of different ethnicities or racial groups, and while these differences may be multifactorial or related to socioeconomic status, they may be impactful in disease progression and require personalized therapeutic approaches. Despite discrepancies that confound seamless comparisons between studies however, the existing literature on the airway microbiome has already made significant contributions to the field, compellingly demonstrating differences in microbial diversity and composition between asthma patients and healthy subjects. Although the microbiome is comprised of bacteria, viruses, fungi, archea, and parasites, here we focus on the dominant groups in the airway microbiome ecosystem and their interactions with the environment and host. A microbiome of high density and low diversity is positively associated with inflammation (Segal et al., 2014), therefore, in general, one would expect a break from the healthy airway microbiome which is highly diverse but lower in mass to correlate with the development of asthma in which airway inflammation is a hallmark.

Bacteria are historically implicated in asthma pathogenesis and exacerbations. Culture-dependent studies have demonstrated the impact some species such as Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, Moraxella catarrhalis, Chlamydia pneumoniae, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae may have on asthma onset, exacerbations, severity and response to therapeutics (Flores-Torres and Samarasinghe, 2022). A detailed culture-independent study published over a decade ago comparing airway microbiota from patients with chronic lung disease to healthy controls showcased the presence of an airway bacteriome that was characteristic of asthma (Hilty et al., 2010).

Asthma is a complex disorder with inflammatory signatures that vary by phenotype and differences in their respective microbiomes are to be expected. Neutrophilic asthma for example has lower bacterial diversity (Simpson et al., 2016; Taylor et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2018; Pang et al., 2019), richness (Simpson et al., 2016; Taylor et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2018; Pang et al., 2019), and evenness (Simpson et al., 2016; Taylor et al., 2018; Pang et al., 2019) and an increased abundance of Proteobacteria, especially Haemophilus and Moraxella (Taylor et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2018) compared to eosinophilic asthma patients. Furthermore, M. catarrhalis or Haemophilus colonization is positively correlated with sputum IL-8 and neutrophilia, longer asthma symptom duration, and lower FEV1 (Green et al., 2014). Experimental in vivo studies have shown that H. influenzae type b, non-typeable H. influenzae and M. catarrhalis, but not commensal Prevotella species, induce higher levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-8 and TNF-α) and neutrophil recruitment without eosinophil recruitment (Larsen et al., 2015). In contrast, patients with eosinophilic asthma may have a distinct microbiome with an increased abundance of the family Enterobacteriaceae (Li et al., 2017) and the genus Tropheryma (Simpson et al., 2016) and Streptococcus (Zhang et al., 2016). S. pneumoniae is particularly pertinent in asthma due to its increased carriage among asthma patients and possible association with exacerbations (Flores-Torres and Samarasinghe, 2022) therefore, increasing the likelihood that endogenous alterations in the airway bacteriome may occur during Streptococcus infections in asthma patients. The airway microbiome further differs based on the number of eosinophils in the airways. For example, patients with low eosinophil levels have an increased abundance of Neisseria, Bacteroidetes Actinobacteria, and decreased abundance of Sphingomonas, Halomonas and Aeribacillus species compared with patients with high levels of eosinophils (Sverrild et al., 2017). Generally, the bronchial bacterial burden is lower in T2-high asthma patients compared to T2-low asthma patients (Durack et al., 2017), potentially owing to diverse antibacterial functions of eosinophils (LeMessurier and Samarasinghe, 2019).

The human virome comprises all viruses that populate humans, including viruses that infect both eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells, and those integrated into the human genome (Wylie et al., 2012). Relatively little is known about the airway virome mostly due to technical challenges and fewer investigators in the field (Wylie et al., 2012). However, multiple diseases have been associated with virome dysbiosis including Crohn’s disease, type 1 diabetes, and obesity (Bai et al., 2022). The most commonly detected commensal viruses in children hospitalized with acute asthma exacerbations are rhinovirus C, bocavirus-1 and respiratory syncytial virus-B (Romero-Espinoza et al., 2018). Asthma patients have reduced abundance and diversity of the bacteriophage populations while the eukaryotic virome is increased predominantly by anelloviruses and picornaviruses (Megremis et al., 2020). The reduction in the phageome may be important as bacteriophages can control microbial populations, and the use of bacteriophages as a therapeutic strategy to reduce bacteria-induced asthma exacerbations has been proposed (Tzani-Tzanopoulou et al., 2021). While provocative, the use of phage-therapy must be approached with caution in asthma patients as bacteriophages are capable of natural transmission of antibiotic-resistant genes amongst member of the commensal microbiome (Muniesa et al., 2013; Colavecchio et al., 2017). A recent analysis of the sputum lung virome showed that severe asthma patients have an increased virome density dominated by β- and γ-herpesviruses that correlated with poor lung function compared to healthy controls (Choi et al., 2021). Studies on the airway virome in specific niches of the RT, in addition to enrollment of patients with different subtypes of asthma and varying demographics in parallel with the bacteriome would augment the field with clinically relevant information beneficial for future mechanistic studies.

Environmental fungi are commonly allergenic to patients with asthma. In fact, severe asthma with fungal sensitization is a prevalent subcategory of asthma that is often eosinophilic and difficult to treat (Moss, 2014). Similar to the bacteriome and the virome, asthma patients have significant fluctuations in the airway mycobiome (van Tilburg Bernardes et al., 2020a). In contrast to the bacteriome however, bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) of asthma patients have a higher fungal diversity (Liu et al., 2020) and relative abundance with predominance in Trichoderma, Alternaria, Cladosporium, and Fusarium compared to healthy individuals that have Blumeria and Mycosphaerella enrichment (Sharma et al., 2019). Rhodosporidium and Pneumocystis are abundant in BAL samples of pediatric patients with severe asthma although environmentally dominant Aspergillus/Alternaria species were not enriched (Goldman et al., 2018). Higher abundance of Malassezia pachydermatis (van Woerden et al., 2013) and Cryptococcus pseudolongus (Rick et al., 2020) have also been reported in the sputum of asthma patients in comparison with healthy cohorts.

Differences in mycobiome have been classified by asthma endotypes as well where T2-high asthma patients have a reduced fungal diversity (correlated with increased eosinophil numbers (Liu et al., 2020)) compared with T2-low patients (Sharma et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2022). Endobronchial brushings and BAL samples from T2-high adult asthma patients showed enrichment by Alternaria, Aspergillus, Fusarium, and Cladosporium and these taxa are suggested to serve as biomarkers of asthma phenotypes (Sharma et al., 2019). As with other microbes, the immune system is programmed to recognize and keep commensal fungi in check to prevent a ‘super bloom’. Environmental fungi are able to increase asthma susceptibility through a variety of antigens (chitin, β-glucan, proteases, etc.), that stimulate a TH2/TH17 bias (Tiwary and Samarasinghe, 2021). Then, perhaps dysbiosis in the mycobiome may promote asthma development through pulmonary immune stimulation (van Tilburg Bernardes et al., 2020a). Whether asthma patients with altered mycobiota are concurrently sensitized to environmental fungi, whether the mycobiome blooms after an environmental fungal exposure, and whether environmental fungi interact with commensal fungi in airways remain enigmatic and in need of investigation.

The window between infancy and early childhood is crucial for immune and microbiome development through crosstalk at multiple levels (Zheng et al., 2020). Early-life also offers a critical window during which a signature-microbiome is imprinted wherein colonization may begin immediately after birth (Bosch et al., 2016; Chu et al., 2017) and lower airway microbiome matures in humans within the first two postnatal months (Pattaroni et al., 2018). The early-life airway microbiome is a critical regulator in immune programming to impede allergic asthma. The development of lymphoid tissues in the lungs are promoted by endotoxins early in life (but not in adulthood) (Rangel-Moreno et al., 2011). In mouse models of allergic asthma, the absence of microbial colonization (by maintenance in germ-free conditions or by administration of antibiotics early in life) increases total IgE and T2-associated cytokines in BAL, airway eosinophilia, and airway resistance (Herbst et al., 2011; Olszak et al., 2012; Russell et al., 2012). The shift in predominance from Firmicutes and Gammaproteobacteria to Bacteroidetes in early life induces a specific subset of regulatory T cells crucial for aeroallergen immune tolerance via PD-L1 in mice (Gollwitzer et al., 2014). Similarly, early-life fungal colonization also participates in host immune development and modulation during airway inflammation to ovalbumin (van Tilburg Bernardes et al., 2020b).

The mode of delivery has a clear influence on asthma pathogenesis, as many studies have found that Caesarean section (CS) is a risk factor for asthma development (Thavagnanam et al., 2008; Guibas et al., 2013). The mode of delivery has a significant impact n the mucosal microbiota as well. Delivery by CS delays intestinal (Kim et al., 2020) and respiratory bacterial colonization, particularly reducing commensals related to health such as Dolosigranulum and Corynebacterium (Bosch et al., 2016). In addition, infants born through vaginal delivery have higher bacterial load in the lower airways, particularly with more Firmicutes and Lactobacillus species compared to CS delivery (Cardelli et al., 2021). History of CS is a risk factor for future hospitalizations due to viral infections during infancy and childhood (Moore et al., 2012; Kristensen et al., 2015; Miller et al., 2020; Alterman et al., 2021), which, depending on the infectious agent, may increase the risk of asthma onset (Gern, 2000; Beigelman and Bacharier, 2016; Flores-Torres and Samarasinghe, 2022). Correspondingly, children delivered by CS have a higher risk of RSV-induced hospitalization, subsequent wheezing, and asthma symptomatology compared to those delivered vaginally (Zomer-Kooijker et al., 2014; Kristensen et al., 2015). Neonatal gut Clostridium abundance in early life after CS delivery (Shaterian et al., 2021), may promote asthma risk in later life (Penders et al., 2007). This is concerning, as the number of CS performed (sometimes performed as a patient preference) is increasing globally, with projections that nearly a third of all births will be by CS by 2030 (WHO, 2021). Black women have been found to be more likely to have a CS compared to other races in the US (Edmonds et al., 2013; Valdes, 2021), with increased incidence from 22 to 64% (Valdes, 2021). The link between increased incidence of asthma and CS delivery suggest that this is an area for intervention and that research efforts should be focused on understanding the drivers for increased CS. Longitudinal analyses of the gut microbiome in CS delivered versus vaginally delivered infants with emphasis on maternal demographics may help elucidate the long-term impact CS may have on the health of the baby.

The epithelia of the respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts share a common embryonic origin thus sharing mucosal functions despite performing physiologically distinct roles (Chunxi et al., 2020). The microbiota of the GI tract is the highest in abundance in the human body at 1014 bacteria in comparison with the low abundance in the lower RT of 10–100 bacteria/1,000 human cells (Marsland et al., 2015). Bifidobacterium, Faecalibacterium, and Bacteroides represent the most abundant genera in intestinal microbiota (Marsland et al., 2015) encompassing clusters of bacteria known as enterotypes. Bifidobacterium species in the gut are important inducers of antimicrobial peptides and immunoglobulin A (IgA) production that are vital for broader mucosal protection (Pilette et al., 2004; Mantis et al., 2011; Budden et al., 2017; Budden et al., 2019).

Differences in gut microbiota have been associated with disease susceptibilities by race and sex. Although minimal emphasis is placed on microbiome profiling by race, analysis of the gut microbiome may be a simple and early biomarker for disease predisposition provided sufficient information is made available in health and disease states across racial groups. For example, while the composition and abundance of Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes were equivalent between Black and White populations, Actinobacteria and Verrucomicrobia were more abundant phyla in Black women particularly in relation to insulin resistance compared to White women (Price et al., 2022). This difference suggests that a linkage exists between microbiome and race in the context of disease susceptibility and severity (Brooks et al., 2018). While these susceptibilities may be the result of socioeconomic differences rather than inherent biological differences, recognizing and understanding the origins of these differences may be valuable determining the appropriate interventions.

Host genetics also govern the airway microbiome composition based on genome-wide association study (GWAS). Host genes involved in shaping the airway microbiota include those important in pattern recognition receptors, barrier defense and mucosal immunity, MHC/HLA specificity, cytokine and chemokine signaling including the JAK/signal transducer and activator of transcription pathway, and vitamin D signaling (Tang et al., 2021). GWAS correlating host genetics and airway microbiota show positive association between mucosal immunity genes (such as FUT3, PGLYRP3, and PGLYRP4) and the relative abundance of upper RT microbiome (Igartua et al., 2017).

Innate immune signaling cascades are increasingly gaining traction for their role in asthma pathogenesis (Zakeri and Russo, 2018) and creating the setting for the airway microbiome (Lipinski et al., 2021), so much so that pattern recognition receptor manipulation is a successful therapeutic avenue for asthma (Bezemer et al., 2012). Polymorphisms in CD14 rs2569190 and TLR2 rs13150331 in asthma patients influences the microbial composition (Losol et al., 2021). Asthma patients with genotypes AG/GG at CD14 rs2569190 showed elevated levels of neutrophils and lower levels of Prevotella and Dolosigranulum compared to those with the AA genotype (Losol et al., 2021).

Smoking is a major cause of several chronic airway diseases such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), lung cancer (Cox et al., 2011) and asthma (Huang and Shi, 2019) wherein smokers have more severe symptoms compared to non-smokers and smoking cessation drastically improves disease control (Munck et al., 2016). Since the airway microbiome plays a crucial role in disease pathology, several studies have attempted to elucidate the effect of smoking on the airway microbiome. Of the 4,000 chemical compounds found in tobacco smoke, about 100 have known hazards to human health (Pietinalho et al., 2009). However, how specific compounds within cigarette smoke may impact the respiratory microbiome is notably under investigated.

The percentage of the White and Black populations that smoke is comparable (Smoking & Tobacco use, 2022), however, intriguingly, Black smokers suffer from more significant negative consequences of smoking (Mendez and Le TTT, 2021) including asthma (Marchese et al., 2015) than their White counterparts. Factors including the age of smoking onset, smoking index, pack years, housing type (shared ventilation systems vs. single), and second-hand smoke exposure require further investigation to better understand the impact smoking has on the pediatric population in correlation with asthma symptoms and may contribute to the race-associated differences reported between White and Black smokers.

The co-occurrence of asthma and obesity is well-recognized as associative, although mechanistic insights are not fully elucidated. Obesity is a risk factor not only in adults, but also in children, and the increase in the risk of asthma development due to obesity may start in utero (Dixon and Que, 2022). Furthermore, the occurrence of maternal obesity is independently associated with a 15–30% increase in the risk of asthma in the progeny although this risk is also governed by inflammatory mechanisms and pre-/post-natal changes (Dixon and Que, 2022). The role of obesity-associated inflammatory response which can ultimately lead to asthma, and the contributory role diet plays in this relationship has been validated (Calcaterra et al., 2021). In obese patients with asthma, food components such as sugar, fat, and inferior-quality nutrients have been associated with the inflammatory response (Calcaterra et al., 2021). The US Department of Agriculture has identified four zip codes within the city of Memphis as being food deserts, where families do not have access to grocery stores (Economic Research Service, 2022). Children living in such environments regularly consume a diet high in fat, low in fiber, and low in methylation, all of which promote asthma severity and airway dysbiosis (Montrose et al., 2017; Rosa and Perzanowski, 2019; Musso et al., 2020; Toivonen et al., 2020; Wen et al., 2022).

The link between diet and microbiota is evident from the co-occurrence of gut dysbiosis and malnutrition. A diet that is rich in nutrients and dietary fibers can result in a diverse gut microbiome that is favorable for host immunity and health (Anand and Mande, 2018). A compromised diet not only affect the intestinal health, but also leads to chronic pulmonary disorders such as COPD and asthma (Anand and Mande, 2018). The impact of variation in diet and dietary components on the composition of microbiota of the host has been reviewed extensively (Singh et al., 2017; Tomova et al., 2019; Zhao et al., 2019; Peled, 2021; Wu et al., 2022). However, the modes by which the microbiota composition is altered, either due to interactions between dietary components and the microbiota, or due to crosstalk between microbes themselves as a result of the variation in diet, remains less clear.

Gut microbiota utilize complex carbohydrates and soluble fibers to produce metabolites including SCFA by anaerobic fermentation. These SCFA in turn play a potential role in maintaining a “normal” gut microbiota. Considering this, and the role of a normal microbiome in maintaining pulmonary health, the contribution of dietary carbohydrates and fibers to gut-lung health is significant. SCFA produced by gut microbiota contains acetate, propionate, and butyrate at a 60:20:20 proportion (Machado et al., 2021) thereby making acetic acid, propionic acid, and butyric acid the most abundant SCFA in the human gut (Yip et al., 2021). In addition to serving as immunomodulators, SCFA may also either act as a carbon source for certain gut microbiota or be toxic (at higher concentrations) to other microbial community members (Sun and O'Riordan, 2013). SCFA production causes changes to the gut pH which has an important regulatory role on the gut microbiota composition (Krautkramer et al., 2021).

Most studies have associated high fiber diets with elevated SCFA production by gut commensals, health, and ultimate reduction in asthma occurrence. It is also possible that high fiber diets alter the microbiome without affecting SCFA production and subsequently reduce lung inflammation and asthma (Wen et al., 2022). Herein, the gut microbiome was altered by a new genus of lipid-metabolizing microbes such as Romboutsia and Ruminococcus torques that were enriched by a high-cellulose diet (Wen et al., 2022). Although not directly tested, positive associations between dietary fiber intake in asthma patients and improved lung function (Berthon et al., 2013) are likely through direct/indirect microbiome regulation. Both Black and White populations have reduced fecal SCFA content compared to Native Africans (O'Keefe et al., 2009), and incorporating fiber-rich food has led to significant alterations to the gut microbiome thereby improving mucosal health in Black cohorts (O'Keefe et al., 2015). Therefore, ensuring that Black children, especially, have access to fiber-rich food may promote gut microbiome health and reduce asthma pathogenesis.

The various states that proteins exist in the gut based on post-translational modifications, digestion, and their interaction with other food components, can all affect the composition of the gut microbiota (Wu et al., 2022). Furthermore, protein source also affects the gut microbiome; hen egg white-fed rats show relatively higher levels of Akkermansia while duck egg white-fed rats have higher abundance of Peptostreptococcaceae and Proteobacteria and lower abundance of Lachnospiraceae (Yu et al., 2020). On the other hand, soy proteins improve abundance of Bifidobacteria and Lactobacilli while decreasing Bacteroidetes (Huang et al., 2016; Ashaolu, 2020). Variations in nutritional protein source could play a vital role in asthma symptom control.

A study comparing children from an African village on an agrarian diet (rich in fiber and low in animal protein and fat) and children from the European Union on a Western diet (rich in fat and sugar) showed substantial differences in the gut microbiota. Children on the agrarian diet showed enrichment in Bacteroidetes, depletion in Firmicutes, higher SCFA content, and lower levels of Escherichia and Shigella (De Filippo et al., 2010). As expected, Prevotella and Xylanibacter (genetically equipped to digest fiber to produce SCFA) were more abundant in the African children (De Filippo et al., 2010). Thus, plant-based high protein diet could potentially help reduce asthma risk in all children. Surviving human biliary secretions that can be cytotoxic to prokaryotes requires microbial adaptation (Begley et al., 2005). Diets rich in animal protein led to abundance of bile-tolerant bacteria such as Bacteroides, Alistipes, and Bilophila, and lowered the levels of Firmicutes Roseburia, Ruminococcus bromii, and Eubacterium rectale (David et al., 2014). As a change in proportion of functionally distinct bacterial populations can occur when specific macronutrients are favored or limited, a diet that is disproportional can cause dysbiosis (Zhao et al., 2019). Indeed, a long-term high protein diet causes gut dysbiosis along with gut inflammation with heightened permeability, kidney damage, and elevated risk of developing metabolic (type 2 diabetes and obesity) and cardiovascular diseases (Snelson et al., 2021; Cai et al., 2022). However, the intake of a protein-rich diet can help reduce fat mass (Geiker et al., 2018) which could help improve asthma symptoms. A diet enriched with meat does not impact lung function in adults with asthma (Hooper et al., 2010) emphasizing that a single cause and effect relationship between macromolecules and asthma may not exist.

A diet high in fat, does reduce FEV1 in adult asthma patients possibly through direct impact on inflammation (Wood et al., 2011), impacting obesity (Jessri et al., 2017), and the microbiome (Murphy et al., 2015). Several studies have reported on changes in the composition of the gut microbiota as a function of dietary fat (Fava et al., 2013; Costantini et al., 2017; Muralidharan et al., 2019; Wolters et al., 2019; Mokkala et al., 2020), however, very few of them have attempted to decipher the mode by which fats affect the microbiota composition. Studies on the effect of high-fat diet on the microbiota composition are contradictory likely because food is complex and considering the effect of a particular dietary component on the microbiota composition does not address the synergistic effect of other dietary components.

Antimicrobial properties of fatty acids may also exert a direct effect on microbiota composition. Ethyl ester of eicosapentaenoic acid inhibits the growth of anaerobe symbiont, Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, a representative member of Bacteroidetes, whereas linoleic acid inhibits Lactobacillus strains (Mokkala et al., 2020). Conversely, medium chain fatty acids, which are abundant in breast milk, may increase the growth of Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium, highlighting their role in early development of gut microbiota (Nejrup et al., 2015). It is worth noting that both, Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium have been known to substantially alleviate asthma and other allergic conditions (Ozdemir, 2010; Liu et al., 2021). Aforementioned animal protein-rich diets are also accompanied by high fat content that promoted bile secretion. Intriguingly, the microbiota composition of mice fed with a bile-supplemented diet is similar to mice fed with high-fat diet (Zheng et al., 2017).

The beneficial effects of probiotics include stimulation of anti-inflammatory cytokines, enhancing mucosal barrier function, and modification of the gut microbiome composition (Singh et al., 2017; Stavropoulou and Bezirtzoglou, 2020). Regular consumption of probiotic foods such as fermented milk and yogurt leads to an increase in bacterial load, especially beneficial gut bacteria such as Bifidobacteria and/or Lactobacilli (Singh et al., 2017) which play significant roles in asthma symptom alleviation (Ozdemir, 2010). Studies have also exemplified that probiotic bacteria aid in re-establishing normal microbiota after perturbation (Sanders, 2016). For instance, the use of antibiotics is associated with antibiotic-associated diarrhea typically caused by the outgrowth of Clostridioides difficile. The use of Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG and Saccharomyces boulardii after the termination of antibiotic treatment has been reported to control the outgrowth of C. difficile and restore the microbiota to normalcy (Ceapa et al., 2013).

The transient probiotic bacteria can modulate commensals by producing anti-microbial compounds such as reuterin (produced by Lactobacillus reuteri) and plantaricin (produced by Lactobacillus plantarum), or indirectly via immune system modulation or altering the gut barrier function (Ceapa et al., 2013). Probiotic microbes may also modulate outgrowth or abundance of specific microbiota such as Roseburia intestinalis or Eubacterium halii, which are lactate-using firmicutes capable of producing various kinds of SCFA (O'Keefe et al., 2009). Cumulatively, functions of probiotic bacteria may help regain a favorable microbiome after stress.

Since vitamins are efficiently absorbed in the proximal small intestine, and do not tend to reach the distal gastrointestinal tract, they were not thought to affect the composition of gut microbiota. However, administration of higher doses to escape complete absorption (Mandal et al., 2016) and colon-targeted delivery (Fangmann et al., 2018) are efficacious modes of gut microbiome modulation (Pham et al., 2021). Each vitamin may aid in maintaining the pulmonary health via one or more mechanisms. Vitamins A, C, and E for instance, can alleviate asthma severity by downregulating oxidative stress which exacerbates airway inflammation (Han et al., 2013). Vitamin A may also act directly on the immune system by inhibiting TH2 and TH17 responses while vitamin C may reduce airway reactivity and inflammation through prostaglandin inhibition (Han et al., 2013). The dietary intake of vitamin A and vitamin C in asthma patients is significantly low (Allen et al., 2009), and children with severe asthma have low plasma vitamin A levels (Samarasinghe et al., 2020). In comparison to mild asthma, vitamin E levels are significantly low in severe asthma (Allen et al., 2009). Vitamin D also plays a crucial role in pulmonary health, and similar to children with eosinophilic esophagitis (Armbruster-Lee et al., 2018), vitamin D deficiency/insufficiency are associated with asthma pathogenesis (Wang et al., 2022). A strong correlation has been observed between vitamin D deficiency and asthma in Black children (Paul et al., 2012). Interestingly, other risk factors for developing asthma such as urban residency and obesity are also observed with vitamin D deficiency (Paul et al., 2012). Independent of racial ancestry, an association between vitamin D deficiency and asthma exacerbations has also been observed in Puerto Rican children (Brehm et al., 2012). Although the exact mode of action of vitamin D in asthma prevention is not well-understood, it may be through regulation of immune response or gene expression, enhancing responsiveness towards steroids, influencing lung development/function, prevention of weight gain, or by protecting against viral infections (Han et al., 2013; Armbruster-Lee et al., 2018).

Although humans depend greatly on their diet for vitamin acquisition, gut microbiota also serve as a source (Rowland et al., 2018; Pham et al., 2021). Vitamins (such as B vitamins) produced by the gut microbiota may primarily be utilized by microbes of symbiotic association, thus not being able to provide the host with the daily recommended intake (Magnusdottir et al., 2015). Markers of folate deficiency, for instance, have been associated with asthma as well as attacks of shortness of breath (Thuesen et al., 2010). Others such as vitamin K are predominantly produced by Firmicutes, Proteobacteria, and Bacteroidetes in the gut (Ravcheev and Thiele, 2016). Vitamin K is a crucial co-factor for periostin (Coutu et al., 2008) which is significantly increased in asthma patients (Jia et al., 2012), linking gut dysbiosis to lung disease.

Minerals can be divided into three groups based on their role in asthma pathophysiology: 1) minerals (such as copper, zinc, and selenium) that are involved directly in immunity, 2) minerals (such as chromium, iodine, iron, and manganese) that are involved in obesity, disturbances in thyroid gland, anemia, and oxidative stress, and 3) the minerals of minor or unknown significance in asthma (Zajac, 2021).

Magnesium influences the diversity of gut microbiota (Bielik and Kolisek, 2021) where optimal levels of magnesium are favorable for gut microbiome homeostasis. Elevated magnesium in rats leads to overgrowth of proinflammatory phyla Proteobacteria, along with Parabacteroides, Victivallis, and Butyricimonas, whilst normal magnesium levels promote higher diversity of the gut microbiota (Garcia-Legorreta et al., 2020). Interestingly, deficiency or excessively high levels of copper have been associated with chronic inflammation. Deficiency of other elements such as selenium and zinc on the other hand, have been correlated with asthma. Other elements such as manganese show contradictory association with asthma pathogenesis (Zajac, 2021).

Alterations to the gut/lung microbiomes affects asthma symptoms and adds another layer of complexity to asthma pathogenesis. Unfortunately, asthma patients are often treated with medications that directly impair the gut and airway microbiota. Although some of these medications are recommended for asthma control, precise regulation and control are needed as misuse and overuse of them could be less beneficial or even harmful.

Since their discovery, antibiotics have saved countless lives. However, misuse and overuse of these medications can result in the development of bacterial resistance, microbial dysbiosis and increased risk of diseases including diabetes, obesity, allergies and asthma (Blaser, 2016). Studies have shown that asthma development positively correlates with antibiotic usage during pregnancy and periods of life when antibiotic prescription is more frequent (Penders et al., 2006; Kozyrskyj et al., 2007; Marra et al., 2009; Martel et al., 2009; Murk et al., 2011; Penders et al., 2011; Risnes et al., 2011; Hoskin-Parr et al., 2013; Arrieta et al., 2015; Bookstaver et al., 2015; Blaser, 2016; Castro-Rodriguez et al., 2016; Loewen et al., 2018; Ni et al., 2019; Donovan et al., 2020; Zhong et al., 2021). In fact, international guidelines for asthma recommend against antibiotic usage in infants and young children (Global Initiative for Asthma, 2021). However, antibiotics are commonly prescribed to children (Hales et al., 2018), and given to children with asthma at a greater rate than children without asthma (Fong et al., 2021), sometimes without any justification (Paul et al., 2011).

The impact antibiotics have on the microbiome has been evaluated in humans. Azithromycin, for example is frequently used in low doses to reduce airway inflammation in chronic diseases like COPD and bronchiolitis obliterans. It is one of the most commonly prescribed antibiotics to pediatric patients and known to reduce the intestinal bacterial diversity and composition in children (Doan et al., 2017; Oldenburg et al., 2018). Smokers’ lung microbiota show a reduction in alpha-diversity after azithromycin treatment although the overall bacterial load may not change (Segal et al., 2017). Antibiotic-induced reductions in beneficial gut commensals like Bifidobacterium species and Actinobacteria may then permit the outgrowth of potentially pathogenic Firmicutes, Proteobacteria, and Bacteroidetes (Korpela et al., 2016; Reyman et al., 2022), some of which are linked to asthma exacerbations (Earl et al., 2015). Much remains unknown about the impact of antibiotics on the airway microbiome in the context of asthma, patient demographics, and lifestyle (Hufnagl et al., 2020).

Although current asthma guidelines recommend the use of corticosteroids to control asthma symptoms and exacerbations (Global Initiative for Asthma, 2021), there is evidence suggesting that their use is associated with increased risk of respiratory infections in asthma patients (McKeever et al., 2013; Qian et al., 2017) and alterations to the airway microbiome (Hartmann et al., 2021). For example, steroid-resistant patients present bacterial enrichment in Microbacteriaceae and Pasteurellaceae, families while steroid-responsive patients have enrichment of Streptococcaceae, Fusobacteriaceae, and Sphingomonodaceae in the upper RT microbiome (Durack et al., 2017). Steroid-resistant asthma patients also present an airway expansion of specific Gram-negative bacteria, which are suggested to trigger TAK1/MAPK signaling and induce corticosteroid resistance (Goleva et al., 2013). Patients receiving steroid therapy have increased fungal load in the BAL (Fraczek et al., 2018), with greater abundance of Fusarium and Mortierella, and reductions in Wallemia, Alternaria and Aspergillus compared to patients not on corticosteroids (Huang et al., 2020).

Studies investigating airway dysbiosis in asthma patients considered corticosteroids as confounders to disease-induced changes on the microbiome. Indeed, patients with asthma do present with airway dysbiosis independent of corticosteroid treatment (Durack et al., 2017). However, there is evidence suggesting that corticosteroids can drive further alterations in the asthma patient microbiome, as corticosteroids associate with decreased abundance of Bacteroidetes, Fusobacteria and Prevotella species, and with increased abundance of Proteobacteria (Denner et al., 2016; Durack et al., 2017). Neutrophils are resistant to corticosteroid-induced apoptosis (Saffar et al., 2011) although patients with neutrophilic and paucigranulocytic asthma may be treated with higher doses of corticosteroids (Cowan et al., 2010). Therefore, effects of corticosteroids may amalgamate with underlying changes to the microbiome in patients with neutrophil dominant asthma phenotypes to cause an overall reduction in bacterial diversity and richness (Taylor et al., 2018).

Multiple studies have shown that microbiome perturbation alters the vaccine-induced antibody responses (Oh et al., 2014). Due to the emphasis on the vaccination on the gut microbiota (de Jong et al., 2020), less is known about the vaccine efficacy during dysbiosis in other niches including the airways. Although the live-attenuated influenza vaccine (LAIV) is the only intranasally administered vaccine, other intranasal vaccines such as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) are under development (de Jong et al., 2020). The LAIV immunogenicity is now reported to be dampened by Streptococcal colonization in humans (Carniel et al., 2021), which is interesting since S. pneumoniae colonization rate is high in children (Bogaert et al., 2004), and asthma patients have a higher carriage compared to healthy individuals (Jounio et al., 2010). These data suggest that LAIV could be less effective among asthma patients. Additionally, LAIV is contraindicated in wheezing children with precautions in 5 year old asthma patients (Grohskopf et al., 2020) although the LAIV has been proven safe and effective by others (Flores-Torres and Samarasinghe, 2022).

The risk factors for the pathogenesis and severity of asthma are multifactorial and include among other factors, environmental pollutants, obesity and poor nutrition, overall poor socioeconomic status, and even repeated exposure to toxic stress. Whether race contributes to asthma severity and outcomes more as a biological factor or a social construct is unclear, but what is clear is that higher prevalence, higher severity, and worse outcomes are associated with the Black race as defined in the literature. Better classification of these relationships will provide a blueprint for more effective clinical interventions. Drastic measures to reduce complications of childhood obesity, including bariatric surgery, have decreased the frequency and severity of asthma exacerbations. Although not discussed in detail here, environmental pollutants including particulate matter are also variable depending on housing location of patients. For example, areas of highest asthma incidence are often located in zip codes adjacent to large cities, airports, or factories. All these components can impact the host microbiome which may imprint the next generation as well (Graphical Abstract).

The future of scientific study into new therapeutics and possibly, one day, gene directed therapy is exciting. Development of targeted treatments for various asthma subtypes seems promising, as does the development of immune and monoclonal antibody therapeutics, but this seems a lofty goal when many of the patients suffering with the most treatment-resistant asthma do not even have access to their own beta agonist inhaler. Thankfully, inhaled corticosteroids are relatively inexpensive by comparison and have been the mainstay of chronic asthma management. The exact effect of inhaled corticosteroids on the lung microbiome has yet to be fully understood, however research up to this point suggests that such therapy may be beneficial for some patients but harmful for others as it negatively affects the lung microbiome.

SM wrote Sections 3–5, helped edit the manuscript, and drew the graphical abstract. MS provided clinical perspective, wrote Section 7, and edited the manuscript. AF-T wrote first drafts of Sections 1, 2, and 6 and drew Figure 1. PD provided clinical perspective and made insightful comments on topics to include, wrote the abstract, and edited the manuscript. AS conceptualized the manuscript, provided direction and scope, significantly edited the first and final drafts for publication, and wrote the abstract. All authors approved the final submission.

The Samarasinghe group is supported in part by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases of the National Institutes of Health under Award number R01 AI125481, the Plough Foundation, and the American Lung Association (all to AES).

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

