Poultry gut health – microbiome functions, environmental impacts, microbiome engineering and advancements in characterization technologies

The gastrointestinal tract (GIT) health impacts animal productivity. The poultry microbiome has functions which range from protection against pathogens and nutrients production, to host immune system maturation. Fluctuations in the microbiome have also been linked to prevailing environmental conditions. Healthy poultry birds possess a natural resistance to infection. However, the exploration of environmental impacts and other relevant factors on poultry growth and health have been underplayed. Since good performance and growth rate are central to animal production, the host-microbiome relationship remains integral. Prior to the emergence of metagenomic techniques, conventional methods for poultry microbiome studies were used and were low-throughput and associated with insufficient genomic data and high cost of sequencing. Fortunately, the advent of high-throughput sequencing platforms have circumvented some of these shortfalls and paved the way for increased studies on the poultry gut microbiome diversity and functions. Here, we give an up-to-date review on the impact of varied environments on microbiome profile, as well as microbiome engineering and microbiome technology advancements. It is hoped that this paper will provide invaluable information that could guide and inspire further studies on the lingering pertinent questions about the poultry microbiome.

The microbiome refers to the totality of microoganisms associated with an organism [1]. The microbiome has complex interactions with their hosts which could be harmful (pathogenic) or beneficial (symbiotic) and can play key roles in human and animal health. Many members of the microbiome are however non-culturable and require more sensitive methods for their identification and enumeration. For example, more than 70% of human gut bacteria cannot be cultured on common laboratory media [2]. Nonetheless, given the advancements in molecular biology and emergence of high-throughput molecular sequencing technologies that are culture-independent, new and interesting scientific data continue to emerge and shed light on microbiome interactions in their host(s) [1].

Poultry health for sustained meat supply is closely linked to their gut microbiome profile and diversity. Microbiome functions include protection against pathogens, nutrients production, and host immune system maturation [12, 13]. The presence of a healthy and functional gut microbiome is essential to poultry performance and health. Following the ban in European, American and some African countries on the use of antimicrobials to promote poultry growth and fight infections, there has been an increase in poultry digestive diseases due to dysbiosis, that is, imbalance in gut microbiome. A poor gastrointestinal (GI) health may result in nutrients malabsorption and attendant growth depression in affected poultry birds [14]. The changes in farming practices and environments may also impact microbiome profile by influencing poultry natural immunity [15]. Age of poultry also affects their gut microbiome diversity [16]. Healthy poultry birds possess an innate resistance to infections [17], but the host-microbiome relationship remain important for good poultry performance and growth [15]. Poultry birds that are most domesticated and studied include the chicken (Gallus spp.) and turkey (Meleagris spp.). Other less domesticated birds include the duck (Carina spp.) and geese (Anser spp.) [8]. This article is therefore targeted towards giving an up-to-date account of the poultry gut microbiome, their functions, impacts of varied environmental conditions, means of gut microbiome engineering, developments in microbiome technologies and prospects.

The data and information in this article were retrieved from sources such as PubMed, ScienceDirect, Scopus, MeSH, Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO) websites and other reputable online scientific databases. Keywords and phrase combinations which were considered relevant to the topic of interest and scope include host-microbe interaction, poultry microbiome, microbiome functions and mechanisms, poultry classification, the gastrointestinal tract microbiome, microbiome engineering, microbiome role in poultry health, microbiome and poultry conservation, and factors affecting the gut microbiome. Records used in this review covered from 1973 to April 2021. This was done to refine search results for up-to-date objective assessment and report on the poultry microbiome, their impact on health and to provide perspectives that could guide future studies in poultry microbiome. The data collected were used to create a PRISMA flow chart (Fig. 1) depicting records used and their screening process.

Generally, the dominant bacteria phyla reported in chickens include the Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, Actinobacteria and Bacteroidetes [18]. About 31 genera within the Firmicutes family with ≥ 5% representing the Eubacterium, Ruminococcus and Clostridium have been reported. The other genera identified from sequencing were the Riemeralla, Paraprevotella, Tanneralla and Prevotella [19]. Bacteroidetes constituted 40% of the general microbiome. Predominant Proteobacteria genera included Neissenia, Desulfohalobium, Shigella and Escherichia [19]. Within the poultry caecal sacs, there are high concentrations of bacteria present (1010–1011 cells per gram cecal material) that encode for greater than 95% of the genetic information [20]. Many of the bacteria present in the chicken caecum have remained unculturable in the laboratory and can only be identified through high-throughput sequencing techniques [21].

The chicken intestinal microbiome commonly contains several taxa. Non-pathogenic Campylobacter spp. such as Campylobacter jejuni and C. coli may be present in concentrations up to 107 colony forming unit per gram (cfu/g) in the chicken intestine and can be cultured from a week-old chick [26]. Salmonella was detected in lower concentrations in the intestinal microbiome and is distributed sporadically [27]. Salmonella is pathogenic in avians; however, disease susceptibilities are dependent on host age [28], health status of the immune system [29], and strain type of Salmonella [30]. Other bacteria present in the GIT of chickens at lower concentrations are Escherichia coli. Certain strains of E. coli may however cause opportunistic secondary infections in poultry birds [31]. The increased levels of ammonia present in poultry housing environments can promote such infections [32]. Many avian pathogenic E. coli (APEC) isolates known to possess virulence genes like the P-pili, Ibe proteins or K1 capsule are phylogenetically related to human extra-intestinal E. coli pathotypes [33]. However, these virulent factors may be found to be distributed sporadically in many avians [34].

The gut is colonized by microorganisms shortly after hatching [35]. Immediately after hatching, the GIT of poultry birds encounters many exogenous microorganisms. The initial colonizers and microbiota provide a baseline environment for the creation of a stable and divergent population over time [35, 36]. Initially, the gut of chickens is colonized by facultative aerobes and later substituted by anaerobes [25]. The prolific growth and oxygen consumption by aerobic bacteria create reducing conditions in the gut ecosystem which promote the subsequent growth and colonization by obligate anaerobes [37].

In the case of mother hen-to-offspring microbiome transmission, the phyla Bacteroidetes (Bacteroides, Prevotella, Paraprevotella, Hallella, Butyricimonas, Tannerella, Alistipes, Rikenella, Parabacteroides, Barnesiella, Odoribacter and Phocaeicola genera); Proteobacteria (Desulfovibrio, Bilophila, Anaerobiospirillum, Succinatimonas, Succinivibrio, Helicobacter, Campylobacter, Sutterella, Parasutterella); Deferribacteres (Mucispirillum) and Firmicutes (Phascolarctobacterium, Megamonas, Megasphaera, Dialister, Erysipelotrichaceae incertae sedis, Dorea, Acetitomaculum, Faecalibacterium, Subdoligranulum, Gemmiger, Peptococcus, Eubacterium, Guggenheimella, Defluviitalea) constituted the major microbiome genera [44]. Other less dominant phyla and genera include the Synergistetes (Cloacibacillus), Actinobacteria (Olsenella, Collinsella, Bifidobacterium), Spirochaetes (Treponema, Spirochaeta), Tenericutes (Asteroleplasma) and Candidatus saccharibacteria (Saccharibacteria incertae sedis) [44]. In another scenario, a more diverse microbiome was demonstrated in high egg-laying chickens compared to low egg-laying hens. The former had Lactobacillus, Bifidobacterium, Acinetobacter, Flavobacteriaceae, Lachnoclostridum and Rhodococcus present with relative abundance of Firmicutes, Bacteroides and Fusobacteria in their faecal profile. The latter group of layer hens showed more actinobacteria, proteobacteria and cyanobacteria [45].

The viruses that cause poultry diseases may cause damage to the GIT of young poultry and thus create an environment conducive for the growth of harmful bacteria and protozoa [46, 47]. However, more recent research has shifted focus towards community-based analyses of the gut microbiome. Viral gene sequencing and analysis have revealed the identities of Caudovirales and Geminiviridae viruses and a few uncharacterized viruses in the poultry gut [48]. The undetermined roles of these novel viruses in enteric disease syndromes in poultry or in the overall gut health of poultry have still to be characterized and understood. Therefore, it is important to determine the viral constituents of the poultry gut and to identify and characterize these viruses [49]. Interestingly, recent research efforts using electron microscopy, next-generation sequencing (NGS) and rapid diagnostic methods have described novel avian rotaviruses, astroviruses, parvoviruses, picornaviruses and calicivirus in chicken. These are small viruses linked to poultry diseases [50]. Members of the Siphoviridae, Herpesviridae, Retroviridae and Myoviridae viral families have also been recently reported in broiler chickens using NGS [51]. Considering the foregoing, little is known about the poultry virome profile. The difficulty in characterizing members of the poultry virome may be linked to sequencing methods used in virome analyses, as well as the absence of common genes among viruses.

The composition and role of the bacterial population within the turkey GIT are relatively undetermined [52]. Some studies have compared the caecal microbiome of both wild and domestic birds [53, 54]. These studies have identified specific genera present in the caeca of different types of turkeys, as well as time-dependent shifts in bacterial populations in the turkey intestinal tract [54]. The predominant genera shared by, and found in both chicken and turkey were Clostridium, Ruminococcus, Lactobacillus and Bacteroides. Factors such as diet, rearing environment, the digestive passage rate and genetics may contribute to the differences in composition of the intestinal microbiome between the chicken and turkey [36]. The majority of microbiome in turkeys were shown to consist of Gram-positive rods (77%), Gram-negative rods (14%) and Gram-positive cocci (9%). The predominant bacteria isolated were Eubacterium, Lactobacillus, Peptostreptococcus, Escherichia coli, Propionibacterium and Bacteroides [36]. The dominant phyla found in turkeys of any age and GIT location were the Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, Actinobacteria and Proteobacteria [55].

An analysis of turkey microbiome sequences revealed the identities of 69 bacteria genera [19]. Of these, 37 belonged to the Firmicutes with > 5% represented by Lactobacillus, Clostridium and Ruminococcus genera. Other sequences belonged to the Blautia, Virgibacillus, Ethanoligenes, Eubacterium, Clostridiales family XI incertae sedis, Faecalibacterium, Bacillus, Butyricoccus and Megamonas genera. As in chickens, Bacteroidetes such as Paraprevotella and Prevotella predominated. Aeromonas and Desulfohalobium predominated the Proteobacteria. While Alkaliphillus, Pectinatus, Blautia, Eubacterium, Butyricoccus and Butyrivibrio made up ≥ 1%, the Faecalibacterium, Clostridium, Megamonas and Ruminococcus genera belonging to the Firmicutes represented ≥ 5% of caecal sequences analyzed [19].

Viruses such as astroviruses, rotaviruses and reoviruses have been found in the gut of healthy turkey birds [57]. Others such as reoviruses, papovavirus, enterovirus and coronavirus-like particles were observed in turkey intestines in connection with turkey blue comb disease [58]. Viruses such as coronavirus, calicivirus, reovirus, astrovirus, rotavirus, picornavirus, picobirnavirus, parvovirus and adenovirus have been detected in poultry enteric disease syndromes [59]. Infections and co-infections in turkeys are caused by a wide range of associated viruses which have a negative impact on their intestinal absorptive functions, thus impacting health and productivity [60].

The viral classes detected in goose using cloacal samples include the circovirus, avian coronavirus, Lake Sarah-associated circular virus-32 and Tunis virus. The analysis involved a new panel of viral primers and an NGS-based data module which were designed for efficient virus characterization [61]. An analysis of the Australian wild duck faecal samples using viral metagenomics showed the presence of 21 viruses which included the avian coronavirus and avian paramyxovirus [62]. Samples were prepared in such a way that allowed the elimination of host and elemental dexoyribonucleic acid (DNA) (from bacteria, parasites, fungi), and achieved maximal retention of viral nucleic acid for good NGS reads. Viral communities were structurally and functionally distinct and varied with environs and host habitats [63]. Research on poultry virome population, especially viruses that are not associated with poultry diseases but inherent within the gut environment is still emerging and is an aspect that is worth further exploration.

Little research data is available on the inherent fungal members (mycobiome) and other members of the poultry microbiome such as parasites, protozoa and archaea species. Most fungi reported are linked to diseases in poultry, but not listed as commensal species within the microbiome [64]. This is also observed with parasites such as Histomonas meleagridis, Cryptosporidium parvum and Eimeria species [65]. Only the methanogenic archaea, Methanobrevibacter woesei and related strains have been reported in chickens [66, 67]. Fungal species like the Saccharomyces may be found as part of the gut mycobiome and serve as an alternative to antibiotics. It is also frequently used in prebiotic and probiotic feed formulations for the enhancement of gut health. Fungal members of the microbiome make up a less abundant group (about 0.001% to 0.1%) compared to bacteria. They may also play integral functions in metabolism, immune modulation, and in balancing the microbiome structure and profile. Again, factors which affect the general microbiome structure may also affect the fungal population [12]. The utilization of 16S ribosomal RNA gene amplification of chicken caecal samples revealed the presence of a methanogenic archaea phyla which had a 99% similarity to Methanobrevibacter woesei. The same microorganism was identified in goose faeces [66].

As regards the poultry phageome, little is known of the healthy poultry gut phage community [68]. Classification of phages is done based on the nucleic acid present, morphology, their target bacteria or site and the phage life cycle (lytic or lysogenic). More than 90% of bacteriophages are tailed and belong to the Myoviridae, Siphoviridae and Podoviridae phage families within the order Caudovirales [68]. In a study by Day et al. [49], the presence of a Siphoviridae phage, Propionibacterium phage PA6, as well as the T4- and P2-like phages in the Myoviridae family were demonstrated in chicken broilers. Other phages detected include the positive, single stranded RNA phage in the Leviviridae family and Adenoviridae phages, which had been reported earlier in turkeys [59]. More recently, bacteriophages capable of ingesting Campylobacter bacteria were reported. The chicken caeca samples used were derived from large poultry farms which did not contain Campylobacter [69].

The poultry GIT is a complex environment made up of several families of bacteria, protozoa, fungi and viruses, but bacteria make up the dominant class [19]. When attached to the epithelium, the bacteria act as a protective barrier [70]. They produce vitamins (vitamins B and K), organic acids, bacteriostatic short chain fatty acids (SCFA) like acetic, propionic and butyric acids, antimicrobials (bacteriocins) and induce favourable immune reactions [70]. These metabolites derived from the gut microbiome have essential roles in enhancing metabolism, nutrient digestion and absorption for better poultry health, growth and wellbeing [9]. However, pathogens such as Salmonella and Campylobacter may also be found within the microbial community and pose major health risks to humans [71].

Bacterial density in the duodenum is generally low due to short transit time, its low pH, and presence of pancreatic and bile secretions [81]. Duodenal bacterial profile consists of clostridia, streptococci, enterobacteria and lactobacilli [83]. A reduction in the activities of digestive enzymes and deconjugation of bile acids makes the environment in the distal portion of the small intestine more favourable for bacterial growth [81]. The predominant phylum and genera in the small intestine are the lactobacilli, anaerobic bacteria and Bifidobacterium (Table 1) [89]. Roto et al. [90] also reported the presence of Enterococcus faecium and Pediococcus spp. in the small intestine. A complex bacterial community is found in the poultry (chicken) caecum due to the longer digestive transit times [86]. Firmicutes (approximately 50%–90% of all taxa) [20], Bacteroidetes, Actinobacteria and Proteobacteria make up the dominant caecum phyla [35]. Peptostreptococcus, Propionibacterium, Eubacterium, Prevotella, Bacteroides and Clostridium are the major genera recovered from the caecum by culture-dependant approaches [36]. The Blautia, Anaerostipes, Veillonella, Butyrivibrio, Megamonas, Lactobacillus, Hespellia, Roseburia, Faecalibacterium and Ethanoligenes genera made up > 1% of the caecal bacteria sequences identified [91]. A study by Nordentoft et al. [92] established the predominance of Faecalibacterium and Butyricimonas compared to other genera. The observed variation was attributed to the sampling and analytic techniques used. Archaea are generally present in lower concentrations [66], but the predominant archaeal genus found in chicken caeca is the Methanobrevibacter. Other archaeal taxa may exist in the gut environment and be involved in fermentation with the release of methanogenic dissipation of hydrogen [66, 67].

Improving poultry livestock health for conservation purposes may involve microbiome engineering (ME). ME can be achieved through various means to facilitate poultry health and conservation [93]. Since molecular techniques have become quite inexpensive and available globally, and microbiome toolkits expanded in the last two decades, microbiome research has increased, and scientific information on their role in health (metabolism, disease, immunity, nutrition, fitness, behaviour) and conservation continue to produce new and interesting outcomes [93]. The application of sequencing methods in poultry microbiome analysis could significantly expedite the acquisition of fascinating results of importance to both animal and human health and disease trends. ME implies that poultry systems can be subjected to experimental manipulations for the purpose of enhancing their health and achieving conservation [94]. In order to improve health and poultry products production, microbiome conservation has become a viable option, and this too given the rise in world population and demand for reduced antibiotic use in livestock. Targeting the microbiome for poultry conservation may also help fight infectious diseases and decrease morbidity and mortality rates in poultry [95]. ME is discussed under subheadings in the following paragraphs.

Besides the beneficial use of antibiotics in poultry infections therapy, antibiotics may cause disruption in the presence of favorable microbial species [96], as well as other negative health issues in poultry animals [97]. A disturbed or disrupted microbiome impacts poultry heath. This is observed with the report of a different micrbiome profile in healthy animals compared to the profile of a dysbiotic animal gut [98]. In other words, antibiotic use can adversely affect poultry gut microbiome conservation if inappropriately used. However, besides the careful monitoring of their use in infections treatment, the unexpected outcomes may require a pause or stoppage in their use in stimulating poultry growth.

A viable possibility to enhance poultry health and restore dysbiosis (DB) involves the use of probiotics. Diet supplementation with live microbiota called probiotics bring about health benefits following appropriate use [99]. For example, some microorganisms can efficiently digest feed fibres, as well as other nutrients to make them readily available to the animal host [100]. Probiotic lactic acid bacteria (LAB), for example, Lactobacillus sp. can produce beneficial molecules (lactic acid) that are antimicrobial in nature during digestion or fermentation of substrates which are useful to the host. They achieve this through the modification or stabilization of the inherent microbiome or microbiome environment. Some LAB are gut commensals. Bacteriocins are antimicrobial moiety secreted from Lactobacillus acidophilus which can competitively prevent pathogen colonization and attachment (competitive exclusion) [101], thus reducing pathogenesis [102]. Probiotics are also able to change epithelial turnover and biofilm structures [103]. Probiotics as immunoregulators have come under investigation and require more research to understand the underlying mechanisms. Immune regulation in form of decrease in Salmonella and enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC) population, and upregulated antibody secretion have been reported in chickens fed with Lactobacillus supplemented feed [104].

Other probiotic examples include yeasts like Saccharomyces sp. which restore the gastrointestinal microbiome by reducing acidosis risk common in ruminants, and balancing gut pH [105]. Also, Acremonium charticola, Aspergillus awamori, A. niger, A. oryzae, Chrysonilia crassa and Rhizopus oligosporus [64] are examples of filamentous fungi with probiotic potential. However, their potentials are yet to be tested in poultry [106]. In addition, broilers’ fitness has been improved with probiotics and probiotic supplemented feeds [107]. Improved egg quality [108], egg size and enhanced egg production have been achieved with Enterococcus faecium and Bifidobacterium thermophilus in layers [109]. Despite the benefits of probiotics, controlled research on probiotic strains, their culture and isolation, as well as in vivo assay for efficacy and mechanism(s) of action remain to be determined. Studies on specificity or broad effect of single or multi-strain probiotic mixtures across animal hosts are also pertinent. Such studies could be followed by the determination of action mechanism(s) which may be either parameter dependent (diversity, microbiome, temperature) or constitutive [101]. It may also be essential to consider the developmental stage of an animal prior to probiotic application and probiotic development [95].

Besides probiotics, prebiotic diet supplements may also be used to stimulate growth. They are substrates or nutrients that can improve the growth of beneficial species within the microbiome [110]. Microbial by-products such as enzymes could also be utilized as supplements to break down or ferment inaccessible substrates. For example, enzymes breakdown fibrous substrates, release trapped nutrients and make them available within the microbiome environment. The nutrient-rich environment contributes to the improvement of the microbiome and poultry health. As an immense advantage, the use of supplements in ME and DB restoration are generally regarded as safe (GRAS) and less regulated compared to antibiotics [111]. Poultry fitness had been enhanced directly using the prebiotic fructo-oligosaccharide (FOS), which was not possible with mannan-oligosaccharide (MOS). The FOS improved activity of beneficial species but did not impede pathogen activity [112]. In mildly stressed environments, MOS has been reported to increase the gut surface-area to volume ratio through increase of goblet cell numbers and villi height in poultry birds [13]. Prebiotic galacto-oligosaccharide (GOS) also influence the chicken gut flora by regulating the bird’s innate immunity (upregulated presence of interleukin-17A (IL-17A) over IL-10 in chicken caecum and ileum). GOS also influenced microbiome profile by increasing the relative abundance of Lactobacillus johnsonii in GOS-fed broilers compared to Lactobacillus crispatus, for improvement in broiler performance [113].

A dysbiotic microbiome, as well as feed efficiency (FE) may be improved using FMT with transplant samples derived from a healthy poultry donor [114]. However, outcomes of FMT treatments are variable, thus limiting its efficacy as demonstrated in recent attempts [115, 116]. In poultry, however, the use of FMT with or without probiotics have protected against Clostridium perfringens, Salmonella, Campylobacter, Listeria spp. and E. coli pathogens. Such protection was probably achieved by competitive exclusion and environmental modifications through the secretion of various molecules [18]. A recent study established that the commensal chicken microbiome can be engineered to regulate natural and hereditary immune reactions against influenza H9N2 virus following chick treatment with Lactobacillus and FMT. Thus, the combination of a probiotic and FMT served to promote a healthy microbiome environment for enhanced defence against the influenza virus [96]. The usage of FMT in poultry remains a budding research area that could be explored to expand potential applications.

This often involves the creation and rewiring of specific actors within a microbiome to perform desired tasks such as use of phages in phage therapy and microbial gene editing in the CRISPR-Cas gene editing system. Usually, the target microorganism is often integral in the microbial ecosystem and would have a ripple effect within the microbiome. Bacteriophages are used to target specific bacterial strains in a microbiome in a technique known as phage therapy. It may be applied in stopping unintended consequences in humans from consumption of poultry products infected with E. coli, Listeria, Salmonella or Campylobacter [117]. The delivery of target molecules across cell membranes or induction of apoptosis in target microbial cells have also been achieved with bacterial secretion systems [118]. Certain commensal poultry microbiome species may also be selected to serve as drug delivery vehicles or for the secretion of cytokines [118].

Specific genes in a microbe may also be chosen for editing using the CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing system [119]. The Cas9 has been successfully demonstrated for the gene-targeted production of mutant spermatozoa, which were useful in the generation of both homozygous and heterozygous mutant chicken offsprings [120]. Gene editing in combination with electroporation has been shown to affect the function of target genes in chick embryo somatic cells [121]. The system allows for the deletion of specific gene regions (virulence factor coding genes) or used as an antimicrobial via self-targeted removal of the resistant region [122]. Microbiomes may also be edited using pyocins which remove specific microbial strains in a microbiome by puncturing the cell membrane and killing targeted species [123]. Some added prospects worth exploring include engineered phages and bacteria as gene and protein transfer vehicles. Still, these potential applications are far from happening soon given the possible risks which need to be circumvented prior to use in poultry [124].

Phages infect and replicate within bacteria but are selective of the bacteria they infect. Phage therapy impacts the microbiome by removing foodborne pathogens such as E. coli [125], C. jejuni, L. monocytogenes, Staphylococcus aureus, Salmonella spp., methiciliin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) [68], and C. perfringens [126]. Unlike antibiotics, phages are more specific in their target and aid in conservation of the commensal gut microbiome. Phage therapy is therefore a viable alternative to antibiotics and makes an excellent tool in poultry infections treatment [68].

The poultry gut microbiota affects poultry health and growth through essential functions such as improvement in nutrient absorption and immune system strengthening and modulation [13]. Choi et al. [84] opined that for a detailed insight into poultry microbiome function and diversity, metagenomic tools may be used in the analysis of chicken gut microbiota with a view to taxonomically characterize and infer biome functions. The same analytic tools could be useful in proposing gene sets that could serve as indicators for poultry health. The authors also advocated that the chicken microbiota could be manipulated to enhance poultry wellbeing in the future [84]. Due to the gut microbiome complexity and diversity, the ability to fully comprehend the roles of the gut microbiome has been immensely impeded. To shed more light, metagenomic approaches are being used and continuously developed to help understand these roles, as well as aid in the ecological and nutritional predictive functions of the poultry gut microbiome. Studies that link feed type to microbiome profiles also require the application of metagenomic techniques [127]. Metaproteomic and 16S rRNA analysis have revealed that microorganisms identified from caecal samples belonging to the Carnobacteriaceae, Lachnospiraceae, Clostridiaceae, Erysipelotrichaceae, Streptococcaceae, Peptococcaceae, Ruminococcaceae, Lactobacillaceae, Anaeroplasmataceae, Succinovibrionaceae and Eubacteriaceae families have a relative abundance above 1% [127]. Metagenomic approaches into poultry microbiome investigate genetic information derived from specific host(s) or environments with the intention of determining their microbiome diversity and functions [128].

On the other hand, unlike the OTU approach, the Amplicon Sequence Variants (ASVs) method determines the exact number of times that target sequences were read. Sequences are then filtered using a threshold confidence level to generate exact sequences without the use of databases or clustering. This makes direct comparison with databases or studies utilizing similar target genes possible. The ASVs approach gives a higher resolution for precise information on diversity and identification to the species or strain level. ASVs are also known as ‘sub-OTUs’ [141].

Poultry intestinal health is important for an efficient and sustainable GIT physiology [142]. The maintenance of a healthy gut is complex and relies on a fine balance between the immune system and the endogenous microbiota [35]. A healthy poultry gut is generally involved in maintaining intestinal homeostasis by a complex network of cells and their secreted soluble products [143]. The intestinal microbiota is involved in modulating host immune system, influences the normal structural and functional organ development, and host metabolism [144]. Mucosal immune responses to resident intestinal microbiota can distinguish commensal from pathogenic bacteria [79]. The repertoire of the T-cell receptors found in both the gut and the spleen are known to be affected by the diverse microbiota found in the avian GIT [145]. The gut microbiota is also involved in the modulation of B-cell response and immunoglobulin A (IgA) production. IgA plays an important role in regulating the composition of the gut microbiota by specifically binding to the bacterial epitopes [146].

The increased proliferation of microbial communities occurs when there is a higher availability of undigested nutrients present in the hindgut [151]. This leads to disruption in the equilibrium between the gut microbiome and host, creating metabolic, pathogenic or sterile inflammation [152]. A healthy gut optimizes digestibility, reduces nutrient excretion and mitigates ammonia (NH3) and other gas emissions within the poultry housing environment. These gases may pose an environmental and health risk [153]. Conditions such as optimal temperature, production phase, bird size and air currents in the poultry farm can affect the health and productivity of poultry birds [154]. External environmental stressors such as temperature variations, drafts, dryness or humidity, and internal stressors can alter the intake of feed and intestinal motility resulting in reduced digestion [155]. Good ventilation within the poultry house is also key to minimize condensation and litter moisture [156]. These stressors can be detrimental to the immunological systems of poultry whereby these birds now lack the ability to maintain their GIT microbiota and health [157].

The shift from traditional techniques (culture-dependent) to the more recent and advanced metagenomic approaches (culture-independent) have expanded our knowledge of the poultry microbiome diversity, microbiome population dynamics, as well as microbiome functions in poultry metabolism and health. Advancements in bioinformatic tools remain essential to make headway in this budding area of scientific research into analysis of the poultry gut microbiota. It is also our submission that all participating members of the poultry microbiome including the archae, fungi and parasites still require in-depth analysis and elucidation. This is important because most studies are focused on bacterial profiling, few on fungi and even fewer on viral and other microbial classes [158]. Microbial databases would be significantly improved by increasing research of understudied domains and members of the microbiome [159]. The influence of internal and external environmental factors should also be given more consideration in microbiome study designs. ME techniques could also be further explored in poultry health and conservation. It is also highly likely that with the continued improvements in identification and characterization technologies, we can expect the discovery of new members of the poultry microbiome. In addition, greater insight into their role in poultry health, metabolism and conservation can also be expected.

