Dietary Intake Is Unlikely to Explain Symptom Severity and Syndrome-Specific Microbiome Alterations in a Cohort of Women with Fibromyalgia

Background: Significant alterations were recently identified in the composition and putative function of the gut microbiome in women with fibromyalgia. As diet can influence the composition of the gut microbiome, differences in nutritional intake could, in theory, account for some of these specific fibromyalgia microbiome alterations. The current study aims to compare the diet of women with fibromyalgia to that of controls in order to explore possible associations between the intake of certain nutrients, symptom severity and gut microbiome composition. Methods: The study population was comprised of 56 women with fibromyalgia and 68 controls. Dietary intake was assessed using the NIH Automated Self-Administered 24 h recall, following dietitian’s instructions and the completion of a three-day dietary recall. The gut microbiome was assessed by 16S ribosomal RNA gene sequencing of stool samples. Results: Most demographic and anthropometric characteristics were comparable between groups. The average energy and macronutrient intake (total and relative) and overall diet quality score were not different between patients and controls, nor were the main vitamins, minerals, fatty acids, alcohol, caffeine, sugar or fiber intakes. The daily intake of micronutrients and normalized macronutrients in women with fibromyalgia was largely not correlated with disease-specific measures, including pain intensity, fatigue, cognitive symptoms and quality of sleep, or with the relative quantity of almost any of the gut microbiome bacterial taxa differentially abundant in fibromyalgia. Conclusion: These data demonstrate that dietary intakes, as evaluated by self-reported questionnaires, probably cannot explain the syndrome-specific differences in gut microbiome or the clinical phenotype of fibromyalgia.

Fibromyalgia is a prevalent syndrome characterized by chronic widespread pain, fatigue, cognitive symptoms and disturbed sleep [1,2,3]. Affecting 2–4% of the adult population, fibromyalgia leads to a considerable decrease in the quality of life of affected individuals [1,4]. Currently, there is no known cure for fibromyalgia, and recommended treatment is multi-disciplinary, aiming to alleviate symptoms [1,5]. Accepted treatment modalities include lifestyle modification, pharmacotherapy, physical measures and psychosocial support [1,5,6]. Lifestyle measures are considered as of paramount importance and include graded physical activity, sleep hygiene, pacing of daily activity and dietary interventions. Different dietary regimens have been tested in individuals with fibromyalgia, with variable levels of success [7,8,9].

Several studies reported on the differences in the dietary habits of individuals with fibromyalgia [20,21,22]. The purpose of this study is to determine whether diet is associated with either previously defined fibromyalgia-specific alterations in the gut microbiome or the severity of symptoms in adult women with fibromyalgia.

The study was conducted at the Alan Edwards Pain Management Unit (AEPMU) of the McGill University Health Centre, Montreal (MUHC), and at the West Island Rheumatology Clinic, in Montreal, QC, Canada. The study was approved by the MUHC institutional review board (approval number 2018-3574). Participants were given a detailed explanation of the study and signed an informed consent form.

Women with fibromyalgia were recruited either by advertisements in the local media, by a dedicated website or directly by their treating physician. The inclusion criteria for patients were: female sex, aged 30–60 years, widespread pain index (WPI) and symptom severity scores compatible with the American College of Rheumatology diagnostic criteria (ACR 2016) for fibromyalgia, and ability to give informed consent in French or English. Control participants were recruited by referral from patient participants and advertisements in the local media and a dedicated website. Control participants of three separate groups were recruited: (1) first-degree adult female relatives of patients participating in the study were recruited as genetic controls (RC); (2) adult household members of patients participating in the study were recruited as environment controls (HC); and (3) unrelated healthy adult women, 30–60 years of age (UC).

Patients with chronic pain were interviewed by a specialized pain physician for a thorough clinical assessment and only those whose diagnosis of fibromyalgia was confirmed were included in the study. All participants—patients and controls—were interviewed by the same physician, and data were collected regarding their demographics, anthropometrics, co-morbidities, medications, dietary intake, smoking and alcohol consumption. All participants completed the following questionnaires: the Fibromyalgia Survey Diagnostic Criteria and Severity Scale (FSDC) questionnaire, assessing symptom severity, pain location, fatigue, sleep quality and cognitive and somatic complaints in fibromyalgia patients [23]; the Fibromyalgia Impact Questionnaire (FIQ), a 10-item questionnaire evaluating physical functioning, work difficulty, pain, fatigue, morning tiredness, stiffness, anxiety and depression [24]; and the Insomnia Severity Index (ISI) Sleep Scale from the Medical Outcomes Study, a 12-item sleep quality evaluation questionnaire [25]. All questionnaires were available in English or in French and have been validated in both languages [26,27,28,29]. All participants were interviewed by a dietitian, with instructions for completing the web-based NIH ASA24-Canada dietary recall, validated in English and in French [30].

Dietary intake was assessed using the NIH Automated Self-Administered 24 h recall (ASA24-Canada version 2016, English or French) as previously described. All participants were trained and supervised by a dietitian as they completed the first day of recall. They were then instructed to complete the dietary assessment on 2 additional days during the following week, allowing for a total of 3 days of dietary assessment, of which 2 were weekdays and 1 was a weekend day. Datasets with less than two completed days were discarded. Daily nutrient averages were calculated, and macro- and micronutrient intakes (including supplements) were compared between groups as absolute intakes and relative to energy intake or body weight for macronutrients. Under-reporting was investigated by applying a ratio of reported energy intake over resting energy expenditure estimated with the Mifflin–St. Jeor equation [31]; participants with a ratio below 0.9 were deemed as under-reporters and excluded from the analysis. Finally, the Healthy Eating Index (HEI-2015) was calculated to assess diet quality [32].

Stool samples for microbiome analysis were collected as previously reported [10]. Briefly, samples were collected at patients’ homes using the OMNIgene Gut OM-200 kit (DNA Genotek, Ottawa, ON, Canada), and fresh frozen at −20 °C. Samples were shipped on ice, in controlled shipping conditions, and were stored at −80 °C upon arrival at the research facility.

DNA extraction, amplification and sequencing were performed as previously reported [10]. Briefly, DNA was extracted from all stool samples using the QIAamp PowerFecal DNA kit (Qiagen: Venlo, The Netherlands) and the V5-V6 region (based on Escherichia coli) of the 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) was targeted for amplification by PCR using the forward primer: S-D-Bact-0785-a-S-18, GGMTTAGATACCCBDGTA and reverse primer: S-*-Univ-1100-a-A-15, GGGTYKCGCTCGTTR [33]. The CS1 (ACACTGACGACATGGTTCTACA) and CS2 (TACGGTAGCAGAGACTTGGTCT) tags were used to add a barcode and Illumina adapters. Sequencing was performed using the MiSeq250 platform (2 × 250 nucleotides (nt) paired-end sequencing). The ANCHOR pipeline was used to process and annotate sequence reads [10,34] (https://github.com/gonzalezem/ANCHOR, accessed on 9 March 2022). Sequences were aligned and dereplicated using Mothur [35] before the selection of operational taxonomic units (OTUs) using a count threshold of 48 across all samples. Annotation used 4 sequence repositories with strict BLASTn criteria (>99% identity and coverage): NCBI curated bacterial and Archaea RefSeq, NCBI nr/nt, SILVA, Ribosomal Database Project (RDP) (NCBI curated bacterial and Archaea RefSeq was given a priority when at 100% identity and coverage). In the cases where the highest identity/coverage was shared amongst different putative annotations, all were retained and reported. Amplicons with low counts (<48) were binned to high-count sequences in a second BLASTn, using a lower threshold of >98% identity/coverage.

Differential abundance of OTUs in fibromyalgia versus unrelated controls was calculated using DESeq2 [36,37], as previously reported [10], with a selection parameter of false discovery rate (FDR; Benjamini–Hochberg procedure) <0.1 [38,39]. Regularized log transformation was applied to raw counts across samples (rlog function, R phyloseq package). Sparsity and low-count cut-offs were used whereby an OTU count in a single sample is <90% of the count in all samples, and the OTU count must be >2 in 40% of the samples.

Correlations between the normalized nutrient intake, log-transformed OTU abundance, and clinical variables were calculated using the Kendall rank correlation. The individual p-value was calculated for each comparison, and the correction for multiple comparisons was performed using Benjamini–Hochberg FDR, with a cut-off value of 0.05. Results were visualized using color-coded correlation matrices representing the correlation coefficients, which were sorted based on hierarchical clustering using MathWorks MATLAB 2020a.

Demographics, anthropometrics, co-morbidities and medications were compared using ANOVA for univariate comparisons and MANOVA for multivariate comparisons, on IBM® SPSS® Statistics version 23 and MathWorks MATLAB® version 2020a.

Dietary analysis was performed as follows: Kolmogorov–Smirnov and Shapiro–Wilk tests were used to test the normality of distributions. Dietary intake data were compared between all groups with the one-way ANOVA and post hoc Games-Howell test (appropriate for unequal sample size) unless otherwise stated. The intake of nutrients, which was not normally distributed, was analyzed using the non-parametric Kruskal–Wallis test. Analyses were conducted using IBM® SPSS® Statistics version 23.

A total of 200 patients were screened for this study, of which 29 were excluded during screening, and 15 were excluded following a medical interview that ruled out the diagnosis of fibromyalgia. Of the remaining 156 participants, 12 were excluded for incomplete filling of the dietary recall questionnaires and 20 were excluded for under-reporting (Supplementary Figure S1). Of the 124 participants who were included in the analyses, 56 were women with fibromyalgia, and 68 were healthy participants in 1 of the 3 control groups: 10 were first-degree relatives of fibromyalgia patients (RC), 18 were household members of fibromyalgia patients (HC) and the remaining 40 were unrelated controls (UCs). Other than sex and marital status, the differences in demographic and anthropometric characteristics among groups were not statistically significant (Table 1). All household members were male, while participants in all other groups were women. No seasonal variation in recruitment was observed between groups when comparing sample collection season (ANOVA p = 0.36, F = 1.08).

Mean ± SD or % as indicated. * indicates significant difference (p < 0.01) between household members and all other groups.

Fibromyalgia patients were women (mean age: 47 ± 8 years), who on average had been diagnosed with fibromyalgia 12 (SD 9.7) years earlier. Ninety-three percent of all participants were of Caucasian ethnicity. The mean WPI in the patient group was 10 (SD 3.3), and the mean symptom severity score (SSS) was 9.2 (SD 1.8). The American College of Rheumatology diagnostic criteria (ACR 2016) and FIQ scores were significantly higher in patients compared to all control groups (Pillai’s trace p < 0.0001, F = 3.86; Supplementary Table S1). IBS was significantly more prevalent among participants with fibromyalgia (48%, p < 0.0001, Supplementary Table S1).

Dietary assessment was performed for all participants using the NIH Automated Self-Administered 24 h recall. The energy and macronutrient intake (total and relative) did not differ between patients and controls (Table 2). In addition, vitamin, mineral, different fatty acids, alcohol, caffeine, sugar and fiber intakes did not differ between groups (Table 3). The overall diet quality score was calculated for all eligible participants and no differences were observed between the groups (Table 3). Non-metric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) analysis of the daily food and nutrient intake showed an overlapping pattern of fibromyalgia patients and controls, whereby the difference between the groups was statistically insignificant (R2 = 0.001, p = 0.88), further corroborating the similarity of dietary intake in both groups (Supplementary Figure S2).

Mean ± SD. * different from “household members”, p < 0.05 ANOVA and Games-Howell post hoc test. 1 mono- and di-saccharides, 2 plant cell wall polymeric sugars.

Vitamin D: ergocalciferol + cholecalciferol; vitamin E: α-tocopherol; vitamin K: phylloquinone. 1 Servings in cup equivalents; 2 servings in ounce equivalents; 3 as number of drinks; HEI: Healthy Eating Index, see Methods for elaboration. A table summarizing the daily average intakes of macronutrients has been previously reported [10].

Nutritional supplements were taken more frequently by participants with fibromyalgia (70%) as compared to all control groups (RC 40%, HC 0%, UC 35%). However, this observation did not reach statistical significance (ANOVA p = 0.1), nor did the consumption of any individual supplement (Supplementary Table S2).

To explore the possible quantitative correlation between participants’ dietary intake and symptom severity, the daily intake of micro- and macronutrients was correlated with the clinical indices of fibromyalgia. Other than waking up unrefreshed, which was negatively correlated with the intake of selenium and grains, no significant correlations were detected between the intake of any nutrient and the severity of any symptoms (Figure 1).

The correlation of macro- and micro-nutrient intake with the relative abundance of all bacterial taxa was explored. A total of 1831 significant correlations were observed (p < 0.01), corresponding to 574 OTUs. These comprised 129 OTUs, which could be identified as putative species. The number of bacterial taxa for which a significant correlation with the intake of certain nutrients was observed differed between nutrients. This number ranged from only 1 correlated taxon for poultry consumption to 75 correlated taxa for citrus fruits (Figure 2A). The nutrients or foods that correlated with the highest number of bacterial taxa were citrus fruits, magnesium, fiber, copper and yogurt.

Well-characterized members of the phyla firmicutes, including Roseburia hominis, Eubacterium eligens and Eubacterium ramulus, were positively correlated with the consumption of nuts, vegetables and vegetable oils, respectively. The actinobacteria Bifidobacterium bifidum was negatively correlated with folic acid (Figure 2B). Yogurt consumption was negatively correlated with the abundance of several bacterial species, including Bifidobacterium adolescentis.

Seventy-two bacterial taxa were found at either significantly higher or lower relative abundance in fibromyalgia patients as compared with controls (as previously reported [10]). To test the possibility that some of these differences could be attributable to altered dietary intake, the relative abundance of the differentially abundant (DA) bacterial taxa was correlated with the daily intake of all measured micro- and macronutrients. No significant correlations were observed between any measure of dietary intake and the relative abundance of DA bacterial taxa.

To verify that significant correlations were not lost due to correction for multiple comparisons, the correlation was explored between DA taxa abundance and the intake of a subset of nutrients, which were found to have the highest numbers of correlated species. Significant correlations were only observed between 2 OTUs (identified to the genus level) and the intake of citrus fruits, vegetables, nuts and selenium (Figure 3). In conclusion, of the 72 taxa differentially abundant in fibromyalgia, only 2 had potential correlations with dietary factors, and of the 19 species/strains differentially abundant in fibromyalgia, none correlated with dietary intake.

In this cohort of women with fibromyalgia and healthy controls, dietary intake did not correlate with symptom severity and syndrome-specific microbiome alterations. In the present study, clinical measures, nutritional intake and microbiome composition were analyzed for a cohort of women with fibromyalgia and control groups comprising household members, first-degree relatives and unrelated healthy women. Women with fibromyalgia did not differ in their demographic and anthropometric measures when compared to unrelated and first-degree control group participants. When comparing their nutritional intake, average energy intake, macronutrient intake (total and relative) and overall diet quality score, no differences were observed between patients and controls. Furthermore, vitamin, mineral, fatty acids, alcohol, caffeine, sugar and fiber intakes were similar between the groups. The normalized daily intake of macro- and micronutrient intake did not correlate with the severity of fibromyalgia symptoms, including pain intensity, fatigue, cognitive symptoms and sleep problems.

This study has several limitations. First, participants were generally a homogeneous cohort in terms of ethnicity and geographical distribution. Second, the dietary recall, despite being a well-validated tool, may lead to inaccurate reporting, specifically due to recall and reporting biases. Objective measures of nutrient intake, when applicable, would be required to strengthen these observations. This research did not explore fibromyalgia-related microbiome interactions with dietary interventions or specific diets, such as Mediterranean or vegetarian, and this traditional diet assessment tool does not evaluate non-nutrient component, such as polyphenols, or that could potentially affect the microbiome [56,57]. Lastly, the collection and analysis of a large dataset, which necessitates statistical correction for multiple comparisons, could potentially fail to detect weak correlations.

Our data suggest that dietary intake is unlikely to explain the differences in gut microbiome or the clinical phenotype of fibromyalgia. Contrary to the belief that fibromyalgia patients commonly adhere to dietary adjustments, fibromyalgia patients and controls consumed similar diets. A better understanding of the intricate interactions between chronic pain, diet and the microbiome calls for further studies, prospectively exploring the effects of dietary interventions on clinical symptoms as well as on the composition of the gut microbiome in individuals with fibromyalgia.

Despite the common belief that diet could impact pain and other symptoms of fibromyalgia, in this cohort, dietary intake did not correlate with symptom severity.

While the intake of macro- and micronutrients was strongly correlated with the overall composition of the gut microbiome, it was not associated with the abundance of specific bacterial taxa known to be altered in fibromyalgia.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

