Fecal microbiome alterations in treatment-naive de novo Parkinson’s disease

Gut microbiota alterations in Parkinson’s disease (PD) have been found in several studies and are suggested to contribute to the pathogenesis of PD. However, previous results could not be adequately adjusted for a potential confounding effect of PD medication and disease duration, as almost all PD participants were already using dopaminergic medication and were included several years after diagnosis. Here, the gut microbiome composition of treatment-naive de novo PD subjects was assessed compared to healthy controls (HC) in two large independent case-control cohorts (n = 136 and 56 PD, n = 85 and 87 HC), using 16S-sequencing of fecal samples. Relevant variables such as technical batches, diet and constipation were assessed for their potential effects. Overall gut microbiome composition differed between PD and HC in both cohorts, suggesting gut microbiome alterations are already present in de novo PD subjects at the time of diagnosis, without the possible confounding effect of dopaminergic medication. Although no differentially abundant taxon could be replicated in both cohorts, multiple short chain fatty acids (SCFA) producing taxa were decreased in PD in both cohorts. In particular, several taxa belonging to the family Lachnospiraceae were decreased in abundance. Fewer taxonomic differences were found compared to previous studies, indicating smaller effect sizes in de novo PD.

Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative disorder, clinically characterized by motor symptoms like bradykinesia, rigidity, and tremor1. Non-motor symptoms can precede the cardinal motor symptoms by years2. In particular, constipation is one of the earliest non-motor manifestations of PD and can occur up to twenty years before diagnosis3. The occurrence of non-motor symptoms can be used to identify probable prodromal PD subjects and predict conversion to motor PD4. Complementary to the early gastrointestinal symptomatology, alpha-synuclein (aSyn) pathology, gut inflammation and increased gut permeability are present in the early and prodromal stages of the disease5,6. In addition, ascending denervation along the vagal nerve is suggested in a subgroup of PD subjects, suggesting a possible gastrointestinal origin7.

The current gut microbiome study concerns two large, independent, treatment-naive cohorts from the Netherlands (NL cohort) and Finland (FIN cohort). The gut microbiome of fecal samples was investigated using 16S rRNA gene sequencing. Both cohorts comprise both PD and HC subjects from the same geographical area. Both cohorts were analyzed separately due to their different geographical origin and the use of different methodologies for stool sample collection and DNA extraction. Relevant variables, such as technical batches, diet and constipation, were assessed for their potential effects on the relationship between PD status and gut microbiome composition. Subsequently, a thorough investigation of the gut microbiome of two large treatment-naive de novo PD cohorts could be conducted.

For the NL cohort, 136 PD subjects and 85 HC could be included. The PD and HC groups were similar in terms of age and BMI, but differed in terms of the sex ratio (p = 0.026). In the FIN cohort 56 PD subjects and 87 HC were included. There was no statistically significant difference in age, sex, and BMI between the FIN cohort PD and HC groups. As expected, gastrointestinal dysfunction was higher in PD compared to HC, with lower Bristol Stool Chart scores for stool consistency and lower stool frequency, indicating harder stool consistency and increased levels of constipation. However, these associations were statistically significant only in the NL cohort. An overview of the clinical characteristics is provided in Table
1.

Given the primary aim to describe gut microbiome changes for the first time in treatment-naive de novo PD subjects, all clinical and technical metadata were investigated for their potential to influence the effect of PD status on gut microbiome composition. The variables age, sex, BMI, stool consistency and DNA extraction batch were selected a priori as potentially relevant nuisance variables. To ensure a large effect of another variable on the relation between PD status and gut microbiome composition would not be missed, all nuisance variables were screened for their potential effect using a PERMANOVA in a model with PD status:

For the FIN cohort, model (4): taxon ~ PD status + stool consistency + number of sequences

Within-sample diversity (i.e. alpha diversity) indices indicated opposite effects in the two cohorts (Fig.
1a). In the NL cohort, alpha diversity was higher in PD subjects with statistically significant differences in observed richness and Chao1 (nominal p-values < 0.05, uncorrected Mann-Whitney U test) and a statistically non-significant increase in the Shannon alpha diversity index. In contrast, alpha diversity was lower in the FIN cohort, with statistically significant differences in observed richness, Chao1, Shannon and inverse Simpson (nominal p-values < 0.01, uncorrected Mann-Whitney U test).

Overall gut microbiome composition (i.e. beta diversity) showed a large overlap between PD and HC (Fig.
1b). PERMANOVA revealed univariable statistically significant differences between PD and HC in both cohorts: p = 6.4E-03 and p = 4.0E-04 for the NL and FIN cohort respectively (Table
2). After adjusting for selected covariates (see variable selection) a statistically significant difference between PD and HC remained, with p = 0.030 and p = 0.016 for the NL and FIN cohort respectively. When assessing differences in overall gut microbiome, using (non-compositional) Bray-Curtis distances, the results were similar, although no statistically significant difference between PD and HC was found in the NL cohort when adjusting for covariates (p = 0.17).

Differential abundance analyses revealed several statistically significant differentially abundant taxa at the ASV, genus and family level (Table
3). Only one taxon at the ASV level, belonging to the Lachnospiraceae GCA-900066575 genus, was identified as differentially abundant by both ANCOM and DESeq2 in the FIN cohort (Supplementary Table 5). None of the differentially abundant taxa were shared between the NL and FIN cohort. However, some similarity between the two cohorts can be discerned. Both at the ASV and genus level several taxa belonging to the Lachnospiraceae family were reduced in abundance in PD, in particular strains belonging to the Lachnospiraceae genus Roseburia. At the family level, Lachnospiraceae was reduced in PD in both cohorts, although this difference was not statistically significant after correction for multiple testing in DESeq2 nor identified as differentially abundant in ANCOM (Supplementary Table 7). Relative abundances of genera and families that were identified as statistically significant differentially abundant in one of the two cohorts, are depicted in Fig.
2.

Samples were randomized as much as possible during the DNA extraction and library preparation and were all sequenced together to minimize batch effects (see Methods). Nonetheless, as the two different cohorts were initiated independently, different methods of sample collection and DNA extraction were used in the two cohorts. Samples from the NL cohort were collected without preservative, frozen immediately and processed using the Qiagen Allprep DNA extraction kit. In the FIN cohort, samples were collected using a DNA preservative and shipped via postal service. DNA extraction was performed using the PSP Spin Stool Kit. To assess the influence of the different methodologies, 47 stool samples from the NL cohort were collected and processed using both the NL method (Qiagen Allprep) and FIN method (PSP Spin Stool Kit) in parallel, taking one aliquot with each method from the same fecal material. Multivariate analysis yielded a statistically significant difference in overall microbiome composition between the two DNA extraction methods (PERMANOVA, p = 9.999E-05). Several taxa at various taxonomic levels were identified as differentially abundant. Both ANCOM and DESeq2 identified various taxa belonging to the Lachnospiraceae family as less abundant when using the FIN extraction protocol, whereas DESeq2 also identified several taxa belonging to the order of Bacteroidales as more abundant when using the FIN protocol (Supplementary Table 8).

Contrary to the FIN cohort, the NL cohort consisted of a substantial proportion of HC from the same household as a PD participant (n = 46). Similarity between same household participants was assessed by stratifying the NL cohort according to household status. First, 45 PD subjects and 45 HC, of which each case-control pair is from the same household, were compared. Second, the same 45 HC were compared to 45 PD subjects who did not have someone from their household participate as HC in the NL cohort, matched according to age and sex. Though the overall microbiome composition of age- and sex-matched PD subjects from a different household was more distant from that of the HC compared to the overall microbiome composition of non-matched PD subjects from the same household, this did not lead to the discovery of more differentially abundant taxa (Supplementary Table 9).

Here, we have presented the results of the two largest gut microbiome studies to date with treatment-naive de novo PD subjects, close to the time of diagnosis. Both cohorts showed alterations in gut microbiome composition of fecal samples in PD after adjustment for relevant covariates. In concordance, several taxa at the ASV, genus and family level were identified as differentially abundant between PD and HC. Though none of the differentially abundant taxa could be directly replicated in both cohorts, both cohorts showed several ASVs and genera belonging to the family of Lachnospiraceae to be reduced in PD, in particular strains of the genus Roseburia.

In conclusion, our findings suggest fewer taxonomic differences in treatment-naive de novo PD subjects compared to previous studies with already treated patients in the more advanced stages of the disease. Although our finding of reduced levels of SCFA-producing taxa are in line with previous studies, none of our findings could be directly replicated with statistical significance in both cohorts, showing the importance of comparing multiple cohorts for analyzing highly variable data such as the microbiome. In addition, the importance of adequately assessing the effects of potential nuisance variables, such as constipation and batch effects of laboratory procedures, can be highlighted. Further enquiry of the metabolic profile of the gut microbiome in treatment-naive de novo PD and longitudinal analysis of the current dataset can provide further insight in relevant pathophysiological mechanisms and the extent to which gut microbiome changes might be confined to specific PD subtypes and medication effects.

For the Dutch (NL) cohort, treatment-naive de novo PD participants were included as part of the Dutch Parkinson Cohort of de novo PD subjects (DUPARC, ClinicalTrials.gov identifier NCT04180865)50. Inclusion criteria were PD diagnosis by a movement disorder specialist according to the Movement Disorders Society (MDS) clinical diagnostic criteria1, confirmed by a dopaminergic deficit quantified by FDOPA-PET or one-year follow-up if no FDOPA-PET was performed (n = 8). HC did not have a neurodegenerative disorder and could not be classified as probable prodromal PD4. HC were recruited from the same geographical area and were spouses of PD participants, caregivers of PD patients at the PD expertise center Groningen, or respondents to local advertisements.

Shared exclusion criteria for both cohorts comprised major confounders of gut microbiome composition (eg. recent antibiotics usage in the previous month). A complete overview of the exclusion criteria per study is provided in Supplementary Table 1. All studies were approved by their respective local ethics committee and all participants provided written informed consent: the ethics committee of the University Medical Center Groningen provided ethical approval for the DUPARC study; the ethics committee of the Turku Hospital district provided ethical approval for the NMDAT and GAMDAT study; the ethics committee of the Hospital District of Helsinki and Uusimaa provided ethical approval for the Aho et al. follow-up study.

Participants in the NL cohort collected their stool sample at home and stored it in their home freezer (−20 °C). Stool samples were then stored at −80 °C at the University Medical Center Groningen (UMCG) and were kept frozen on dry ice during all transportation. PD participants in the NL cohort were extensively characterized, as previously described50, with HC receiving a more selective assessment. For the current study, determinants of gut microbiome composition were selected as potential confounders in three different categories: (1) the medical history, including disease history, medication use (eg. use of proton pump inhibitors, opioids, antidepressants), and family history; (2) nutrient intake based on a dietary diary that was filled out for three consecutive days, including alcohol usage; (3) gastrointestinal functioning represented by stool consistency and frequency based on a stool diary that was filled out for seven consecutive days, with consistency represented by the Bristol Stool Chart, and the subjective sense of constipation asked with question 5 of the Non-Motor Symptom Questionnaire (NMSQ)52. In addition, motor-symptomatology was examined using the Movement Disorder Society Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale (MDS-UPDRS) part III53.

Participants in the FIN cohort collected their stool sample at home using a collection tube with DNA-stabilizing buffer (PSP Spin Stool DNA Plus Kit, STRATEC Molecular), which were send via postal services to the University of Helsinki laboratory where they were stored at −80 °C. If samples were not immediately shipped, they were stored at home in the refrigerator. Participants in the FIN cohort received similar assessments of potential confounders of gut microbiome composition and PD status in the categories of medical history, diet and gastrointestinal function. Notable differences compared to the NL cohort were the usage of a food frequency questionnaire, concerning food consumption in the month before stool sampling, instead of a dietary diary. Also, there were several additional measures of subjective constipation instead of question 5 of the NMSQ: a question about strained defecation in the stool diary and the ROMEIII, Wexner, and Constipation Severity Index (CSI) questionnaires. A complete overview of the assessed endpoints per cohort is provided in Supplementary Table 2.

All laboratory procedures were performed at the Institute of Biotechnology, University of Helsinki. DNA extraction of the NL samples was performed using the Qiagen Allprep DNA/RNA Mini Kit, whereas the PSP Spin Stool DNA Plus Kit (Invitek Molecular, Germany) was used for the FIN samples. To assess the possible influence of both sample collection and DNA extraction protocols, a subset of the NL participants (n = 47) collected an additional stool sample from the same feces as their regular stool sample collection. The additional sample was collected using the FIN cohort protocol with PSP tubes and processed using the PSP Spin Stool Kit. The V4 hypervariable region of the 16S rRNA gene was amplified using a mixture of universal primers 515F1-4 (5′-GTGCCAGCMGCCGCGGTAA-3′) and 806R1-4 (5′-GGACTACHVGGGTWTCTAAT-3′) with partial Illumina TruSeq adapter sequences added to the 5′ ends:

The additional nucleotides (non-capitalized letters) are introduced for mixing in sequencing. The 2-step PCR amplification was done as described in Aho et al. 201913. Every DNA extraction and amplification batch included a blank control to assess possible contamination and case and control samples were semi-randomized, where possible, to avoid batch effects. Barcodes were selected using BARCOSEL54. All samples were sequenced together for four runs using Illumina MiSeq (v3 600 cycle kit), with 325 bases for the forward and 285 bases for the reverse read.

Forward and reverse primers were removed from R1 and R2 reads using cutadapt (v2.10)55. Further bioinformatics were performed with DADA2 (v1.18)56. Forward sequences were trimmed at 200 nucleotides (nt) and reverse sequences at 150nt, quality trimmed at the first instance of a nucleotide (or group of nucleotides) with quality score 2. Reads with more than 10 expected errors or ambiguous nucleotides were discarded. Amplicon sequence variants (ASVs) were inferred for each of the four runs separately, using default parameters in DADA2. An overview of the number of sequences per sample during each of the preprocessing steps (primer removal, quality filtering and length trimming, denoising forward and reverse reads, merging forward and reverse reads) is provided in Supplementary Table 10. In addition, the number of sequences of the blank control samples at the DNA extraction and PCR steps are included, showing very minimal to no contamination during the wet lab work (Supplementary Table 10). Subsequently, the four resulting sequence tables were merged, ASVs that only differed in length were collapsed and chimera were removed. Taxonomic assignments were based on the SILVA (v138) reference database57, in which taxonomic assignments are first performed up to genus level using a naive Bayesian classifier with 50% bootstrap confidence. Second, species are assigned based on a 100% match with the references sequence if the match corresponds to the already assigned genus.

Due to the geographical and cultural differences, as well as the different endpoints that were assessed, the NL and FIN cohort were analyzed separately. Supporting the large influence of geographical differences, samples were more distant in terms of their overall microbiome composition when contrasting the geographical origin, compared to PD and HC status (Supplementary Fig. 2). All statistical analyses were performed with the statistical software R, v4.0.3. The threshold for statistical significance was set at p < 0.05 (two-sided), or adjusted p < 0.05 if corrected for multiple comparisons. Comparison of clinical and technical variables were performed using a Chi-square test for categorical variables and a Student’s t-test or a Mann-Whitney U test for continuous variables, depending on the distribution of the variable. For microbiota analyses, the sequence tables, taxonomy tables and metadata tables were merged in a phyloseq object (phyloseq, v1.34.0)58 after which data transformations and subsequent analyses were performed using the R packages microbiome (v1.12.0) and vegan (v2.5–7). Multivariate analyses of overall community structure were performed on Aitchinson distances: Euclidean distances calculated after centered log-ratio (clr) transformation of the ASV count data59. Statistical significance was calculated using a PERMANOVA with adjustment for selected variables (see variable selection)60. PERMANOVA was performed with marginal testing, meaning all variables were assessed whilst holding constant all other variables in the model. In parallel, a non-compositional approach was performed using Bray-Curtis distances after rarefaction59. Cut-offs for rarefaction were identified for both datasets separately, based on the plateauing of the rarefaction curves depicting sample richness (Supplementary Fig. 1). Similarly, the differential abundance analyses were performed with adjustment for selected confounders using both a compositional approach with ANCOM (v2.1, using default settings and code from: github.com/FrederickHuangLin/ANCOM-Code-Archive) and a non-compositional approach with DESeq2 (v1.30.1)61–63. Continuous variables were scaled and centered for the DESeq2 analysis, to improve model convergence. Differential abundance analyses were performed at the ASV, genus and family level after filtering out taxa which occurred in fewer than ten percent of the samples. Taxa were identified as differentially abundant with a detection threshold of 0.7 in ANCOM or with a false discovery rate (FDR) adjusted p-value < 0.05 in DESeq. Alpha diversity was investigated using alpha diversity indices Chao1, Shannon, Inverse Simpson, and observed richness, which were tested univariably using a Mann-Whitney U test. Results were plotted using ggplot2 (v3.3.3), with relative abundances calculated after adding a pseudo-count of 1 to sequence count data, in order to present data on a logarithmic scale.

Given the primary aim to describe gut microbiome changes for the first time in treatment-naive de novo PD subjects, all clinical data described under “data and stool sample collection” and technical metadata (eg. DNA extraction batch, PCR batch, number of reads) were investigated for their potential to influence the effect of group status on gut microbiome composition. The variables age, sex, BMI, stool consistency and DNA extraction batch were selected a priori as potentially relevant nuisance variables. To ensure a large effect of another variable on the relation between PD status and gut microbiome composition would not be missed, all variables were screened for their potential effect using a PERMANOVA in a model with PD status: distance-matrix ~ PD status + variable

For the FIN cohort, model (4): taxon ~ PD status + stool consistency + number of sequences



Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

These authors contributed equally: Jeffrey M. Boertien, Kirsi Murtomäki.

These authors jointly supervised this work: Filip Scheperjans, Teus van Laar.

A list of authors and their affiliations appears at the end of the paper.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41531-022-00395-8.

