Gut microbiome stability and dynamics in healthy donors and patients with non-gastrointestinal cancers





As microbial therapeutics are increasingly being tested in diverse patient populations, it is essential to understand the host and environmental factors influencing the microbiome. Through analysis of 1,359 gut microbiome samples from 946 healthy donors of the Milieu Intérieur cohort, we detail how microbiome composition is associated with host factors, lifestyle parameters, and disease states. Using a genome-based taxonomy, we found biological sex was the strongest driver of community composition. Additionally, bacterial populations shift across decades of life (age 20–69), with Bacteroidota species consistently increased with age while Actinobacteriota species, including Bifidobacterium, decreased. Longitudinal sampling revealed that short-term stability exceeds interindividual differences. By accounting for these factors, we defined global shifts in the microbiomes of patients with non-gastrointestinal tumors compared with healthy donors. Together, these results demonstrated that the microbiome displays predictable variations as a function of sex, age, and disease state. These variations must be considered when designing microbiome-targeted therapies or interpreting differences thought to be linked to pathophysiology or therapeutic response.



Microbial therapeutics, including fecal microbiota transplants (FMTs), bacterial consortia, and probiotics, are increasingly being tested in patients with Clostridium difficile infections and other gastrointestinal (GI) disorders (Allegretti et al., 2019), including inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and, more recently, non-GI indications such as autism (Kang et al., 2019) and cancer (Mullard, 2018). In parallel to microbial therapeutics, microbial signatures are being evaluated as a novel class of biomarkers, applied for stratification of efficacy and safety in clinical trials across multiple indications (Ananthakrishnan et al., 2017; Dubin et al., 2016). Notably, this rapid increase in microbial therapeutics and biomarkers demands a rigorous reevaluation of the factors influencing an individual’s personal gut microbiome over time. Such understanding is essential for optimizing clinical trials with any microbial component. For example, without a complete understanding of the factors influencing the gut microbiome in health and disease, we cannot determine whether the optimal FMT should be sourced from a patient who previously responded to a therapy or a healthy donor who is matched for age and sex.

Overall, the aims of the study are threefold. First, we introduce a new microbiome analysis approach that uses an expanded set of reference genomes with a novel taxonomy to discover new, statistically robust insights into host/bacteria biology that will enable personalized medicine approaches for microbial therapeutics and biomarkers. Second, we provide the rich metadata and 1,000-plus deep shotgun metagenomic samples described here as a resource on which future microbiome studies can test and build new computational tools, as well as be compared against disease cohorts. Finally, while demonstrating the utility of this resource as a control population, we define global shifts in the gut microbiomes of patients with non-GI tumors compared with healthy donors.

Historically, microbial sequencing efforts focused predominantly on a small number of organisms, often causes of nosocomial infections (Fig. S1, A and B). By contrast, reference databases, including National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) GenBank, are increasingly populated with genomic information of commensal microbes (Browne et al., 2016; Forster et al., 2019; Poyet et al., 2019; Zou et al., 2019). As genome reference databases expand, historical, microbiology-based taxonomic assignments do not reflect population-level relationships inferred from genome sequencing. This is particularly problematic for k-mer–based analyses, which use sequence similarity between closely related genomes to infer which taxa are present (Nasko et al., 2018).

The RefSeq sequences and taxonomic tree from the GTDB, including its naming conventions, were used to build a reference database for the k-mer–based program Kraken2 (Wood and Salzberg, 2014) and read-reassignment step Bracken2 (Lu et al., 2017). This custom Kraken2/GTDB pipeline was applied to 1,359 quality-controlled samples from 946 MI donors (Fig. S1, C–F; Data S1, tables 2 and 3) and compared using both the marker gene–based tool Metaphlan2 (Truong et al., 2015) and Kraken2, with the same 23,505 reference genomes using their original NCBI taxonomies (Fig. S2). Consistently, more bacterial taxa were identified per sample with Kraken2 than Metaphlan2, a result of the updated reference database and higher sensitivity of this k-mer–based approach (Fig. S2, A–C; McIntyre et al., 2017). Between the two Kraken databases (GTDB and NCBI), richness varied depending on how taxa were redistributed by GTDB. For example, GTDB split 2,397 NCBI genera into 3,205, while it collapsed 18,795 NCBI species into 13,446 (Fig. S2, A and D). Despite finer-level differences, the overall distribution of phyla across the three approaches was similar (Fig. S2 E), indicating that Kraken2/GTDB pipeline results would be consistent with previous analyses. As such, a combination of k-mer–based read assignment and genome-based taxonomy allows higher-resolution analysis of shotgun metagenomic samples.

To complement our optimized taxa-based approach and further use the resolution afforded by shotgun metagenomic sequencing, we applied HUMANn2 to identify the functional potential of microbial pathways present in the MI samples (Franzosa et al., 2018; Data S1, table 4). Using both the Kraken2/GTDB and HUMANn2 pipelines, we identified a broad range of diversity across the 946 individuals in this geographically restricted cohort of healthy French adults. This diversity was observed in terms of metabolic pathway richness (282 ± 40, mean ± SD), species richness (248 ± 32), and Shannon diversity (3.7 ± 0.35), which accounts for both richness and evenness (Data S1, table 2). Across donors, our GTDB pipeline confirmed Firmicutes and Bacteroidota (formerly Bacteroidetes) as the most abundant phyla in the gut, but enabled distinction among the original Firmicutes phyla, which was further divided in the GTDB into 12 distinct categories: Firmicutes, Firmicutes_A, Firmicutes_B, … Firmicutes_K (Data S1, table 1). Notably, throughout the GTDB, the group containing type material (if known) kept the original unsuffixed name. Of those, seven were present in this cohort, with Firmicutes_A the most abundant, followed by Firmicutes and Firmicutes_C (Fig. 1 A and Data S1, table 3), highlighting the finer granularity, even at the phylum level, provided by GTDB-based taxonomic calls. Subsequent application of the Bray–Curtis (BC) distance metric, a means to assess species presence/absence in addition to relative abundance across donors, demonstrated that samples fell along a gradient defined by the relative abundances of Firmicutes_A and Bacteroidota, with lesser contributions from Actinobacteriota and Firmicutes (first dimension of multidimensional scaling [MDS] projection; Fig. 1 B).

In this healthy cohort, medication usage was low, with only 28% of individuals (n = 266) taking medication of any kind. Notably, donors were excluded if they used antibiotics in the 3 mo preceding enrollment. Of all medications, only oral contraception was taken by >10% of participants (n = 111). In premenopausal women, oral contraception was taken by 36% (110/303) and explained 0.005% of the variance (P = 0.04). In contrast, relatively common medications, β-blockers and proton pump inhibitors, were taken by only seven and four individuals, respectively. Despite this, medication usage was a significant, albeit minor, contributor (R2 = 0.003) to microbial community composition, highlighting how xenobiotics can and do influence the gut microbiome (Jackson et al., 2018; Maier et al., 2018).

To determine whether MI bacterial profiles were unique to this population or comparable with other non-European healthy cohorts, we ran our Kraken2/GTDB pipeline on 1,159 samples from 851 Israeli donors originally published by Zeevi et al. (2015) (Data S1, table 8), for whom age, sex, and body mass index (BMI) were provided (Fig. 2, A and B). After accounting for sequencing depth (mean read count: MI, 13.9 ± 2.9 million; Zeevi, 13.5 ± 7 million), we found that richness across taxonomic levels was consistently elevated in the MI samples, even though the percentage of unmapped reads was comparable (MI 42.2% versus Zeevi 39.6%; Fig. 2, C–E). More specifically, we identified on average 24 more species in samples from the MI donors than from the Zeevi cohort. In addition to potential technical and lifestyle reasons, this discrepancy could reflect the stricter inclusion and exclusion criteria, and thus the greater overall health, of the MI donors (Thomas et al., 2015; Zeevi et al., 2015).

On the whole, community composition, including relative taxa abundances and β diversity, was consistent across both cohorts (Fig. 2, F–H). Notably however, the contributions of age and sex to community composition were almost two times greater in MI than Zeevi (age: R2 = 0.0087 versus 0.0038; sex: R2 = 0.011 versus 0.0066; Fig. 2 I), highlighting how stratification of age and sex in the MI cohort provided enhanced statistical power to identify new correlations (Fig. 2, A and B; Zeevi et al., 2015). Despite technical differences, as well as geographic and cultural distinctions between these cohorts, our findings demonstrate a comparable makeup of the gut microbiome. This allowed us to use the Zeevi samples as a replication cohort to demonstrate the reproducibility of our findings in MI.

Given that sex and age were the variables most strongly associated with bacterial community composition in healthy individuals, we leveraged the statistical power of the MI cohort to explore which taxa were differentially abundant between sexes and across decades of life. To identify bacteria differentially abundant between the 473 females and 473 males, we conducted DESeq2 analysis using age and BMI as covariates (Love et al., 2014) on 485 abundant species (prevalence >5% and mean relative abundance >0.01%; Data S1, table 9). Of the 71 differentially abundant species (FDR < 0.05), 5 were more abundant in females, while 18 were more abundant in males, with log2 fold change >1 (Fig. 3 A). In total, 11 of 32 prevalent Prevotella species were more abundant in males than females, corresponding to a greater overall richness or number of unique Prevotella species in males (Fig. 3, B and C). Similarly, in the Zeevi cohort, five species of Prevotella were more abundant in males (Fig. 3 B and Data S1, table 10; Zeevi et al., 2015). Notably, even when a species was significantly differentially abundant between sexes in only one cohort, the direction of this trend was also consistent in the other, indicating that higher Prevotella abundance in males compared with females is a biological phenomenon consistent across multiple species and populations. This information increases the granularity of trends presented in two previous studies, one that identified Bacteroides-Prevotella as broadly more abundant in males than females based on 16S rRNA-targeted oligonucleotide probes (Mueller et al., 2006), and another that found males were three times more likely to have an enterotype consisting of fewer Bacteroides and higher Prevotella (Ding and Schloss, 2014). Although the factors driving preferential colonization of Prevotella in males are unknown, from these data we could generate hypotheses surrounding the roles of gonadal hormones and microbial community composition. In support of this hypothesis, in a longitudinal study of the oral microbiome, serum levels of testosterone in boys and estradiol and progesterone in girls were positively correlated with levels of Prevotella intermedia (Nakagawa et al., 1994).

When considering 364 prevalent metabolic pathways (prevalence >5%), we identified 65 (FDR < 0.05) that were differentially abundant between the sexes (Data S1, table 11). Of those, the pathway CRNFORCAT-PWY: creatinine degradation I was the most strongly enriched in men (Fig. 3 D). Biologically, this is consistent with men having higher blood levels of creatinine (Fig. 3 E). Across both sexes, but not in each individually, circulating creatinine levels were significantly associated with the abundance of the CRNFORCAT-PWY pathway (both sexes: Spearman ρ = 0.087, P = 0.0014; men: ρ = 0.028, P = 0.47; women: ρ = −0.047, P = 0.22). Of species positively associated with this pathway, many were more abundant in males, including the top species Holdemanella biformis, which was also correlated with circulating creatinine levels (Spearman ρ = 0.13, P = 4.1 × 10−5; Fig. 3, F and G; and Data S1, table 11). Overall, this exemplifies how adaptation to use available nutrients may influence microbiome composition.

It is well characterized that the composition of the gut microbiome differs dramatically between newborns and adults, with the neonatal microbiome transitioning to a more adult-like state upon consumption of solid food and cessation of breastfeeding (Bäckhed et al., 2015; Stewart et al., 2018). However, how the gut microbiome changes throughout adult life has been primarily studied in smaller cohorts by culturing or 16S rRNA analyses (An et al., 2018). The design of the MI cohort provides a unique opportunity to explore how in the absence of underlying disease the gut microbiome is dynamic across the adult decades (20–69 yr old).

Other pathways associated with age were related to l-histidine. In this case, pathways for l-histidine biosynthesis were decreased with age, while those for degradation were increased (Fig. 5 F). Concordantly, the biosynthesis pathway was positively correlated with species decreased with age, while degradation pathways were correlated with species increased with age (Fig. 5 G and Data S1, table 14). In total, these results indicate that gut l-histidine levels may be decreased in older adults, which could lead to an altered immune state, as l-histidine metabolites have been demonstrated to influence colonic inflammation (Gao et al., 2017). Overall, understanding the multitude of microbial correlations with age is incredibly important for appreciating the microbial shifts observed in diseases affecting older individuals.

To complement our cross-sectional study of the microbiome across the decades, we leveraged longitudinal sampling of roughly half the cohort (n = 413) to study short-term (17 ± 3.3 d) dynamics within an individual in the absence of antibiotic exposure. By comparing species BC distances within and between individuals, we found that in the short term, intraindividual differences were less than the interindividual ones (Fig. 6 A). This is consistent with previously published findings (Costello et al., 2009; Flores et al., 2014; Mehta et al., 2018) and also reflected the analysis of relative abundance and presence/absence of metabolic pathways (Fig. 6 A). While within an individual species and pathway, stabilities were highly correlated (Spearman ρ = 0.75, P < 2.2 × 10−16), differences between donors were less dramatic at the pathway level, reflecting the more conserved nature of annotated metabolic pathways versus species profiles across individuals (Human Microbiome Project Consortium, 2012).

We then applied the BC metric to calculate stability (1 – BC) of individual species and pathways (Data S1, tables 17 and 18; Faith et al., 2013; Franzosa et al., 2015). For both species and pathways, we found that stability was strongly associated with mean abundance and prevalence across donors (Fig. 6, G and H). For example, the Firmicutes Enterococcus_B faecium_B had a mean abundance of 0.15%, prevalence 7.5%, and low stability (0.025). Additionally, many species known to be present in yogurt and probiotics were also highly unstable, e.g., Lactobacillus_D sakei, Lactococcus lactis, and B. animalis (Fig. 6 G; Fijan, 2014), in agreement with previous observations that probiotics often face colonization resistance (Zmora et al., 2018). Comparison of overall stability of pathways and species revealed that individual pathways were on average more stable than individual species (Fig. 6 I), consistent with pathways being more conserved across individuals (Fig. 6 A). Moving forward, these data can be leveraged to prioritize microbial pathways/species that will make reliable biomarkers as well as persistent colonizers if incorporated into a microbial therapeutic.

Given our success integrating results of the MI cohort with those from Zeevi et al. (2015), we sought to determine whether similar congruence was observed in the gut microbiome of cancer patients. We focused on those with non-GI tumors, for whom recent publications have demonstrated associations between microbiome composition and positive responses to checkpoint inhibitors (Frankel et al., 2017; Gopalakrishnan et al., 2018; Matson et al., 2018; Peters et al., 2019; Routy et al., 2018). In contrast to colorectal cancer (Thomas et al., 2019), there remains a large gap in our knowledge detailing how the microbiome composition of cancer patients with non-GI indications compares to that of healthy donors. To investigate this, we applied our Kraken2/GTDB pipeline to an additional 375 samples from 283 cancer patients across five published cohorts (Frankel et al., 2017; Gopalakrishnan et al., 2018; Matson et al., 2018; Peters et al., 2019; Routy et al., 2018; Fig. S4, A–E). Despite technical and geographic differences, we identified that cancer patients have significantly altered gut bacterial communities compared with their healthy counterparts, as quantified by differences in principal coordinates (PCs) 1 and 2 (Fig. 7, A and B). When comparing datasets across cohorts, even those processed with identical analytical methods, there is always a risk of differences being driven by technical artifacts, for example collection or sequencing method. However, in this case, the differences between healthy donors and those with cancer were consistent across age groups (Fig. 7 C) and diverse cohorts (Fig. S4, F and G), supporting our conclusion.

In total, this analysis revealed that compared with their healthy counterparts, cancer patients’ gut microbiomes are less diverse and populated by more Enterobacteriaceae. However, counterintuitively, cancer patients also had higher Bacteroidota/Firmicutes_A ratios, which are associated with features of good health such as lower BMI, alanine aminotransferase, and C-reactive protein, as well as greater stability. While these observations are important for contextualizing findings of the recent cancer immunology/microbiome literature, future sampling efforts are needed to deconvolute which of these changes are driven by the cancer itself versus lifestyle changes or therapeutic agents that are taken after a cancer diagnosis and can themselves account for shifts in the gut microbiome. In addition, further experiments are needed to understand how these shifts may influence a patient’s underlying cancer immune set point and subsequent response to therapy (Chen and Mellman, 2017).

As the number of microbial intervention trials and biomarker studies continues to grow, it is increasingly important to develop a robust understanding of the gut microbiome across individuals in the steady state. In this study, we use the statistical power of a large cohort, the resolution afforded by deep shotgun sequencing, and an updated microbial database to expand our understanding of the gut microbiome in health and disease. More specifically, we identified sex as the strongest driver of community composition, with many Prevotella species enriched in men compared with women (Fig. 3 B); many of which were absent in previous databases (Truong et al., 2015) and thus not detectable in prior analyses. Given the recent literature on the strain-level variability within Prevotella species (De Filippis et al., 2019; Fehlner-Peach et al., 2019), particularly Prevotella copri, follow-up analyses should compare if there are also strain-level differences between the sexes.

In addition to cancer, these data will be valuable for designing microbial therapeutics for individuals of all ages. For instance, interventions containing Bifidobacterium species may need to be dosed more frequently in individuals older than 50 yr, in whom Bifidobacterium appears to colonize less effectively (Fig. 5, A, B, and D). Similarly, consortia with Prevotella species may work less effectively in females, and species which demonstrated low stability in the short term may also require additional dosing. Finally, beyond the findings in this paper, the rich metadata and 1,000-plus deep shotgun metagenomic samples provided here will be a valuable resource on which future microbiome studies can build new computational tools as well as generate and test new hypotheses.

The 1,000 healthy donors of the MI cohort were recruited by BioTrial in the suburban Rennes area (Ille-et-Vilaine, Bretagne, France). The cohort included 500 men and 500 women; 200 individuals were from each decade of life, between 20 and 69 yr of age. Participants were selected based on stringent inclusion and exclusion criteria, detailed elsewhere (Thomas et al., 2015). Donor BMI was restricted to ≥18.5 and ≤32 kg/m2. Briefly, the donors had no evidence of any severe/chronic/recurrent pathological conditions. Primary exclusion criteria were seropositivity for HIV or hepatitis C virus, travel to tropical or subtropical countries within the previous 6 mo, recent vaccine administration, and alcohol abuse. Subjects were also excluded if they took nasal, intestinal, or respiratory antibiotics or antiseptics any time in the 3 mo preceding enrollment. Additionally, anyone following a doctor- or dietician-prescribed diet for medical reasons (e.g., calorie-controlled diet in overweight patients) and volunteers with food intolerance or allergy were excluded. To avoid the influence of hormonal fluctuations in women during the perimenopausal phase, only pre- or postmenopausal women were included. To minimize the influence of population substructure, the study was restricted to individuals of self-reported metropolitan French origin for three generations (i.e., with parents and grandparents born in continental France).

Multiple demographic, environmental, and clinical variables were collected for each of the donors in an electronic case report form (Thomas et al., 2015). For example, donors were asked about their family medical history, smoking habits, sleeping habits, and infection and vaccination history. Additionally, donors completed a food-frequency questionnaire (FFQ) administered by trained investigators and comprising 19 food groups (Data S1, table 5). Participants estimated their “usual consumption” selecting from six intake frequencies ranging from “twice per day or more” to “never” (except for alcohol, which offered five intake frequencies ranging from “every day” to “never”). Investigators administering the FFQ invited participants to declare their “usual” diet, rather than focusing on their latest dietary consumption. The detailed FFQ is available in Partula et al. (2019). For clinical chemistry, hematologic, and serologic assessments, 20 ml of blood was collected from each donor and analyzed at the certified Laboratoire de Biologie Médicale, Centre Eugene Marquis (Rennes, France). For microbiome profiles, stool samples were produced by the participant at home within 24 h before the scheduled visits (visit 1 [V1] and V2). For individuals who provided two stool samples, V1 and V2 were on average 17 ± 3.3 d apart, minimum 8 d and maximum 45 d.

After manual curation and removal of variables that were (a) variable in <5% of participants, (b) missing in >25% of donors, or (c) correlated with another variable (Spearman ρ greater than −0.6 or < 0.6), 154 metadata variables were considered for future correlations. In the case of correlated variables (Data S1, tables 5 and 6), the variable with fewer missing values was prioritized and kept, while the other variable was removed. When the pair had equivalent numbers of missing values, one from the pair was randomly selected. Notably, circulating levels of creatinine were so strongly correlated with sex (Spearman ρ = 0.72, P = 3.5 × 10−115), this variable was excluded from the 154.

The clinical study was approved by the Comité de Protection des Personnes–Ouest 6 on June 13, 2012, and by the French Agence Nationale de Sécurité du Médicament on June 22, 2012, and was performed in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. The study was sponsored by the Institut Pasteur (Pasteur ID-RCB no. 2012-A00238-35) and conducted as a single-center study without any investigational product. The original protocol is registered under ClinicalTrials.gov (study number NCT01699893). Informed consent was obtained from the participants after the nature and possible consequences of the studies were explained. The samples and data used in this study were formally established as the Milieu Interieur biocollection (NCT03905993), with approvals by the Comité de Protection des Personnes–Sud Méditerranée and the Commission nationale de l’informatique et des libertés on April 11, 2018.

Stool specimens were collected in a double-lined sealable bag containing a GENbag Anaer atmosphere generator (Aerocult; Biomerieux) to maintain anaerobic conditions. Upon reception at the clinical site, fresh samples were aliquoted into cryotubes and stored at −80°C.

In the end, we obtained 21 trillion raw paired-end reads from 1,359 samples from 946 of the donors. On average per sample, there were 2.4 Gbp, 15.5 million reads, with 358-bp insert size. To process the reads, Illumina TruSeq adapters were trimmed with Trimmomatic v0.36 (Bolger et al., 2014); low-quality and low-complexity reads were removed with prinseq-lite 0.20.4 (Schmieder and Edwards, 2011); and Bowtie2 v2.1.0 (Langmead and Salzberg, 2012) was used to remove reads mapping to PhiX or the PacBio human genome (parameters specified in Fig. S1 C). After processing, there were on average 13.9 ± 2.9 million reads per sample (Fig. S1, D and E). Of an initial 1,000 recruited donors, 44 were excluded from this analysis because of lack of consent for sharing their data outside of the MI consortium. An additional 10 donors were excluded because of technical issues in the extraction and sequencing steps (e.g., low DNA extraction yield), resulting in a sample size of 946 donors.

To build the Kraken-GTDB database, first the following files were downloaded ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genomes/refseq/bacteria/assembly_summary.txt and https://data.ace.uq.edu.au/public/gtdb/data/releases/release89/89.0/bac120_taxonomy_r89.tsv (Parks et al., 2018) on June 25, 2019. These files were merged based on accession number, and only those genomes present in both databases were considered, i.e., RefSeq genomes with a GTDB taxonomy. To avoid biasing the database toward those species with large numbers of genomes (Fig. S1 A), while balancing the added information provided by additional isolates per species, we selected up to five genomes per GTDB species to include in our database. Genomes were first ordered by their assembly quality, i.e., reference genome, representative genome, complete genome, chromosome, contig, and scaffold, and then randomly selected. Based on these criteria, 23,505 genomes representing 13,446 unique bacterial species were downloaded and formatted into a Kraken2 database (Wood and Salzberg, 2014). To incorporate the GTDB taxonomy into the Kraken2 database, files mimicking the NCBI-like taxonomy files from ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/pub/taxonomy/new_taxdump/new_taxdump.zip were created for names.dmp, complete_names.dmp, nodes.dmp, and accession2taxid. A matching Bracken database was then generated with bracken-build -k 35 -l 126 (Lu et al., 2017).

First, putative reagent contaminants identified by species cocorrelation analysis were filtered using Kraken2’s unclassified-out option and a custom database of contaminant genomes (Data S1, table 22). Using our custom GTDB-Kraken database, Kraken2 v2.0.8 (Wood and Salzberg, 2014) and Bracken v2.5 (Lu et al., 2017) were run on the 1,359 quality-controlled samples (parameters specified in Fig. S1 F) to generate bacterial profiles. With the exception of longitudinal results in Fig. 6, all analyses were based on bacterial profiles from the V1 samples. In the case of eight donors from whom no V1 sample was available, the sample from V2 was used.

To go beyond taxa-based calls, HUMANn2 v0.11.2 (Franzosa et al., 2018) with default parameters including Uniref90 was run on all MI samples where the forward and reverse reads were concatenated into a single file. Raw output values were converted from rpks to cpms with humann2_renorm_table. Outputs of all samples were joined into a single merged table with the humann2_join_tables function. Using humann2_regroup_table, individual gene families were regrouped with multiple different databases including COG, GO, KEGG, and MetaCyc. Ultimately, MetaCyc pathways (Caspi et al., 2018) were selected for the correlations because of the additional steps implemented in HUMANn2 to check for completeness of the pathways.

All correlations and statistical tests were performed in R v3.6.1 (R Core Team, 2019), documented via rmarkdown documents (Allaire et al., 2019), and compiled with knitr (Xie, 2019). Within R, tables were manipulated with functions of the dplyr package (Wickham et al., 2019). The majority of figures were rendered with ggplot2 (Wickham, 2016), adjusted with geasy (Carroll et al., 2020), and arranged with cowplot (Wilke, 2019). Colors were selected with the help of RColorBrewer (Neuwirth, 2014) and viridis (Garnier, 2018). The cladogram in Fig. 4 B was generated with GraPhlAn (Asnicar et al., 2015). Correlation plots in Fig. S3, D and E and Fig. 5 C were generated with ggcorrplot (Kassambara, 2019). Supplemental tables were generated with Openxlsx (Walker, 2019). When comparing values between two or more groups, Wilcoxon rank sum tests were used.

For all statistical tests, P values were corrected with the R function p.adjust using the Benjamini–Hochberg (FDR) method (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995). To account for possible dependence between the hypotheses being tested across all species, multiple hypothesis correction using the Benjamini–Yekutieli adjustment was also performed, and those values have been included in Data S1, tables 9, 10, 12, 13, and 21 (Benjamini and Yekutieli, 2001).

Sequence data have been deposited in the European Genome-Phenome Archive under accession code EGAS00001004437. Donor metadata and code used in this paper will also be available.

Fig. S1 shows the quality control and Kraken analysis pipelines. Fig. S2 shows results from all the different program–database combinations tested. Fig. S3 shows distributions of the 154 metadata variables across the MI donors. Fig. S4 shows how cancer patients have altered gut bacterial profiles consistently across studies and indications. Fig. S5 shows additional analysis of which variables were associated with a cancer-like microbiome. 22 tables are provided in Data S1 that present summary statistics and other information.

