Improvement of gut microbiome and intestinal permeability following splenectomy plus pericardial devascularization in hepatitis B virus-related cirrhotic portal hypertension



The gut microbiome is an essential component of the intestinal mucosal barrier, critical in regulating intestinal permeability. Microbiome dysbiosis and intestinal permeability changes are commonly encountered conditions in patients with cirrhosis and are closely related to its development and further complications. However, alterations in the gut microbiome and intestinal permeability in chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) patients with cirrhotic portal hypertension after undergoing a splenectomy plus pericardial devascularization (SPD) have not been investigated. This study recruited 22 patients who were measured against themselves on the study parameters before and after an SPD, along with 20 healthy controls. Methodologically, fecal samples were collected for gut microbiome analysis by 16S ribosomal DNA sequencing, and peripheral blood samples were obtained to examine the liver function and intestinal permeability. This study showed that the community structure of the gut microbiomes in patients before the SPD exhibited obvious differences from those in the healthy control group. They also exhibited a decreased bacterial community richness, increased intestinal permeability, and enhanced inflammation compared with the healthy controls. These issues were further aggravated two weeks after the SPD. There was also evidence of significantly higher abundances of Streptococcaceae, Enterobacteriaceae, and Enterococcaceae than those in the healthy control group. However, 12 months after the surgery, 12 of the 16 patient-associated genera recovered, of which 10 reached normal levels. Additionally, the microbiome diversity increased; the bacterial composition was back to a level similar to the healthy controls. Liver function, intestinal permeability, and inflammation levels all improved compared with preoperative levels. Furthermore, correlation analyses indicated that the five recovered bacterial taxa and the Shannon diversity index were correlated with several improved clinical indicators. Altogether, the improvements in the liver function and intestinal permeability in HBV-related cirrhotic patients may be related to the restoration of the gut microbiome after an SPD.

As the pathologic end-stage of advanced liver disease from hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection (1), cirrhosis may unavoidably progress to portal hypertension, which subsequently leads to various portal hypertension-caused complications, such as hypersplenism, gastroesophageal varices, variceal hemorrhage, and ascites (2). Hypersplenism is the most common complication, with an incidence rate of approximately 64% (3). Its presence indicates a more advanced stage of liver disease and an increased risk of complications. A splenectomy plus pericardial devascularization (SPD) is a classic and efficacious surgical therapy to alleviate pancytopenia caused by hypersplenism, improve liver function, and reduce portal pressure and the risk of variceal hemorrhage (4, 5). However, many postoperative complications, such as infection and thrombosis, are the most common threats to post-SPD patients (6). Therefore, analyzing the relevant risk factors for postoperative complications and strengthening perioperative management are crucial to improving a prognosis.

In the study, we evaluate the gut microbiome and intestinal permeability status between healthy controls and HBV-related cirrhotic patients with portal hypertension and hypersplenism. In particular, the differences in intestinal microbial communities before and after the SPD were characterized. Correlations between specific bacterial taxa as well as liver function and intestinal permeability in the patients were also analyzed. The present study could help to gain a better understand of the risks and beneficial effects of SPD for cirrhotic patients from the perspective of their intestinal microenvironments.

The patients in the study had HBV-related cirrhosis with portal hypertension and hypersplenism and had undergone an SPD procedure at the Second Affiliated Hospital of Xi’an Jiaotong University. The inclusion criteria were designated as follows: [1] The patients had been diagnosed according to the guideline of prevention and treatment for chronic hepatitis B in China (2015 update) by comprehensive consideration of liver biopsy results, imaging examinations, clinical features, physical signs, laboratory tests, medical histories, progress notes, and associated complications (20). [2] All the patients suffered varying degrees of splenomegaly, and the majority of them had moderate or severe esophagogastric varices as revealed by upper gastrointestinal radiography or endoscopy examinations. [3] The clinical indications for an SPD included endoscopic treatment-resistant esophagogastric varices with or without variceal hemorrhage, history of esophageal variceal bleeding or potential bleeding or infection due to hypersplenism and thrombocytopenia (platelet count <50×109/L), and upper abdominal discomfort owing to an enlarged spleen (5, 6). [4] The patients were not treated at the hospital until their stool and serum samples had been obtained.

All patients were informed about the benefits and risks of SPD, and prior informed consent was obtained from all participants. The study conformed to the ethical guidelines of the 1975 Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the Institutional Ethics Committee of the Second Affiliated Hospital of Xi’an Jiaotong University (Approval No. 2017-416).

Fresh fecal samples from patients with cirrhosis (before the SPD as well as two weeks and 12 months after the SPD) and healthy individuals were collected in a sterile container and delivered immediately from the hospital to the laboratory using an insulated polystyrene foam box filled with ice. Upon collection, each stool sample was immediately divided into aliquots, flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80°C before analysis. Total bacterial DNA was then extracted from a frozen aliquot (200 mg) of each fecal sample using a QIAamp DNA Stool Mini Kit (51504, Qiagen, Germany) in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. The quality and quantity of the DNA were measured considering ratios of 260/280 nm and 260/230 nm using a NanoDrop spectrophotometer (NanoDrop 2000, Thermo Scientific, Wilmington, DE, USA). The V3+V4 hypervariable region of the bacterial 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene was amplified with the common primer pair 338 F (5′-ACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAG-3′) and 806 R (5′-GGACTACHVGGGTWTCTAAT-3′) combined with adapter and barcode sequences. The thermal cycling conditions were as follows: initial denaturation at 95°C for 5 min (1 cycle), followed by 95°C for 30 s, 50°C for 30 s, and 72°C for 40 s (25 cycles), and a final extension at 72°C for 7 min.

Purified amplicons were quantified by a Quant-iT™ dsDNA High-Sensitivity Assay Kit (Q33120, Invitrogen, USA) and pooled in equimolar amounts. Then, DNA libraries were constructed in accordance with the manufacturer’s (Illumina) instructions and sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq 2500 platform (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) with the paired-end 250 mode (2×250 bps) following the standard protocols provided by Biomarker Technologies Co. Ltd. (Beijing, China).

After excluding the adaptor and primer sequences, the raw sequences were assembled for each sample according to the unique barcode using the Quantitative Insights Into Microbial Ecology platform (QIIME, V.1.8.0). The raw paired-end reads from the original DNA fragments were merged by FLASH (V.1.2.7), and assigned to each sample according to the unique barcodes. All the effective reads from each sample were assigned to the same operational taxonomic units (OTUs) based on a cut-off of 97% similarity according to the UCLUST algorithm. For alpha diversity analysis, the OTUs were rarified to different metrics to analyze species diversity in a sample. This included generating curves for OTU rank, rarefaction, and the Shannon index. The standard Shannon and Simpson diversity indices and richness indices (including the Chao1 and abundance-based coverage estimator [ACE] indices) were calculated by Mothur (V.1.30). For beta-diversity analysis, principal component analysis (PCA), principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) and nonmetric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) were performed using the QIIME to evaluate differences in species complexity among the samples. All analyses were carried out with a bioinformatic pipeline tool, BMK Cloud (http://www.biocloud.net/).

Peripheral venous blood from each individual was collected into pro-coagulation tubes before and after the SPD. The tubes were left undisturbed at room temperature for 30 min and then centrifuged at 2,000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatants (serum) were divided into aliquots and stored at -80°C until subsequent analysis. One aliquot was used for each assay to avoid multiple freeze/thaw cycles. The serum concentrations of tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α), diamine oxidase (DAO), lipopolysaccharide (LPS), and D-lactate (D-LA) were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kits (MLbio, Shanghai, China) in accordance with the manufacturer’s protocols. All samples were tested in triplicate. The optical density at 450 nm was measured using a microplate reader (PowerWave XS2, BioTek, Winooski, VT, USA).

All statistical analyses were performed with the SPSS 21.0 statistical package (SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA). Values are presented as the mean ± standard deviation for normally distributed data or median and interquartile range for continuous variables following non-normal distribution or number (%) for categorical variables. One-way ANOVA test was used for comparison of continuous data among multiple groups, while the LSD-t test was used for further comparison between two groups. The Kruskal-Wallis test was performed to process the data that retained a non-normal distribution even after log transformation. The inter-group difference was compared with Fisher’s exact test for categorical variables. Multiple hypothesis tests were adjusted using the Benjamini and Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR); significant differences were considered when the results were below an FDR threshold of 0.05. Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient (P-value<0.05) was used to evaluate the associations between bacterial abundance and clinical characteristics as appropriate. All tests for significance were two-sided, and P<0.05 was defined as statistically significant. All figures were plotted by Origin Pro8.0 software (OriginLab, Northampton, MA, USA) and R software (V. 3.4.4).

From March 1, 2017, to December 31, 2018, a total of 34 HBV-related cirrhotic patients who met the inclusion-exclusion criteria were enrolled in the study and were prepared for comparisons to themselves on the study parameters taken before the SPD (Pre) vs. two weeks after the SPD (Post1) vs. 12 months after the SPD (Post2) ( Figure 1 ). Eight patients were excluded 12 months after the SPDs for the following reasons: One patient with cirrhosis had developed hepatocellular carcinoma, two patients had taken antibiotics within the three months prior to stool sample collection, and five patients were lost to follow-up. In summary, serum and fecal samples were obtained from 22 patients before and after the SPD (the stool samples of four patients were not collected at two weeks after the surgery) and from 20 healthy controls (HC). The clinical characteristics of the patients with cirrhosis and the healthy controls are shown in Table 1 . As expected, the liver function of the cirrhotic patients with portal hypertension and hypersplenism was severely impaired, and blood cell counts were remarkably reduced compared with those of the healthy control group. However, the Child-Pugh classes of five patients at Post1 and eight patients at Post2 were downgraded from class B to A, with the decreases in the Child-Pugh scores from 6.2 ± 1.3 (Pre) to 5.8 ± 0.7 (Post1) (P>0.05) and 5.1 ± 0.4 (Post2) (P<0.001), respectively. Furthermore, blood cell counts increased after SPD and reached normal levels in the Post2 group. Therefore, liver function and pancytopenia were ameliorated significantly in the long term after therapeutic SPD.

BMI, body mass index; TB, Total bilirubin; ALT, alanine transaminase; AST, aspartate aminotransferase; PT, prothrombin time; WBC, white blood cell count; PLT, platelet count. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001; n.s. represents no significant difference.

Data are expressed as mean ± standard deviation. Numbers in parenthesis are %.

First, overall differences in the microbial community structures in the healthy controls and cirrhotic patients before and after SPD were calculated. High-throughput sequencing of the bacterial 16S rRNA gene V3+V4 regions in 86 samples produced 6,438,544 raw reads (an average of 74,866 reads per sample). After filtering the low-quality sequences and chimeras, 4,889,963 effective tags were obtained for the following analysis. Based on a 97% similarity level, all effective tags were clustered into OTUs. The rarefaction curve and Shannon index curve were plotted to reflect sequencing depths. As shown in Figures 2A, B , OTU numbers and Shannon indices reached plateaus with increases in sample sequence numbers, suggesting that the sequencing depth was adequate.

The beta diversity of the microbiome was assessed using unsupervised multivariate statistical methods, including PCoA (based on Binary Jaccard) and NMDS (based on Weighted Unifrac). The results showed that the bacterial compositions in the Pre and Post1 groups not only clearly deviated from each other but also set apart from those in the healthy control group and in Post2 ( Figures 2G, H ). However, most of the points at Post2 overlapped with those in the healthy control group, suggesting similar bacterial community structures.

To investigate the SPD-related changes in bacterial phylotypes in patients with cirrhosis, the microbial compositions of the stool samples from the groups were analyzed. The relative abundances (%) of the dominant microbial phyla, families, and genera clustered into each group are shown in Figure S1 . At the phylum level, the gut microbiome composition of all individuals was mainly characterized by Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes, and Proteobacteria, with minor contributions from Actinobacteria, Verrucomicrobia, Cyanobacteria, Fusobacteria, and others. Although the bacterial community was highly diverse and there were marked interindividual differences, the microbial communities of the study patients differed from those of healthy controls. There were significantly lower relative abundances of Bacteroidetes and Lentisphaerae at Pre than in the healthy control group, while Actinobacteria was remarkably overrepresented (P<0.05) ( Figure S2 ). However, the relative abundance of Lentisphaerae was recovered at Post2 (P<0.05) and was not significantly different from that in the healthy control group (P>0.05).

In addition, it is worth mentioning that Enterococcus, Escherichia-Shigella, and Streptococcus were more enriched at Post1 compared with the healthy control group ( Figure 5A ). As concluded by many clinical studies, these genera contain many pathogenic species that are the leading causes of bacterial infections and are associated with a poor clinical prognosis in patients with cirrhosis (18, 21–23). The result of this study was in accordance with the changes in bacterial communities at the family level ( Figure 3B ). Lachnospira, Faecalibacterium, Lachnospiraceae_NK4A136_group, Roseburia, Subdoligranulum, [Eubacterium]_eligens_group, Blautia, and so on, which can produce beneficial substances called short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) (24), were significantly suppressed in the Post1 group ( Figure 5B ). With the exception of Streptococcus, the relative abundances of these fifteen genera were reversed at Post2, and had significant differences compared with those at Post1 (P<0.01). All this evidence indicated an imbalance in the intestinal flora in cirrhotic patients. This situation was aggravated two weeks after the SPD. However, it had partly improved 12 months after surgery.

The concentration levels of DAO, D-LA, LPS, and TNF-α, which indirectly reflect intestinal permeability and systemic inflammatory levels, were measured to evaluate the effects of the SPD on intestinal permeability. As shown in Figures 6A–D , the levels of the four biomarkers were higher in Pre than in the healthy control group (P<0.05). Subsequently, these indices were further increased significantly at Post1 (P<0.05) and reached peak values. Finally, these indices displayed decreased levels at Post2 compared with Pre and Post1. The concentrations of D-LA and LPS in the Post2 group were still slightly higher than those in the healthy control group (P<0.05), but DAO and TNF-α were restored to a normal level (P>0.05).

To further elucidate whether the improved liver function and intestinal permeability were related to the recovery of the gut microbiome at Post2, a correlation analysis between the clinical parameters and improved genera was conducted. The results showed that the relative abundance of Veillonella was positively correlated with aspartate aminotransferase (AST) (R=0.451, P<0.05) ( Figure 7A ). The relative abundance of Subdoligranulum was negatively correlated with AST (R=-0.464, P<0.05) and alanine transaminase (ALT) (R=-0.456, P<0.05) ( Figures 7B, C ). The relative abundances of Streptococcus and Veillonella were negatively correlated with albumin (R=-0.481, P<0.01; R=-0.672, P<0.01, respectively) ( Figures 7D, E ). The relative abundances of Enterobacteriaceae and Escherichia-Shihella, which contain many kinds of gram-negative bacteria, were positively correlated with LPS concentration (R=0.564, P<0.01; R=0.678, P<0.01) ( Figures 7F, G ). The relative abundance of Lachnospiraceae_NK4A136_group was negatively correlated with D-LA (R=-0.512, P<0.05) and TNF-α (R=-0.609, P<0.01) concentrations ( Figures 7H, I ). In particular, the Shannon diversity of the gut microbiome showed a negative correlation with LPS (R=-0.654, P<0.01), DAO (R=-0.528, P<0.05), and D-LA (R=-0.467, P<0.05) concentrations ( Figures 7J–L ). Compared with the Pre group, the changing trends in these clinical parameters and bacterial taxa at Post2 were consistent with the correlations between them. These results suggested that normalizing the intestinal permeability through the restoration of some specific genera might ameliorate liver damage and its function.

To the best of our knowledge, this was the first prospective study to investigate the alterations in the gut microbiome and the intestinal permeability of HBV-related cirrhotic patients after undergoing an SPD. Our results revealed that gut microbial dysbiosis, increased intestinal permeability and impaired liver function were significantly mitigated at 12 months after surgery. Several improved clinical parameters were related to specific bacterial taxa with altered abundances.

Even with these limitations, our work could still observe substantial differences in the gut microbiome and intestinal permeability between cirrhotic patients and healthy individuals. The differences were further exacerbated two weeks after the SPD. However, the patients then exhibited benefits that included the improvement of liver function and gut microenvironment 12 months after surgery. Improvements in the liver function and intestinal permeability were likely related to restoring the gut microbiome. Further studies are needed to determine whether and how the altered gut microbiome that occurs after an SPD influences the prognosis of patients.

The data presented in the study are deposited in the Sequence Read Archive (SRA) repository (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra/), accession number: PRJNA838734.

The studies involving human participants were reviewed and approved by Institutional Ethics Committee of the Second Affiliated Hospital of Xi’an Jiaotong University. The patients/participants provided their written informed consent to participate in this study. Written informed consent was obtained from the individual(s) for the publication of any potentially identifiable images or data included in this article.

YZ and ZL designed the research; XC and AZ collected the clinical data and samples; YZ, RZ, and YG performed the research; JW and BQ analyzed data; YZ and FJ wrote the first draft of the article; JG, GK, and ZL revised the article; all authors have read and approved the final version of the article.

This work was supported by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central University (No. XJJ2015102, XJJ2017190), the Free Exploration Project of Research Funds for the Second Affiliated Hospital of Xi’an Jiaotong University [2020YJ (ZYTS) 335], and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 82100635).

We thank Beijing Biomarker Technologies Corporation for their technical support in the sequencings. We would also like to thank Medjaden Inc. for the scientific editing of this manuscript.

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fimmu.2022.941830/full#supplementary-material

