Host diet and evolutionary history explain different aspects of gut microbiome diversity among vertebrate clades

Multiple factors modulate microbial community assembly in the vertebrate gut, though studies disagree as to their relative contribution. One cause may be a reliance on captive animals, which can have very different gut microbiomes compared to their wild counterparts. To resolve this disagreement, we analyze a new, large, and highly diverse animal distal gut 16 S rRNA microbiome dataset, which comprises 80% wild animals and includes members of Mammalia, Aves, Reptilia, Amphibia, and Actinopterygii. We decouple the effects of host evolutionary history and diet on gut microbiome diversity and show that each factor modulates different aspects of diversity. Moreover, we resolve particular microbial taxa associated with host phylogeny or diet and show that Mammalia have a stronger signal of cophylogeny. Finally, we find that environmental filtering and microbe-microbe interactions differ among host clades. These findings provide a robust assessment of the processes driving microbial community assembly in the vertebrate intestine.

Our understanding of the animal intestinal microbiome has now extended far beyond its importance for digestion and energy acquisition, with many recent studies showing that the microbiome contributes to detoxification, immune system development, behavior, postembryonic development, and a number of other factors influencing host physiology, ecology, and evolution1,2. Clearly, the adaptive capacity of an animal species is not determined solely by the host genome but must also include the vast genetic repertoire of the microbiome3. Concretely understanding how environmental perturbations, host–microbe coevolution, and other factors dictate the microbial diversity in the animal intestine holds importance for the conservation and management of animal populations along with determining their adaptive potential to environmental change4. However, we are still far from this understanding, especially regarding non-mammalian species and non-captive species in their natural environment.

To address this challenge, we generate and analyze a very large and highly diverse vertebrate distal gut microbiome 16S rRNA dataset, comprising 80% wild animals that include members of Mammalia, Aves, Reptilia, Amphibia, and Actinopterygii (which diverged from a last common ancestor ~435 MYA). Unlike meta-analyses, this dataset was generated with the same collection methods and molecular techniques performed in the same facility, which reduces batch effects that plague meta-analyses. We utilize a robust analytical framework to resolve the relative importance of host diet and evolutionary history (along with other host characteristics) on gut microbiome diversity. Moreover, we identify particular microbial operational taxonomic units (OTUs) that associate with diet or host phylogeny after controlling for the effect of the other factor. Finally, we utilize eco-phylogenetic methods and co-occurrence analyses to investigate the effects of environmental filtering and microbe–microbe interactions on microbial community assembly in the vertebrate intestine.

With the specific aim to cover as much of the breadth of vertebrate hosts animal diversity as possible, we collected fresh fecal samples from the five host classes Mammalia, Aves, Reptilia, Amphibia, and Actinopterygii. Sampling was mostly restricted to animals living in the wild, with some additional samples originating from domesticated livestock and pets (Supplementary Data 1). We generally excluded samples from zoo animals (20 of the 39 samples from captive animals) because artificial habitat, diet, and medication may have strong confounding effects on the natural intestinal communities. No samples were collected from aquariums. The majority of the samples were collected in Central Europe and supplemented with samples from other regions to cover phylogenetic groups lacking extant members in this region (e.g., Afrotheria, Marsupialia, Primates, or Cetacea). To ensure sample origin, samples were gathered by specialized wildlife biologists doing research on the host species in the field. In total, the dataset includes 213 samples from 128 species, each with detailed diet, habitat, and additional metadata (Fig. 1). The number of samples per species varied from 1 to 11 (mean = 1.7), with 50 species having ≥2 samples (Supplementary Fig. 2).

We sequenced the 16S rRNA V4 region from feces or gut contents of all 213 samples and generated OTUs (resolved at 100% sequence identity) with the DADA227 pipeline, which produced a total of 30,290 OTUs. Most OTUs (98%) were only detected in ≤5% of samples (Supplementary Fig. 3), which may be due to the high taxonomic and ecological diversity of the hosts. Therefore, we utilized presence–absence for all subsequent OTU-based analyses unless noted otherwise (e.g., for abundance-based beta-diversity metrics). At the phylum level, two clades were found in at least one individual per species: Firmicutes (mainly Clostridia) and Proteobacteria (mainly Betaproteobacteria and Gammaproteobacteria). The next most prevalent phyla were Actinobacteria and Bacteroidetes, which were found in 87% and 86% of host species, respectively (Supplementary Fig. 3).

Altogether, our assessment of OTU distribution and taxonomy in our dataset revealed that (i) OTUs are sparsely distributed, (ii) host phylogeny constrains beta-diversity, (iii) taxonomic compositions of many host species in our dataset correspond with findings from other studies, and (iv) many OTUs in our dataset, especially those observed in non-mammals, lack cultured representatives.

We utilized multiple regression on matrices (MRMs) to test how well gut microbiome diversity could be explained by host phylogeny, diet, habitat, geographic location, and technical variation. We chose MRMs because host phylogeny and geographic location can be directly represented as distance matrices (patristic distance and great circle distance, respectively) and measuring host phylogenetic similarity as a continuous variable (patristic distance) versus a discrete variable (taxonomic groupings) alleviates imbalances in representation for specific host taxonomic groups (e.g., Mammalia was highly represented). Host metadata that could not inherently be described as a distance matrix (e.g., the diet components of each species) were converted to distance matrices by various means (see “Methods”). We had no data on the genetic similarity of individuals within host species, and thus we conducted our analysis at the species level. To estimate the effects of intra-species variation in host microbiome and metadata on our MRM analysis, we performed the analysis on 100 subsampled datasets, each comprising one randomly selected sample per species. Unless noted otherwise, we used this sensitivity analysis approach for all hypothesis testing in this study (see “Methods”).

We examined whether these patterns change when grouping microbes at coarser taxonomic levels (Supplementary Figs. 12, 13, 14, and 15). The results were mostly consistent with the OTU level; however, weighted Unifrac became significantly associated with host phylogeny, regardless of the taxonomic level. Also, both weighted Unifrac and the Shannon index were no longer significantly associated with host diet at the phylum level.

Our MRM analyses suggest that host phylogeny and diet explain gut microbiome diversity, but this is only one line of evidence, and it does not finely resolve which particular aspects of diversity (e.g., particular OTUs) correspond with host diet and phylogeny. Therefore, we employed complementary tests to our MRM analyses to support and further investigate our findings. While animal host phylogeny is somewhat correlated with diet, our dataset comprised a highly taxonomically diverse set of species with substantially varying diets, which often did not correspond to phylogenetic relatedness (Fig. 1). We exploited this lack of complete correspondence between host phylogeny and diet to decouple the effects of each variable on microbial community diversity.

The LIPA-OTUs belonged to seven bacterial phyla and one archaeal phylum (Fig. 4c; Supplementary Fig. 18). Firmicutes was dramatically more represented than other phyla, with Bacteroides the second-most common. Members of Bovidae consistently had the highest numbers of these two phyla; this finding is supported by Sasson and colleagues13, who only identified Bacteroides and Firmicutes to be heritable in cattle. The majority of the Firmicutes OTUs were members of the Ruminococcaceae, and while most of Ruminococcaceae OTUs were associated with Artiodactyla hosts, some were also observed in certain members of the Primates, Rodentia, and Perissodactyla. Other OTU clades with significant phylogenetic signal included the genera Christensenella, Blautia, and Methanobrevibacter, which were all found to be consistently heritable among multiple human cohort studies12,35. Interestingly, while humans are represented in this dataset, and a few OTUs were associated with some of the primate species, no OTUs showed a phylogenetic signal with humans (Fig. 4a). Among some very closely related OTUs, we observed that host clade specificity differed, suggesting that these taxa have diversified via adaptive specialization for particular hosts (Supplementary Data 2; Supplementary Fig. 18).

Our finding that only Mammalia possessed OTUs with local phylogenetic signal suggests that the effects of evolutionary history on intestinal microbiome diversity may be stronger for Mammalia versus non-mammalian species. We investigated this finding by performing cophylogeny analyses, which determines whether the phylogenies of the host and symbiont (microbe) correspond in their branching patterns. While a positive correlation can be the result of other processes besides co-cladogenesis36, the pattern is consistent with a model of host–symbiont coevolution. We first utilized Procrustean approach to cophylogeny (PACo37), which performs Procrustes superimposition to infer the best fit between host and symbiont phylogenies based on symbiont occurrences in the hosts. This permutation-based approach does not rely on distribution assumptions. Moreover, the analysis generates residuals of the Procrustean fit, which describes the contribution of each individual host–symbiont association to the global fit (smaller residuals means a better fit).

The stronger signal of cophylogeny among mammals may be the result of more transient environmental microbes in the guts of non-mammals. We assessed this possibility by mapping taxa to the Earth Microbiome Project (EMP)38 16S rRNA dataset (No. of samples: Animal = 317, Human = 206, Sediment = 259, Soil = 193, Water = 242) and using the indicator value analysis39 (IndVal) to assess the specificity of taxa to (i) the guts of mammals versus non-mammals in our dataset and (ii) biomes in the EMP dataset. We found 32 bacterial genera and 1 archaeal genus to show significant specificity for mammals or non-mammals in our dataset and also significant biome specificity in the EMP dataset (IndVal, Adj. p < 0.05; Supplementary Fig. 20A). Moreover, the non-mammal associated taxa had a significantly higher specificity for environmental EMP biomes (Wilcox, p < 0.006); Supplementary Fig. 20B), which corroborates our hypothesis. Genera did not contribute equally to this signal, and actually many non-mammal and mammal specific genera were only specific to human and/or animal biomes in the EMP dataset. Still, more non-mammal-specific genera (e.g., Desulfolobus and Hyphomicrobium) were strongly associated with environmental biomes relative to mammal-specific genera. The only mammal-specific genus to show a strong environmental association was Paludibacter (Bacteroidetes phylum).

Our findings that diet and host evolutionary history significantly explain microbiome diversity indicate that environmental filtering plays a substantial role in microbial community assembly. In order to further test this notion and to assess how environmental filtering may differ among host clades, we utilized two ecophylogenetics analyses: mean phylogenetic distance (MPD) and mean nearest taxon distance (MNTD). These tests assess the degree of phylogenetic clustering within each sample (host) relative to a permuted null model. Assuming phylogenetic niche conservatism (i.e., closely related taxa overlap along niche axes), then host diet or gut physiology may select for phylogenetically clustered taxa with overlapping niches, while in the absence of such strong selection, competition via niche conservatism would lead to phylogenetic overdispersion40. Phylogenetic overdispersion may also result from facilitation (i.e., beneficial microbe–microbe interactions), such as when distantly related taxa form consortia to break down complex plant polymers40. MPD is more sensitive to overall patterns of phylogenetic clustering and evenness, while MNTD is more sensitive to patterns at the tree tips41.

We next tested how microbes co-occur among hosts, which can be influenced by selective pressures or microbe–microbe interactions. Specifically, we conducted a co-occurrence analysis to determine which OTUs significantly positively or negatively co-occurred relative to a permuted null model. Our analysis revealed that almost all significant co-occurrences were positive (Fig. 7a; Supplementary Fig. 21A). The co-occurrence network consisted of four sub-networks, each with differing taxonomic compositions and existence of “hub” OTUs (Fig. 7d). Sub-networks 1 and 2 were dominated by Ruminococcaceae and Peptostreptococcaceae, with Ruminococcaceae OTUs acting as central hubs in both (Supplementary Fig. 22). Sub-network 3 contained an Enterobacteriaceae (Proteobacteria) OTU hub and also possessed more members of Clostridiaceae, Lachnospiraceae, and Enterobacteriaceae. Sub-network 4 did not have a strong hub OTU and contained the most taxonomic diversity (Fig. 7d). Interestingly, Methanobrevibacter OTUs were only found in sub-network 1 and significantly co-occurred with Christensenellaceae OTUs as previously seen in a large human cohort study35. The presence of OTUs from each sub-network differed substantially among host clades (Fig. 7b). Sub-networks 3 and 4 were generally most prevalent in many host orders, with only one of the two networks being highly prevalent. Sub-network 1 was only prevalent in the Artiodactyla, suggesting strong host specificity of this microbial consortium. In support of this finding, the network contained a substantially higher proportion of OTUs with local phylogenetic signal among hosts relative to the other sub-networks (Fig. 7d). Sub-network 2 was only prevalent in four mammalian orders: Artiodactyla, Diprotodontia, Pilosa, and Primates. The sub-networks showed significant distributional shifts among diets (Kruskal–Wallis, p < 2.2e−16; pairwise Wilcox test, Adj. p < 0.05 for all tests), with sub-networks 1 and 2 being most prevalent among herbivores, sub-network 4 dominating in omnivores, and sub-networks 3 and 4 showing similar prevalence among carnivores (Fig. 7c).

While various studies have shown that host diet and phylogeny modulate the animal intestinal microbiome5,6, we have expanded on this previous work by performing a robust assessment of each factor’s effect on a homogeneously generated dataset of highly diverse and predominantly wild animals. Because our dataset consisted of animals from diverse lineages that consume a range of dietary components, we were able to decouple the effects of host phylogeny and diet on both aggregate diversity metrics and at the individual OTU level. We employed multiple analytical methods to support our findings, and we also directly assessed the sensitivity of our analyses to intra-species microbiome and metadata heterogeneity, which has been found to be non-trivial7,14,43,44. We did not have inter-individual replicates for some host species in our dataset, which limited our ability to determine the impact of this factor for certain host clades; nevertheless, our findings suggest that host diet and evolution are strong modulators despite the intra-species variability that we measured. We did not observe that habitat or geographic distance explained microbiome diversity, which is consistent with some animal microbiome studies6,25 but not others6,21,45. Possibly, these factors may only modulate the microbiome of certain host clades, or our dataset is underpowered in regard to testing these potential modulators.

In conclusion, our findings help to resolve the major modulators of intestinal microbiome diversity in animals, which have not been well studied in wild animals, especially non-mammalian species. Our findings indicate that diet primarily selects for functional guilds, while host evolutionary history mainly determines the prevalence of specific microbial OTUs. The modulating effect of host evolutionary history was most pronounced in mammals, especially for Artiodactyla. In general, our findings suggest that microbial community assembly in the Artiodactyla clade differs substantially from other mammalian clades, which may be the result of the complex digestive physiology that has evolved in ruminants. The putative keystone species identified in our co-occurrence analysis may be of special interest for future work determining how dietary changes can modulate the animal gut microbiome, such as in the context of captivity or climate change.

Sampling was conducted between February 2009 and March 2014. Only fresh samples with confirmed origin from a known host species were collected, most of them by wildlife biologists conducting long-term research on the respective species in its habitat. This also ensured that sampling guidelines and restrictions were adhered to, where these were applicable. Human DNA samples were taken from a previous study61. Samples originated predominantly from Central Europe (Austria and neighboring countries). However, in order to cover as much vertebrate diversity as possible, many samples were also taken from other countries around the world (19 countries on 6 continents; see Supplementary Fig. 1). Detailed metadata on the sampled animal species such as habitat, sampling location, and conditions were collected alongside the fecal samples. Additional metadata was compiled from various databases such as the NCBI Taxonomy browser or the PanTHERIA database62 (see Supplementary Data 1).

All fecal samples were collected in sterile sampling vials, transported to a laboratory and frozen within 8 h. Samples were stored at −20 °C and shipped on dry ice to TU Wien in Vienna, Austria within weeks after collection. In Vienna, DNA extraction was performed within 2 months after receiving the samples using the PowerSoil DNA Isolation Kit (MoBio Laboratories, Carlsbad, USA) in combination with bead-beating (FastPrep-24, MP Biomedicals, Santa Ana, USA). DNA concentration in extracts was measured using a NanoDrop ND 1000 UV spectrophotometer and the Quant-iT PicoGreen dsDNA Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Vienna, Austria). DNA extracts were stored at −80 °C until further analysis.

PCR amplicons for the V4 region of the 16S rRNA gene were generated with primers 515F–806R63 and were sequenced with the Illumina MiSeq 2 × 250 v2 Kit at the Cornell University Institute for Biotechnology. DADA227 was used to call 100% sequence identity OTUs (i.e., sequence variants). Taxonomy was assigned to OTUs with the QIIME2 q2-feature-classifier64 using the SILVA database (v119)65. The phyloseq66 R package was used to rarefy total OTU counts to 5000 per sample due to the multiple orders of magnitude difference in raw counts among samples. A phylogeny was inferred for all OTU sequences with fasttree67 based on a multiple sequence alignment generated by mafft68. All samples lacking metadata used in the study were filtered from the dataset. In cases where an individual host was sampled multiple times, we randomly selected one sample.

Only 19% of animals in our dataset have existing genome assemblies of any quality in which to infer a genome-based phylogeny from. Instead, we used a dated host phylogeny for all species from http://timetree.org69. To create a phylogeny for all samples (Supplementary Fig. 2), sample-level tips were grafted onto the species-level tips with a negligible branch length.

The dataset contained a variable number of samples per host species, and species were asymmetrically represented among clades (Fig. 1). Moreover, the host phylogeny did not include within-species relatedness information, which would cause zero-inflation in our analyses of coevolution. Therefore, we used a sensitivity analysis approach (inspired by the sensiphy70 R package) that assessed the sensitivity of all analyses in this study (unless noted otherwise) to intra-species heterogeneity in microbiome diversity and host metadata. This method consisted of generating 100 subsamples of the dataset, each with just one randomly selected sample per host species. For each hypothesis tested in the study, the test was applied to each dataset subset, and the overall hypothesis test was considered significant if ≥95% of the subsets were each considered significant after correcting for multiple hypothesis testing with the Benjamini–Hochberg procedure.

General manipulation and basic analyses of the dataset were performed in R71 with the phyloseq, dplyr, tidyr, and ggplot2 R packages66. High-throughput compute cluster job submission was performed with the batchtools72 R package. Phylogenies were manipulated with the ape73 and caper74 R packages and visualized with iTOL75. Networks were manipulated and visualized with the tidygraph76 and ggraph77 R packages, respectively. The world map in Supplementary Fig. 1 was created with the maps78 R package.

We downloaded the deblur_90bp.subset_2k.rare_5000 16S rRNA dataset from the EMP38 ftp site. Samples associated with human, animal, or non-anthropogenic environmental biomes were selected (n = 1217) and grouped into general biome categories (e.g., “soil” or “sediment”) based on EMP metadata (e.g., “env_feature”; Supplementary Data 3). Taxa were mapped between our dataset and the EMP dataset based on genus-level taxonomic classifications. For our dataset, we quantified mammal versus non-mammal specificity of genera with the IndVal analysis39 via the labdsv R package. IndVal was also used to measure biome specificity for the EMP dataset. All genera with a Benjamini–Hochberg adjusted p value of <0.05 were considered significant.

Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.





Journal peer review information: Nature Communications thanks the anonymous reviewers for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Peer reviewer reports are available.

Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

These authors contributed equally: Nicholas D. Youngblut, Georg H. Reischer.

Supplementary Information accompanies this paper at 10.1038/s41467-019-10191-3.

