The functionality of the gastrointestinal microbiome in non-human animals

Due to the significance of the microbiome on human health, much of the current data available regarding microbiome functionality is centered on human medicine. For agriculturally important taxa, the functionality of gastrointestinal bacteria has been studied with the primary goals of improving animal health and production performance. With respect to cattle, the digestive functions of bacteria in cattle are unarguably critical to digestion and positively impact production performance. Conversely, some research suggests that the gastrointestinal microbiome in chickens competes with the host for nutrients and produces toxins that can harm the host resulting in decreased growth efficiency. Concerning many other species including reptiles and cetaceans, some cataloging of fecal bacteria has been conducted, but the functionality within the host remains ambiguous. These taxa could provide interesting gastrointestinal insight into functionality and symbiosis considering the extreme feeding regimes (snakes), highly specialized diets (vampire bats), and living environments (polar bears), which warrants further exploration.

In humans, the numbers of bacterial cells outnumber human tissue cells by 10 to 1. The skin, nasal passages, and gastrointestinal tract are all inhabited with microorganisms, and each location has a specific microbial profile composed of microorganisms best suited to inhabit that niche. Perhaps the most studied of these niches is the gastrointestinal tract (GIT). From Table 1, it is clear that competition, mutualism, and co-habitation all occur within the GIT microbial community as well as provide nutrients and vitamins to the host.

A wealth of information regarding the functionality and impact of the gut microbiome on human health has been obtained from clinical studies and experimental models. Currently, studies are applying these methods to non-human animals with bias towards agricultural taxa. Regardless, there are numerous papers available for some species, fewer for others, and no information for some animals. The point of this review is not to provide an exhaustive list of bacterial taxa present in every animal and the functionality of those microbes. Rather, the aim of this review is to point out that some gut microbe functions may be broad and applicable to many animals, while some species may contain unique microbes performing unique functions and to use a few animal species to demonstrate this idea. Deciphering and defining the functionality of the gut microbes can be addressed using various methods and observations.

Assessing and determining the functionality of microbes is not an easy task. Numerous experiments have been undertaken to understand the function of the gut microbiome in different species. These approaches include analyzing animals reared in sterile environments lacking any gut microbiome and transplanting microbiome from one animal to another. Disruptions to the microbiome such as fasting or gastrointestinal infection also provide insight regarding functionality of the commensals. Furthermore, these types of comparisons may be made to enhance the understanding of the symbiotic balance.

One approach to determine functionality of microbiomes is to compare sets of conventional animals to those without microbiomes. These so-called germfree animals have been documented as early as 1895 by Nuttall and Theirfelder [6] who intended to prove that microbes were not needed for life and were actually harmful by creating germfree guinea pigs. Other experiments including one conducted by Cosendy and Wollman also intended to demonstrate that animals could live without microbes and utilized “germfree” chickens to test their hypothesis [7, 8].

In addition to histological changes in the intestine, other organs and physiological changes have been noted. The germfree rat has a smaller heart and a cecum that is four to six times larger than rats with normal microbiomes [12]. This change has been explained by an accumulation of substances normally degraded by the microbiome and histological changes of the cecum epithelial cells [13]. In germfree chicks, the body temperature is slightly higher than that of chicks with normal flora [14]. These experiments have demonstrated the complex role that microbiomes play in host development, not only in the gastrointestinal systems but in other organs as well.

That fasting tends to shift the GIT bacteria populations has been demonstrated in many animals including mice, alligators, pythons, and chickens [15–18]. Furthermore, a feeding/fasting cycle promotes diversity of the microbiome [18]. During fasting, the lack of nutrient availability impacts the intestinal mucin layer, as bacteria with the ability to utilize mucin will degrade it for a nutrient source [19]. Hence, when the host does not provide nutrients to the commensals, the commensals will start to consume the host. This may be because fasting suppresses the host antibacterial defenses [20, 21]. Interestingly, even though the protective barrier of mucin is decreased, bacterial translocation across the epithelia may not increase [21].

Compared with other animal taxa, there is little information about the gastrointestinal microbiome found in reptiles, many of which practice an extreme feeding/fasting cycle. Snakes are very interesting animals because many species have extreme periods of fasting with a time span as long as 1 year between meals [27]. In addition, all snakes ingest and rapidly digest whole prey. These two facts suggest that snakes must be very efficient at nutrient uptake, and this would hold true for the microbiome as well. These extreme feeding regimes in the snake raise the question of whether the microbiome impact on nutrient uptake is more dramatic in the snake or has any affect at all. Peterson et al. [28] aimed to answer this question using African house snakes where the snakes were repeatedly given oral dosages of antibiotics (treatment) or sterile water (control) prior to consuming sterilized mice. Intestinal samples were obtained non-lethally each time prior to feeding and sequencing of these samples was conducted. No differences in energy densities of expelled mice or feces and uric acid as determined by bomb calorimetry were reported. However, the bacteria populations present in the intestinal samples were very different between the two groups. From the data, the authors concluded that the bacterial microbiome had no significant impact on nutrient acquisition.

Disruptions in the normal patterns of host microbiome may occur for a variety of reasons. Changes in diet, antibiotic intake, or colonization by pathogens have all been demonstrated to result in a shift in the microbiome populations [29]. In some cases, this shift results in negative health consequences, because the immune system maintains a constant production of antibodies aimed at the normal microbiome pattern that must be adjusted to fit the new bacterial population, and this can be costly in terms of energy expenditures.

Metamorphosis and the impacts of the process on intestinal populations have been demonstrated in frogs and toads by comparing gut microbes in tadpoles versus adult forms [31]. Tadpoles have more diversity and a microbiome similar to fish, while frog GIT profiles resemble amniotes. The differences are attributed to food preferences and GIT structure. Like amphibians, metamorphosis of the sea lamprey and mosquito results in GIT rearrangement and feeding preferences [32, 33]. In both species, the microbiome in the adult is substantially less diverse than in the young. Specific to the lamprey, the sanguivore form apparently selects for the Aeromonads because this population of bacteria increases from 4 % in the young to 84 % in the parasitic fish. Analysis of these Aeromonads found all species and strains were hemolytic. Like other sanguivores, Aeromonas hydrophila was consistently isolated from fecal samples of vampire bats and is thought to be necessary for the digestion of blood [34]. The authors also suggested that acquisition of the bacterium by nursing the young through coprophagy is essential in order to transition to the sanguivore lifestyle.

Commensals of the microbiome can be classified as obligate or facultative. The obligate bacteria often have a reduced genome and are dependent on the host and the microbial community for nutrients and other essential compounds. As an example, Lactobacillus johnsonii codes for amino acid proteases, peptidases, and phosphotransferase transporters but not for genes necessary for biosynthetic pathways. In addition, L. johnsonii contains all of the genes necessary for the synthesis of pyrimidines but not for the synthesis of purines, and therefore, the bacterium must acquire amino acids, peptides, and purine nucleotides as secondary metabolites from other microorganisms or from the human host [35]. Since obligate microbes, like L. johnsonii, are dependent on the host for survival, promoting the fitness of the host is advantageous to the symbionts.

In higher animals, there is some evidence of amino acid provisions supplied by the microbiome and an impact on reproduction [52]. But these and other connections between host reproduction and the microbiome are more difficult to discern due to the complexity of higher animal systems. Studies in cows and pigs demonstrate a shift in the GIT microbes during the gestation period, and thesis shifts were inferred to be for fat deposition to support the developing fetus and milk production [53, 54]. It has been suggested that changes in hormones and immune factors during gestation cause subsequent modifications in the microbiome profiles. Thus, it appears that host factors may modulate the microbiome in order to facilitate some physiological needs of reproduction.

Of all the functions that gastrointestinal bacteria perform, promoting health and preventing disease are likely the most studied. Commensal organisms prevent pathogens from colonizing the host by producing antimicrobial substances (organic acids, bacteriocins) and competing for nutrients and spaces [55]. Pathogens must compete with the commensal bacteria and devise methods to promote infection. For example, Salmonella typhimurium induces the inflammatory pathway to reduce the microbial population [56]. Inflammation also provides reactive oxygen species that react with thiosulfate to produce tetrathionate [57]. Tetrathionate can be used by Salmonella in the respiratory pathway, and the presence of this compound affords a selective advantage for the pathogen.

Understanding the mechanisms of pathogenesis and how commensal microbes defend the host can lead to therapeutic methods. Conversely, studying the relationship and identification of pathogens can lead to unique methods for control of certain pest insects. One specific example took advantage of ice nucleation to control the mulberry pyralid (Glyphodes pyloalis). Ice nucleation refers to the process where insects enhance their supercooling capacity during the winter by eliminating endogenous ice nucleators, accumulating low-molecular-weight polyols and sugars, and synthesizing hemolymph antifreeze proteins to prevent the formation of internal ice crystals that can pierce and damage cells and tissues. In the mulberry pyralid, active bacteria within the gut are known to increase the supercooling points and reduce cold hardiness by expressing an ice nucleation gene. Wantbe et al. [59] colonized the gut of the mulberry pyralid with a strain of Enterobacter cloacae, having a transformed ice nucleation gene that led to increased mortality of the insect. A second example involves the medically important triatomine bug that may be colonized by the parasite Trypanosoma cruzi. Triatomine bugs were colonized with the mutualistic bacterium Rhodococcus rhodnii that was genetically transformed to express an antitrypanosomal peptide effectively preventing colonization and development of the parasite population in the gut of the insect [60].

Many herbivores do not produce endogenous cellulases, hemicellulases, and pectinases and as such are dependent on the gut microbiomes for digestion of plant material. Cranial fermenters utilize a rumen in the foregut for fermentation, while caudal fermenters possess a cecum in the large intestines. The location of fermentation has an impact on animal physiology and nutrition. Both types are dependent on the fermentative microbes to extract energy from cellulose. However, unlike caudal fermenters, cranial fermenters cannot utilize hexose sources directly, and these sugars are instead converted to volatile fatty acids in the rumen. Since amino acid absorption takes place in the small intestines, cranial fermenters can utilize the microbes themselves as a source of protein. In fact, in cows, bacterial biomass provides about half the protein requirement for the animal [61]. Conversely, microbial proteins are lost in caudal fermenters because the cecum is located after the small intestines, where amino acids are absorbed. The dependence of the cranial fermenters on microorganisms for digestion is clear when considering the inability to produce healthy germfree adult cows. Germfree calves have been produced and can be sustained for a short time because they feed on sterilized milk, yet adults are nearly impossible to sustain due to the reliance on microorganisms for symbiotic digestion of plant materials.

A recent study of the American alligator revealed the impacts of evolution on the microbiome for digestive dependence [17]. The authors found a high proportion of Fusobacterium in the alligator gut, which is unusual because Firmicutes or Bacteroidetes typically dominate the gut bacteria populations. For this reason, the authors suggest Fusobacterium performs functional roles including development of the digestive organs and nutrient acquisition in the alligator. Furthermore, given that the basal position of Fusobacterium on the evolutionary tree and that the American alligator is the least evolved of nearly all animals, the authors suggest that Fusobacterium were dominant gut microbes in some prehistoric animals.

Marine sponges and tubeworms inhabit a wide distribution of marine environments, but many can be found in locations near hydrothermal vents with pressures of 400 bar (395 atm) and water temperatures up to 60 °C. This environment may also have an acidic pH and is rich in chemicals emitted from the vents including sulfide, hydrogen, and methane. The sponge or tubeworm absorbs chemicals, and microbial symbionts process the chemicals into organic molecules the host needs, while the bacteria gain a stable habitat. The dependence of the tubeworm and sponges on their symbiotic chemoautotrophic bacteria for nutrients has been well established [71]. Studies have confirmed the microbiome of these invertebrates is distinct from the surrounding water [72], and evidence of vertical transmission of endosymbionts exists [73]. Together, data from studies of these animals point to an adaptation of the host to an otherwise uninhabitable environment partly facilitated by the symbiotic bacteria.

Many marine mammals also inhabit extreme environments such as the polar arctic. To date, the few studies examining the gut microbiome of marine mammals living in these extreme environments have identified and cataloged bacteria, but little functionality of these bacteria has been explored. Glad et al. [74] identified the bacteria present in 10 different samples obtained from the rectums of polar bears (Ursus maritimus; note: polar bears are considered marine mammals and protected as such under marine mammal laws). Ogawa et al. [75] used cloning techniques to characterize gut bacteria in three different minke whales (Balaenoptera acutorostrata). These studied animals are carnivorous, feeding primarily on fish (minke whales) or seals (polar bears), and thus, the identification of bacteria including Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes is not surprising. Although primarily characteristic in nature, the distribution and abundance of the bacteria in these studies may provide clues for functionality. Firmicutes were the dominant taxa in nearly all the samples, and these bacteria have an increased capacity to stimulate host energy storage over other phyla [76]. These animals rely heavily on fat deposition for survival not only for energy storage but also to maintain body temperature. Thus, it is possible that some animals living in the polar extremes rely on their gut microbes to facilitate efficient fat storage needed for survival.

Intra-species comparisons of the metagenomes of individuals have revealed the functionality of some digestive communities. Qu et al. [77] used a chicken model to show that even though two individuals may have marked differences in microbiomes, the functional metagenome can be the same. They concluded that in their samples, bacterial taxa replaced other taxa without changing the overall function of the microbiome. Conversely, comparison of rumen samples among individuals showed marked differences in microbiomes that did result in differences in the overall functional microbiome [78]. The conflicting results in the two studies may be attributed to diet and digestive tract physiology.

Comparing phylogenetically divergent animals can also provide a better understanding of how microbiomes function and evolve and are shaped by factors such as diet and physiology. Although the cow and termite are both heavily dependent on bacteria for celluloytic digestion, diet was the main factor that shaped the microbiomes in these animals [78]. Comparison of the cow and hoatzin (a foregut fermenting bird) revealed that very similar microbial compositions and organ digestive functions dictated microbial profiles rather than phylogeny [79]. Interestingly, comparative genomic studies have demonstrated that the bacterial profile in swine and humans are similar and harbor many of the same phylogenetic groups primarily due to the similar gastrointestinal systems [80]. However, comparative metagenomic analysis of the pig, chicken ceca, cow rumen, and human fecal microbiomes showed that the metagenomes of the pig aligned more closely with the cow and chicken than with the human microbiome [81]. The results imply that agricultural taxa possess bacterial metagenomes that have been selected as a result of a very consistent and narrowly defined diet and rearing environment.

Studies of the gastrointestinal tract of animals have produced a wealth of information and revealed that populations are contingent on a number of factors including diet, habitat, and taxonomy. Although animals may be very different evolutionarily, they may have very similar microbes based on specific factors. Mosquitoes, leeches, sea lamprey, and bats are all sanguivores but have very different habitats and are quite distant on the evolutionary tree. However, the digestive tract is dominated by Aeromonas spp. in all these animals and is most likely for digestion of blood. Similarly, herbivorous fish, cows, and insect termites have similar cellulolytic microbiota with cows.

Some bacteria species are present in the microbiomes of a wide variety of animal taxa. Conversely, there are unique microbes performing unique functions in a very narrow group or species. Identifying, harvesting, and transplanting these microbes to other animal systems have been sought to perform the same function in non-host species. This concept has been applied to the use of kangaroo intestinal bacteria in the cattle rumen to reduce methane emission. Like other cross-species transplants, application of kangaroo bacteria in the cattle has failed even though the animal system is quite similar. Even at the breed level, it appears that genetics has a large impact on microbial population and function. Transplants of the same microbe into two different chicken breeds resulted in faster weight gain in only one of the breeds. Bacterial transplant failure may be the result of host specificity obtained through co-evolution. This co-evolution has selected the functional roles of the microbiome in a specific host. Thus, understanding the functional roles of microbes and how they interact with the host might further our ability to successfully transplant microbes.

Competing interests

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions

SD and IH conceived, outlined, wrote, revised, and finalized the manuscript. Both authors read and approved the final manuscript.

