The Gut Microbiome and Cancer Immunotherapy: Can We Use the Gut Microbiome as a Predictive Biomarker for Clinical Response in Cancer Immunotherapy?

The current review assessed the effects of the gut microbiome on clinical outcomes of immunotherapy and related adverse events (AEs) in cancer patients. Studies (n = 10) consistently reported that the gut microbiome prior to administering immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) was associated with enhanced efficacy of ICIs and reduced AEs. Recent fecal microbiome transplant (FMT) studies demonstrated the modulatory effects of FMT on the composition and diversity of the gut microbiome in patients with refractory cancers and the potential to improve the efficacy of ICIs.

Background: Emerging evidence suggests that gut microbiota influences the clinical response to immunotherapy. This review of clinical studies examines the relationship between gut microbiota and immunotherapy outcomes. Method: A literature search was conducted in electronic databases Medline, PubMed and ScienceDirect, with searches for “cancer” and “immunotherapy/immune checkpoint inhibitor” and “microbiome/microbiota” and/or “fecal microbiome transplant FMT”. The relevant literature was selected for this article. Results: Ten studies examined patients diagnosed with advanced metastatic melanoma (n = 6), hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) (n = 2), non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) (n = 1) and one study examined combination both NSCLC and renal cell carcinoma (RCC) (n = 1). These studies consistently reported that the gut microbiome profile prior to administering immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) was related to clinical response as measured by progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS). Two studies reported that a low abundance of Bacteroidetes was associated with colitis. Two studies showed that patients with anti-PD-1 refractory metastatic melanoma experienced improved response rates and no added toxicity when receiving fecal microbiota transplant (FMT) from patients with anti-PD-1 responsive disease. Conclusions: Overall, significant differences in the diversity and composition of the gut microbiome were identified in ICIs responders and non-responders. Our findings provide new insights into the value of assessing the gut microbiome in immunotherapy. Further robust randomized controlled trials (RCTs) examining the modulatory effects of the gut microbiome and FMT on ICIs in patients not responding to immunotherapy are warranted.

Cancer immunotherapy, a novel paradigm for cancer treatment, has demonstrated significantly increased survival rates in patients with metastatic cancer who were diagnosed with melanoma, non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and renal cell cancer (RCC) when compared with standard care. In addition, immunotherapy has been approved as treatment for several other cancers, including head and neck squamous cell cancer (HNSCC), refractory classical Hodgkin lymphoma, urothelial carcinoma, microsatellite instability-high cancer, recurrent or metastatic gastric and cervical cancer, refractory or relapsed primary mediastinal B cell lymphoma, advanced hepatocellular and Merkel cell carcinoma, and colorectal cancer (CRC) [1,2].

To date, few studies have examined the impact of the gut microbiome on the clinical response of ICIs, namely progression-free survival (PFS), overall survival (OS) and irAEs, although several studies have suggested a critical role for the gut microbiome in mediating responses to immunotherapies. Previous reviews have included both animal models and clinical studies and have attempted to elucidate the underlying mechanisms of dysbiosis of gut microbiota in immune responses [15,17]. Our current review, therefore, assesses the association between the gut microbiome and the therapeutic benefits of ICIs in metastatic advanced cancer patients.

An extensive search of the electronic databases PubMed, Medline, and ScienceDirect was conducted from inception to March 2021. Studies were searched with terms “cancer” and “immunotherapy/immune checkpoint inhibitor” and “microbiome/microbiota”. Inclusion criteria were studies conducted with adults (>18 years), published with full texts in English, and published in peer-reviewed journals. In addition, references contained in the included studies were manually searched to identify relevant papers that may have been missed by electronic searches.

Ten studies were identified from the three electronic databases (Medline, PubMed and ScienceDirect) and included in this review (Table 1). Of the ten studies, eight assessed the relationship between the gut microbiome and clinical outcomes of ICIs, one reported the relationship between gastrointestinal (GI) toxicity and ICIs, and one examined the relationship between both clinical outcomes and GI toxicities and ICIs. No studies on CAR-T cells were identified.

ATB: Antibiotic, HCC: Hepatocellular carcinoma, NSCLC: Non-small cell lung cancer, RCC: Renal cell carcinoma, PFS: Progression-free survival; OS: Overall survival; AEs: Adverse events, CTLA-4 blockers (Ipilimumab), PD-1 blockers (Nivolumab, Pembrolizumab, Cemiplimab), PD-L1 blockers (Atezolizumab, Avelumab, Durvalumab). RS: Retrospective study, PS: Prospective study, M: Male, FMT: Fecal Microbiota Transplant.

The ten selected studies included a total of 467 patients with a range of 8–89 in each of the studies. Only three studies were conducted with moderate sample sizes (n ≥ 65), whereas seven studies were conducted with small sample sizes (n ≤ 42). Six studies assessed patients diagnosed with melanoma, two with HCC, and one each study with lung cancer and with mixed lung and RCC. Five studies were conducted in the USA, three in China and two in France. Total study populations for ICIs (melanoma, NSCLC, HCC, and RCC) and type of ICI interventions (anti-PD-1 [n = 5], anti-CTLA-4 [n = 2], and a combination of anti-PD-1 and anti-CTLA-4 [n = 3]) varied across studies. Study designs included in this review were diverse, but the main primary outcome of individual studies were clinical outcomes including, response to ICI (n = 9) and irAEs (n = 1). Four studies collected fecal samples once prior to ICIs interventions, whereas six studies collected these multiple times (before, during and/or after treatment). Three studies analysed the gut microbiome profile with the 16S ribosomal RNA (16S rRNA) gene sequencing method, three with shotgun metagenomic sequencing, and four with both the 16S rRNA and shotgun metagenomics sequencing. Interestingly, an analysis of gene sequencing regions of 16S rRNA varied across studies: V3–V4 (n = 2), V4 (n = 4), and V4–V5 (n = 1).

Nine studies assessed the relationship between baseline composition and diversity of the gut microbiome and clinical outcomes of ICIs comprising five studies of patients with melanoma, two with HCC, one with NSCLC and one with both NSCLC and RCC.

In 2017, two studies explored the relationship between the gut microbiome and clinical outcomes of ICIs in advanced melanoma. Frankel et al. investigated the effect of the baseline gut microbiome on clinical outcomes in advanced melanoma patients receiving Ipilimumab (anti-CTLA-4), Nivolumab (anti-PD-1), and a combination of Ipilimumab + Nivolumab or Pembrolizumab (anti-PD-1), and reported that an enrichment of Bacteroides caccae was higher in patients who responded to immunotherapy (responders) (n = 24) compared to those who did not (non-responders) (n = 15) [20]. Among Ipilimumab (anti-CTLA-4) + Nivolumab (anti-PD-1) responders, they observed an enrichment of gut bacteria Fecalibacterium prausnitzii, Bacteroides thetaiotamicron, and Holdemania filiformis, whereas Pembrolizumab (anti-PD-1) responders displayed an enrichment of Dorea formicigenerans. Chaput et al. also explored the relationship between the baseline gut microbiome and clinical response and GI toxicities in patients receiving Ipilimumab (CTLA-4). They reported that a relative abundance of Fecalibacterium, Gemmiger, and Clostridium XIVa and a lower abundance of Bacteroides were associated with longer PFS (p = 0.0039) and OS (p = 0.051) [21].

More recently, Peters et al. assessed the relationship between the gut microbiome and immunotherapy response (PD-1 and CTLA-4) in melanoma patients (n = 27) and reported that higher microbial community richness was associated with longer PFS (p < 0.05) [8]. They found that an abundance of Fecalibacterium prausnitzii, Coprococcus eutactus, Prevotella stercorea, Streptococcus sanguinis, Streptococcus anginosus, and Lachnospiraceae bacterium 3 1 46FAA were related to longer PFS, whereas Bacteroides ovatus, Bacteroides dorei, Bacteroides massiliensis, Ruminococcus gnavus, and Blautia producta were related to shorter PFS. In addition, this study examined the association between the transcriptional expression of metagenomic pathways and PFS and reported that transcriptionally expressed metagenomic pathways of L-rhamnose degradation, guanosine nucleotide biosynthesis, and B vitamin biosynthesis were associated with PFS.

Recently two studies explored the relationship between baseline composition and diversity of the gut microbiome and ICIs outcomes in HCC patients and reported that the composition and diversity of the gut microbiome was related to the efficacy of ICIs.

Li et al. also examined the gut microbiome profile in patients with primary HCC in advanced stage who received ICIs in a large population with hepatitis B virus infection (n = 55) [23]. They found that the diversity and composition of the gut microbiome was significantly higher in responders than in non-responders and that patients with a high abundance of Fecalibacterium had a significantly prolonged PFS compared to those with a low abundance. Conversely, patients with a high abundance of Bacteroidales had a shortened PFS compared to those with a lower abundance.

Two studies assessed the relationship between baseline composition and diversity of the gut microbiome and ICIs outcomes in NSCLC patients and reported that the composition and diversity of the gut microbiome was related to the efficacy of ICIs.

Jin et al., in a study conducted in China with patients with advanced NSCLC (n = 37) undergoing anti-PD-1 immunotherapy, reported that PFS was significantly prolonged in patients who maintained a high diversity microbiota when compared to a low diversity group (median PFS 209 versus 52 days, p = 0.005) and that microbiota diversity was a significant predictor of PFS (hazard ratio: 4.2; 95% confidence interval: 1.42–12.3, p = 0.009) [25]. They also documented significant differences in the composition of the gut microbiome in responders and non-responders. The enrichment of Alistipes putredinis, Bifidobacterium longum, and Prevotella copri were high in responders, whereas Ruminococcus_unclassified was enriched in non-responders. Also, patients with a high abundance of microbiome diversity in the gut had a greater frequency of unique memory CD8+ T cell and natural killer cell subsets in the periphery in response to anti-PD-1 therapy.

Of ten studies reviewed, two were conducted with melanoma patients and assessed the relationship between the gut microbiome and GI toxicity of ICIs and found that a low abundance of Bacteroidetes was associated with colitis.

Dubin et al., assessed the relationship between the baseline gut microbiome and Ipilimumab (CTLA-4)-induced GI toxicity in patients with metastatic melanoma (n = 34). They reported that a higher relative abundance of bacteria belonging to the Bacteroidetes phylum was correlated with resistance to the development of ICIs-induced colitis [22]. In another study, Chaput et al., explored the relationship between the baseline gut microbiome and clinical response and GI toxicities in patients receiving Ipilimumab (CTLA-4) and reported that at baseline most of the colitis-associated phylotypes were related to Firmicutes (e.g., relatives of Fecalibacterium prausnitzii and Gemmiger formicilis) and that no colitis-related phylotypes were associated with higher level Bacteroidetes [21].

Recently two breakthrough clinical studies reported that FMT to non-responders, from donors who had a complete response to anti-PD-1 refractory metastatic melanoma, showed a clinical response to ICIs in a subset group of anti-PD-1 refractory metastatic melanoma patients when they received a combination of FMT and anti-PD-1 immunotherapy [27,28].

Davar et al., investigated the safety and efficacy of FMT combined with anti-PD-1 in patients with PD-1 refractory melanoma [28]. The study found that the combination of FMT and anti-PD-1 was well tolerated and identified 6 responders (partial responses (n = 3) and stable disease (n = 3)) among 15 patients who received a single colonoscopic FMT from 7 donors who had a partial or complete response to pembrolizumab. Responders showed an increased abundance of taxa similar to FMT donors, increased CD8+ T cell activation, and decreased frequency of interleukin-8-expressing myeloid cells, which are associated with resistance to immunotherapy. They suggested that the combination of FMT and anti-PD-1 altered the composition of the gut microbiome and tumor microenvironment to overcome resistance to anti-PD-1 in a subset of PD-1 advanced melanoma patients [28].

Several recent promising studies have shown that the gut microbiome is related to clinical response of cancer immunotherapy and irAEs. However, up-to-date practice guidelines regarding the gut microbiome and cancer, based on clinical evidence, are not as yet available for clinicians, patients and carers. To our knowledge, this is the first clinical review examining the relationship between the gut microbiome and clinical response in immunotherapy, irAEs and the effects of FMT modulation on the gut microbiome in immunotherapy.

While the main strength of the current review is that it was conducted with clinical studies, our review has several limitations. Firstly, we found that a number of studies were conducted with heterogeneous samples of cancer patients diagnosed with advanced metastatic melanoma, HCC, NSCLC and mixed NSCLC and RCC. Despite these issues with heterogeneity, our review shows that clinical response to ICIs was consistently found to be related to alpha diversity in the composition of the gut microbiome. However, heterogeneity in the biasing of results, does have the advantage of increasing the generalizability of those results and more readily allow their application to patients diagnosed with various stages of cancers in real-world clinical practice settings. Furthermore, most studies included in this review analysed fecal samples using a 16S rRNA sequencing method that can measure the composition of gut bacteria from phylum to genus level, and occasionally species level, while limited studies conducted analyses using metagenomics sequencing methods that measure from phylum to species level. Thus, there are wide variances in the composition of gut microbiota reported among studies included in this review (Table 2). In order to identify and validate specific gut bacteria in a common microbiota community that contribute a direct link to favourable responses for ICIs in cancer patients, future international multicentre trials will be required to provide comprehensive and reliable data utilising a standardised method of fecal sample analysis. Our study did not evaluate the quality of individual studies included in the review. A quality appraisal of non-randomized studies (NRS) is complicated by the issue of heterogeneity in observational study design (e.g., cohort, case-control, retrospective studies), and despite recommendations that the assessment of the quality of studies should follow the guidelines for systematic reviews [43], this is not always feasible. There is as yet, no robust method that is accepted as “gold standard” when evaluating risk of bias (ROB) for NRS in a gut microbiome study, despite methodological tools for assessing ROB in RCTs being well-established, e.g., the Cochrane Collaboration’s ROB Tool. Taking into account these limitations, studies with larger sample sizes and robust RCT designs are required to provide convincing evidence that can be implemented in clinical practice.

In conclusion, our findings from this clinical review demonstrates the potential benefits of utilising the gut microbiome to predict clinical response in advanced cancer patients undergoing ICIs and provides further insight into the gut microbiome in immunotherapy. Moreover, it revealed that gut microbiota can play a crucial role in augmenting the therapeutic effects of immunotherapy in advanced cancer patients who may have limited treatment options. However, several challenges remain to be answered before translating microbiome therapy into routine clinical practice.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

