Gut bacterial microbiome composition and statin intake—A systematic review

Recently, the gut microbiome has become an important field of interest. Indeed, the microbiome has been associated to numerous drug interactions and it is thought to influence the efficacy of pharmacologic treatments. Although statins are widely prescribed medications, there remains considerable variability in its therapeutic response. In this context, we aimed to investigate how statins modulate the gut microbiome and, reversely, how can the microbiome influence the course of anti‐hypercholesterolemic treatment. We conducted a systematic review by searching four online databases, in accordance with PRISMA guidelines. Studies addressing gut microbiome changes following statin treatment and those assessing statins’ response and associating it with patients’ microbiome were included. Due to the limited number of results, we decided to include studies enrolling both humans and animals. We summarized information from three human and seven animal studies and aimed to assess the influence of gut microbiome composition on statin response (Outcome 1) and to evaluate the impact of statin treatment on the gut microbiome (Outcome 2). An association between a certain microbiome composition that promoted the lipid‐lowering effect of statins was found. However, what kind of microorganisms and how they can exert this effect remains uncertain. Furthermore, statins might have a role in the modulation of the gut microbiome, but then again, it is still unknown whether this change is directly caused by the drug or another metabolic mechanism. Even though gut microbiota may have several potential therapeutic implications, its use as a personalized predictive biomarker requires further studies.

More than 100 trillion symbiotic microorganisms live on and within the human body, playing an important role in health and disease. These consist of a diverse consortium of archaea, bacteria, fungi, protozoa and viruses (along with their genome), forming the microbiome. 1 Unlike the host genome, the microbiome is dynamic and changes with early development and environmental factors such as diet, antibiotic exposure and, especially, in response to disease. 2 The majority of the microorganisms that inhabit the human body are in the gut, corresponding to the gut microbiota. The terms microbiome and microbiota are mostly used interchangeably. However, microbiota refers purely to the actual microorganisms that are present in a specific site, regardless of their genome or the environment in which they inhabit. In the last decades, several studies explored the interaction between the microbiome and the host as well as its influence on vital physiologic processes among which were energy and metabolism, immunity, neurobehavioral development and gut epithelial health. 3

In this context, we aimed to perform a systematic review of the literature in order to explore two major aspects: i) the influence of gut bacterial communities on the response to statin treatment in hyperlipidemic patients, thereby exploring whether there is enough data to support the use of a particular statin depending on gut microbiome characteristics; ii) to analyze the effect of statin intake in the gut microbiota composition. In this context, we aim to contribute to decode the interindividual variability in drug response, which cannot be totally explained by genetic factors, and still poses an important clinical and financial burden.

This study was performed following the recommendations of the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta‐Analyses [PRISMA] Guidelines 27 and the Cochrane Collaboration Guidelines for Systemic Reviews. 28 Since there is scarce literature concerning solely humans, the authors decided to include studies performed in animals, in order to maximize the data integrated in the review. From our perspective and taking into account that this is a novel topic, besides analyzing differences between the populations enrolled it is essential to establish comparisons and correlations between the various studies. The literature search was carried out during February of 2019. Human and animal randomized controlled trials, quasi‐experimental, cohort, case‐control and review studies, were retrieved after a literature search including four electronic databases: PubMed, Web of Knowledge, ScienceDirect and Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials. In the first database, PubMed, the following words or medical subject heading terms were used: “Microbiome [MeSH] AND (statins or atorvastatin or cerivastatin or fluvastatin or lovastatin or mevastatin or pitavastatin or pravastatin or rosuvastatin or simvastatin)”. For the remaining databases shorter queries had to be used in order to retrieve the maximum number of possible eligible entries; for such, the search terms used were: “microbiome AND statins”. To ensure that all pertinent articles were included the reference lists of the studies selected from the databases were manually reviewed.

Studies considered for inclusion met, at least, one of the following criteria: (a) articles concerning the influence of the gut microbiome on statins therapeutic effect; and (b) articles relating statin intake and its effect on the gut microbiome modulation.. No restrictions in terms of publication dates or language were applied. Studies were excluded according to the following criteria: (a) articles that were reviews, guidelines, journal indexes, book chapters or editorials; (b) articles where full text was not available; (c) articles in which patients did not receive statins; (d) articles that did not mention the gut microbiome; and (e) articles that did not evaluate, at least, the enteric bacterial composition. Note that, all studies where the gut microbiome was evaluated, emphasized the bacterial community. This may be due, at least in part, to the fact that most of the sequencing methods used to examine microbial communities were developed to study bacteria, regardless of the existence of other types of microorganisms inhabiting the gut.

The identified studies were independently screened by two reviewers. Whenever the title and abstract clearly indicated that the study failed to meet the selection criteria it was immediately excluded. For the remaining studies, the full text was analyzed to decide its inclusion or exclusion. The following information was collected from the selected studies: authors’ name; publication year; country where the study was conducted; number of patients enrolled in the intervention; statin used and which dose; duration of treatment and follow‐up; the samples collected for microbiome analysis, timing and analysis’ methodology; outcomes under assessment; main results and conclusion.

To ascertain the methodological quality of the included studies, we analyzed the quality of the research question and determined the adequacy of the randomization and allocation of intervention, as well as the quality of the data reported. For such, two methodological quality assessment tools were applied. The Critical Appraisal Skills Programme 29 checklist, concerning human studies, provided the sense of quality of each research and allowed us to estimate the usefulness of all of them. 30 The Systematic Review Centre for Laboratory Animal Experimentation (SYRCLE)’s risk of bias tool which is an adaptation of Cochrane risk of bias tool, was applicable to animal studies. 31 Two authors applied the checklist independently and discrepancies were solved by discussion.

The two outcomes evaluated were: (a) the potential influence exerted by bacterial gut composition on the lipid‐lowering effect of statins, and (b) the role of statins in the gut bacterial environment modulation.

Figure
1 summarizes the selection strategy. The electronic database search retributed a total of 668 citations. After removing duplicates, 628 studies remained. In the screening stage, 609 studies were discarded since the analyses of the title and/or abstract revealed that those papers clearly did not meet the criteria: 400 did not study the gut microbiome and did not include statin‐treated subjects; seven did not study gut microbiome; seven did include statin‐treated subjects; 13 were review papers; 176 were book chapters; four were guidelines; one was a journal index; and one whose full text was not available. Nineteen studies were considered eligible for full‐text detailed examination. From those, nine did not meet the inclusion criteria as described: six did not evaluate the gut microbiome composition; two studied drug‐drug interaction between statin and another drug; and one was a review article. At the end, a total of 10 studies met the inclusion criteria and were included in the systematic review.

The 10 selected studies varied regarding the study design (the animal studies were all quasi‐experimental; one of the studies enrolling humans was cross‐sectional), studied population (human vs animal), country of origin and number of subjects enrolled. On the other hand, all studies are recent as they were published between 2015 and 2018. In order to simplify the article organization, primarily we present data belonging to the different outcomes separately, but also human and animal studies will be addressed apart within each outcome.

From the three selected studies, two were conducted in China, with kindred study designs (quasi‐experimental; comparing only treated subjects, responders and poor responders). However, within those studies, there were peculiar differences regarding the number of subjects, statin agent and respective drug dose, and duration of treatment. The third included study was held in Saudi Arabia, a cross‐sectional study comparing three groups of subjects (healthy individuals, patients without treatment and patients treated). Additional information about these studies is illustrated in Tables 1 and
2.

Abbreviations: AB, Antibiotic; AB_SV, Antibiotic + Simvastatin; BLL, blood lipid levels; BW, Body Weight; GM, Gut Microbiome; HDLc, High Density Lipoprotein cholesterol; HFD, High Fat Diet; LDLc, Low‐Density Lipoprotein cholesterol; NCD, Normal Chow Diet; PCR, Polymerase Chain Reaction; RSV, Rosuvastatin; SR, statin resistant; SS, statin sensible; SV, Simvastatin; TC, Total cholesterol; TG, Triglycerides.

Abbreviations: At‐HP, atorvastatin‐treated hypercholesterolemic patients; ATV, Atorvastatin; HFD, High Fat Diet; HFD‐At, High Fat Diet + Atorvastatin; HFD‐T, High Fat Diet treated patient; HP, hypercholesterolemic patients; HS, healthy subjects; n/a, nonavailable; NCD, Normal Chow Diet; NCD‐T, Normal Chow Diet‐treated patient; PV, Pravastatin; RSV, Rosuvastatin; w/w, weight for weight.

From the seven studies selected, two were performed in rats and five in mice. As for the region, three took place in Asia (two in China and one in Saudi Arabia), three were carried out in Europe (two in Ireland and one in Belgium) and the last one took place in Australia. The number of animals studied widened between 20 and 60, per study. Also, four different type of statin were used, namely simvastatin, rosuvastatin, atorvastatin or pravastatin. Furthermore, the duration of treatment had significant discrepancies among studies, since it varied between 28 days to 24 weeks. Description of the details can be found in Tables 1 and
2.

Regarding the studies enrolling humans, all of them failed at reporting a good methodology in what concerns the recruitment strategy. The inclusion criteria were well defined in the three studies, but no description was provided on how the contact with the subjects was made, which may lead to selection bias. However, the study conducted by Liu et al consecutively enrolled subjects, thus minimizing selection bias. In this type of sampling, every eligible case for a time period is enrolled, ie, during enrolment period, all potential participants had 100% chance of being sampled. Therefore, there is a higher probability that the resulting sample better represents the target population. In Saudi Arabian study (Khan et al) there could be a memory bias, as the enrolled subjects had to fill a questionnaire reminding their own disease status and lifestyle factors. Only one study (Sun et al) failed to address ethical considerations. Apparently, the data obtained in each study are presented in a rigorous manner yet, globally, less information is available on the Discussion regarding the limitations of each study (all studies only display arguments favouring findings, and none against). Altogether, even though these studies point out interesting information, some methodological faults hamper the translation of such data into other settings. Regarding animal studies, in each study, the comparisons were apparently made between animals that shared the same characteristics. Indeed, the authors performed proper allocation concealment and randomization before grouping the animals in the different arms of comparison. The animal housing conditions were addressed in all studies but one (Wang et al 2018). Nevertheless, performance bias may be present, as none of the studies describe blindness of the caregivers and researchers, from knowing which intervention each animal received. Concerning outcome assessment, all animals were studied, but, again, these studies failed in blinding the assessors, so detection bias could be on the verge here. No incomplete outcome data were reported. From the seven animal studies selected, there were two where funding information was not provided (Khan et al, and Catry et al).

As we pointed before, due to the limited evidence concerning the topic under analysis, we had to include studies enrolling humans but also those performed in murine models. This aspect hampered direct comparisons, as mouse models cannot fully reproduce human systems, different mouse models could diverge in gut microbiome composition, and the gut microbiome and host interplay is host specific. In addition, multiple human background factors, such as diet or medical history, contribute to shape human gut microbiome, therefore their absence in mouse models cannot mimic a “real‐life” gut environment). In spite of that, there are several positive features of studies including animals that must be taken into account. Indeed, animal studies are normally faster, easier and cheaper to conduct. 32 Also, murine models allow experimental manipulations of the intestinal microbiome, thus allowing to evaluate different types of interactions established by gut microbes (for example: host, xenobiotics, diet, etc), thereby providing more insights about pathological mechanisms of certain diseases as well as pathways of drug metabolism. In this regard, one of the possibilities is the modulation of the intestinal bacterial flora of mouse models through antibiotics. This unbalanced microbiological environment known as dysbiosis, 33 is widely used in the preclinical investigation of numerous pathologies, both intestinal and extraintestinal, such as inflammatory bowel disease, celiac disease, metabolic diseases, central nervous system‐related disorders, among others. 34 Therefore, the use of these models that mimic the disrupted intestinal flora of the diseases previously mentioned, represents a fundamental step also in the search for suitable therapies.

Like the majority of investigations on the taxonomic field, all studies but two (Sun et al and Catry et al) addressed the alpha‐ and beta‐diversity concepts. Alpha‐diversity refers to the diversity within an ecosystem and is usually expressed by the number of species (ie, species richness) in that ecosystem. On the other hand, beta‐diversity consists in the examination of differences in species diversity between two or more ecosystems. Simplifying, is when we measure the total number of species that are unique to each of the ecosystems under comparison. The results of the diversity analysis are depicted in Tables
1 and
2.

The two analyzed studies, conducted by Sun et al and Liu et al were relatively similar and obtained comparable results: essentially, the individuals who had a more satisfactory response presented higher levels of microorganisms belonging to the Firmicutes phylum and increased proportions of Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium genera. In both studies, the higher gut microbiome diversity was associated to a better response to statin treatment, thereby suggesting a potential role of intestinal flora in the statin action.

The study performed by He et al compared statin response in a dysbiotic mouse‐model with that of a nondysbiotic model. Initially, authors confirmed that the statins’ hypolipidemic effect was diminished in the dysbiosis environment. Then they observed that statins alone exert several beneficial actions among which: stimulating expression of hepatic proteins that function as regulators in the bile acid synthesis (Cholesterol 7 alpha‐hydroxylase‐Cyp7a1; 25‐hydroxycholesterol 7‐alpha‐hydroxylase‐Cyp7b1; and farnesoid X receptor‐FXR); doubling the concentration of lithocholic acid, or decreasing the levels of phospholipids. Notwithstanding, when statin was administered concomitantly with an antibiotic all those actions were impaired or even lost, meaning that intestinal bacterial composition could have a major relevance in the statin pro‐bono activity.

In a similar way, Wang et al, tried to establish a dysbiotic environment but prior to statin intake and not concomitantly. In this work it was also shown that antibiotic treatment dramatically decreased bacterial gut diversity. Because of the study design, it was possible to compare, in three different timings, how statins influence the cholesterol levels, simultaneously in a dysbiotic rat model and in a nondysbiotic rat. With no surprise, the cholesterol levels at week zero were higher, in the statin group previously treated with antibiotic (AB+Statin), compared with statin alone and water control groups. At week two, the cholesterol levels were still elevated in the AB+Statin group in comparison with the other two groups, but at this point the water group also had higher cholesterol levels than statin alone group. However, at week 4, the cholesterol levels from the AB+Statin and statin monotherapy groups were evaluated, being lower than the water group. It was demonstrated that in the presence of a decreased gut microbial diversity the cholesterol‐lowering effect of statin was reduced. However, as time passed, the communities were replenished, and statin hypolipidemic ability reappeared.

Only one study, from Khan et al, intended to investigate how statins could impact gut microbiome composition. It was observed that the hypercholesterolemic‐treated group inclined to an antiinflammatory profile, with increased proportions of Akkermansia muciniphila and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii. In contrast with the untreated hypercholesterolemic group that presented higher relative abundance of proinflammatory bacteria, such as Proteobacteria, Enterobacteriaceae and Desulfovibrio spp. Notwithstanding the fact that statin‐treated group showed a less diverse bacterial composition, they managed to restore a healthier profile, even comparable to the group of healthy subjects, demonstrating that statins could, in fact, be a driving force to gut microbiome modulation.

Five studies aimed to evaluate how statins could influence the gut bacterial microbiome composition. Khan et al obtained some contrasting results. In the Normal Chow Diet (NCD)‐treated group there was an increased level of Desulfovibrio, an endotoxin‐producing bacterium, and increased levels of Lactobacillus. The treated High Fat Diet (HFD) group presented higher relative abundance of Bacteroides and Parabacteroides genera. Also, in the HFD group, there was a rise in Oscillospira and a drop in Clostridium levels, with the curiosity of both being butyrate‐producing genera. In this case, drug‐specific effects could be produced over certain bacteria populations, without a clear predictable response on the host health. In parallel, Caparrós‐Martín et al, found that cholesterol levels were not modified by statin treatment. In addition, it was found to be an enrichment of Bacteroidetes over Firmicutes. Curiously, both pravastatin and atorvastatin, showed a reduced hepatic expression of an enzyme involved in the bile acid synthesis cascade (Cholesterol 7 alpha‐hydroxylase – Cyp7a1), but only atorvastatin induced an increase of sterol 27‐hydroxylase – Cyp27a1. The possibility of gut microbiome composition being altered, after, statin intake, is not clear. In the study performed by Nolan et al, there were distinct patterns, of cecal and faecal microbial populations, between the rosuvastatin‐treated and the untreated groups. Nevertheless, it was unclear after the conclusion of the study, if changes in gut microbial communities were due to direct action of statins or to other types of host response. Another study carried by Catry et al, showed abundance of Bacteroides‐Prevotella spp and Roseburia spp, which did not differ between groups. Also, Bifidobacterium level was not modified by the statin treatment, but a significant drop was observed in ezetimibe‐treated mice. Another work, conducted by Ryan et al, showed that statin intake had little effect in gut microbiome composition, except for the increased proportion of Ruminococcus, when compared with HFD animals. Despite this fact, change was not significant compared with other dietary interventions.

Statins are widely used as lipid‐lowering drugs in the context of cardiovascular disease, either in primary or in secondary prevention. From a clinical point of view, there is strong evidence that this family of drugs has many advantages with only a slightly percentage of adverse events. 46 In recent years, investigation around gut microbiome and cardiovascular disease has been growing. Therefore, this review aimed to systematize the evidence available on the literature concerning the potential influence of the bacterial intestinal flora on statin hypolipidemic effect as well as whether there was any statin‐induced modulation of gut microbiome composition.

Four studies, two including animals and two enrolling humans, tried to establish an association between gut microbiome and the therapeutic effect of statins. Within human studies, Sun et al analyzed fecal (collected before treatment) and blood (after 3 months of treatment) specimens, and showed that patients with good response to statins (LDLc ≤ 100mg/dL) presented higher bacterial diversity, with increased levels of known gut commensals (Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium) and genera recognized to decrease cholesterol levels (Faecalibacterium and Eubacterium). The cholesterol lowering advantageous effects of these bacterial genera are well known. There are many potential mechanisms by which gut commensals contribute to the hypolipidemic activity of this class of drugs. 47 Similarly, Liu et al, found that “good responders” (LDLc drop of 58.5%) presented increased diversity with higher proportions of Firmicutes phylum and other commensal bacteria. Bacteria belonging to the Firmicutes phylum have the ability to participate in metabolic process of compounds with antidiabetic and antiobesity properties. 48 Although the beneficial effects reported in these two studies, it is unclear how does this directly influence statins’ treatment. Probably, it may be due to a broader interaction of bacterial microbiome together with host cells properties in the way of changing statin‐metabolizing enzymes and modulation of the drug receptors. The study by Liu et al excluded patients that had received antibiotics within three months; while Sun et al did not take that aspect into consideration. None of these studies provided information regarding the use of concomitant medication and/or supplements that may have influenced gut microbiome composition or function, as well as regarding patients’ dietary, exercise or smoking habits, consumption of probiotics or prebiotics.

Regarding animal studies, He et al, described that simvastatin, when taken alone (without antibiotic), possesses a lipid‐lowering effect. In gut dysbiosis scenario, secondary to antibiotic treatment, the hypolipidemic effect of simvastatin was altered. This might happen for various reasons: (a) simvastatin is metabolized by anaerobic bacteria, whose composition could be altered in the presence of antibiotic, 49 (b) simvastatin stimulates expression of proteins that are responsible for bile acid synthesis, which in turn are impaired in the presence of gut dysbiosis, 50 (c) Clostridium derived lithocholic acid, which is considered as a marker of good response to statin treatment, was almost doubled in the simvastatin‐treated group but with significantly lower concentration in the antibiotic treated groups. 51 However, to date, there is not enough evidence relating the action of these bile acid homeostatic proteins and its relationship with the hypolipidemic effect of statins and how these are influenced by bacterial intestinal microbiome. In the same direction, Wang et al, demonstrated that when the mice were submitted to antibiotic treatment prior to statin start, they presented a higher lipid profile in comparison to mice receiving statin in monotherapy, after two weeks of therapy. However, four weeks after, there were no differences in the cholesterol levels between the two groups. Explaining these discrepancies was the bacterial composition found in the two groups, that were in favor of Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium genera in the statin alone group, but antibiotic imbalance, over time diminished and the previous composition was reestablished. In the literature, Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium, are listed as potential regulators of some cytokines (tumour necrosis factor‐alpha [TNF‐α] and interleukin‐6 [IL6]), 52 which in turn are known to be also regulators of one specific rosuvastatin transporter, the organic anion transporting polypeptide 1B1 (OATP1B1). 53 Impaired proportion of these bacteria could lead to transportation defects of rosuvastatin.

The only human‐based work that targeted the above outcome, Khan et al, tried to establish association between statin intake and bacterial gut microbiome modulation. Not surprisingly, it is difficult, if not impossible, to infer any kind of cause‐effect in a cross‐sectional study. We do not know how the bacterial composition before treatment was. More even, they relied subjects’ responses to questionnaires, about lifestyle habits and other risk factors, which could easily be a cofounding factor to the results. They found that atorvastatin‐treated subjects presented an antiinflammatory gut bacteria profile, mainly increased proportions of A muciniphila and F prausnitzii, while in the hypercholesterolemic group, an opposite trend developed, essentially, more in favor of proinflammatory bacteria, including Proteobacteria, Enterobacteriaceae and Desulfovibrio sp. 54 It has been reported that A muciniphila, in mice with HFD‐induced obesity, was not correlated to inflammatory markers, lipid synthesis and adiposity. 55 Concomitantly, F prausnitzii have the ability to decrease TNF‐α and IL12 (proinflammatory) and increase IL10 (antiinflammatory) cytokines. 56

Before we initiated the submission process, we made one last search, to verify if there were new works in the field. Interestingly, we were confronted by a review article (Ashrafizadeh and Ahmadi, 2019) with the objective of reviewing the interactions between statins and gut microbiota. After detailed analysis we realized that it was not a systematic review, they only focused on the influence of statins over gut microbiome, and no real discussion was made on the possible reasons for the inferences assumed by them. 65

The evidence available regarding the possible correlation between statins and gut microbiome is very scarce and only 10 studies fulfilled our search criteria. Few quantitative data were available limiting the use of meta‐analysis. Among the included studies, three were conducted in human subjects and seven in mice models. This is an important limitation, because comparisons are difficult to perform and the number of studies is too small to allow broader generalizations. Also, all studies presented, at least, one type of bias, thus weakening potential inferences. Differences existed also regarding the study design. The animal studies were conducted in a laboratory‐controlled environment, but still there were discrepancies, in duration of treatment, type and dose of statin used, number of subjects enrolled, arms of treatment and controls, and timing of collected samples, making analogies impossible. Regarding the human‐based studies, one (Khan et al) was an observational cross‐sectional, conducted in Saudi Arabia, while the remaining two were quasi‐experimental Chinese studies, relatively similar despite some differences in number of subjects, statin used (type and dose) and duration of treatment.

Therefore, in order to better understand the reciprocal relationship between gut microbiome and statins, further studies with more homogenous designs and methodologies must be developed. Particular attention must be paid to the accuracy in defining the dysbiotic environment (overall diversity or relative proportion of microbial communities?) in studies enrolling humans and even more in those conducted in animals, since several dysbiosis models exist and the manipulation of the gut microbiome is undeniably easier in this setting. Few studies were conducted in humans, making it difficult to understand the possible cofounding influence of diet, lifestyle, concomitant medications, diseases, among others. Last but not the least, the comparison of different types of statins, in different doses and treatment durations is also a topic to be investigated, in order to determine which changes are common to the class and those that are drug specific.

Taken together, in almost all studies there were variations in gut microbiome diversity after statin intake, and at the same time, the lipid‐lowering effect of statins were compromised in the presence of intestinal bacterial dysbiosis. Despite that, to date, there is not enough information to personalize the choice of hyperlipidaemia's treatment based on gut microbiome composition.

This is the first systematic revision on this topic, confirming the lack of evidence available. Therefore, further research is needed to understand the correlation between statins and the bacterial gut microbiome. Indeed, with modern technologies and increasing knowledge in distinct areas of science, from genomics to metabolomics, and constant pressure to develop new targets for therapies, excellent discoveries could blossom in a short‐medium term, allowing a more personalized use of the current therapeutic options.

The authors did not receive external funding for this review article.

All authors have no conflict of interest to disclose.

GC and AMD were involved in the acquisition, analysis, interpretation of data and drafting of the manuscript; MME, RV, LF, and MRC helped with data interpretation, manuscript drafting and medical writing assistance; and FM was involved in the study concept and design, data interpretation, and manuscript drafting. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

