Elevated gut microbiome abundance of Christensenellaceae, Porphyromonadaceae and Rikenellaceae is associated with reduced visceral adipose tissue and healthier metabolic profile in Italian elderly

Aging is accompanied by physiological changes affecting body composition and functionality, including accumulation of fat mass at the expense of muscle mass, with effects upon morbidity and quality of life. The gut microbiome has recently emerged as a key environmental modifier of human health that can modulate healthy aging and possibly longevity. However, its associations with adiposity in old age are still poorly understood. Here we profiled the gut microbiota in a well-characterized cohort of 201 Italian elderly subjects from the NU-AGE study, by 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing. We then tested for association with body composition from dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA), with a focus on visceral and subcutaneous adipose tissue. Dietary patterns, serum metabolome and other health-related parameters were also assessed. This study identified distinct compositional structures of the elderly gut microbiota associated with DXA parameters, diet, metabolic profiles and cardio-metabolic risk factors.

The gut microbiome is a crucial component of the individual health, by means of its impact on food degradation, energy intake, and regulation of immune system functionality.1–3 Recently, the human gut microbiome has also been proposed as a determinant of healthy aging, by counteracting inflammaging (i.e., the low-grade chronic inflammation characterizing the advancement of age), immunosenescence, intestinal permeability, and the decline in cognitive and bone health, thus helping to preserve homeostasis.4–9

In an attempt to better reveal the associations between abdominal adiposity and gut microbiome in old age, here we analyzed the multivariate relationship between DXA-derived measures of VAT and SAT and the gut microbiota structure, as profiled by 16S rRNA gene-based sequencing, in a cohort of 201 Italian seniors, enrolled within the EU FP7 NU-AGE project. Dietary data, collected by 7-day food records, and serum metabolomics data, generated by ultra-performance liquid chromatography coupled to quadrupole-time-of-flight mass spectrometer, were also analyzed to explore associations of macro/micronutrients and metabolites with abdominal adiposity-related microbiota profiles. We find that distinct gut bacterial taxa are associated with reduced VAT, as well as with peculiar profiles of circulating metabolites and food intake. Monitoring and possibly modulating the gut microbiota, in addition to promoting healthy eating habits, could therefore represent an additional tool to support healthy aging and possibly longevity.

To explore microbiome links to abdominal adiposity in the elderly, we profiled the fecal microbiome and searched for its correlations with DXA-derived parameters describing fat, in particular visceral and subcutaneous adiposity, and lean mass composition, in a cohort of 201 elderly subjects (101 females, 100 males; age range, 65–79 years, mean age, 71.2 years) from the Emilia-Romagna region (Italy), in the context of the NU-AGE FP7 EU project (see Table 1 for cohort description). Our microbiota dataset was composed of 15,167,630 high-quality reads with an average of 75,460 (± 64,658, SD) 300-bp paired-end reads per sample.

Post-hoc Wilcoxon test: #G1 vs G2, p value < 0.05; §G2 vs G3, p value < 0.05; ^G1 vs G3, p value < 0.05.

Post-hoc Wilcoxon test: #G1 vs G2, p value < 0.05; §G2 vs G3, p value < 0.05.

Finally, serum metabolomics data were analyzed in order to find out metabolites that discriminated gut microbiome structures. The G2 group was characterized by significantly lower circulating levels of some serum metabolites, including mineral (sulfur), BCAAs (isoleucine, leucine and valine), fatty acids (myristic acid – C14:0) and methyl ester fatty acids (methyl-hexadecenoic acid, and tetramethyl-dihydroxy-octadecahexaenoic acid) (post-hoc Wilcoxon test for G2 vs G1 and/or G3, p value ≤ 0.05), and a tendency to lower levels of primary bile acid, chenodeoxycholic acid (p value > 0.05). On the other hand, methyl-heptadecadienoic acid was found to be significantly higher in G2 compared to G3, but also in G1 compared to G3 (p value ≤ 0.05) (Figure 3). Based on a sPLS regression analysis of relative abundances at the genus level and metabolites (Fig. S8), genera belonging to the families identified as signatures of the G2 group, i.e., Christensenellaceae R7 group, Alistipes and Parabacteroides, inversely correlated with BCAAs, while some Lachnospiraceae and Ruminococcaceae members, distinctive of the G1 and G3 profiles, showed opposite correlations. Similarly, for fatty acids, we observed negative correlations between Christensenellaceae R7 group or Alistipes and the majority of systemic fatty acids retained in the sPLS regression model. In contrast, mostly positive correlations were found with Lachnospiraceae taxa, along with Bifidobacterium, Streptococcus, Ruminococcus 1 and Erysipelotrichaceae UCG 003.

In the present study, we identified three significantly different groups (G1 to G3) of elderly Italian individuals harboring distinct gut microbiome structures, which correlate with body composition and other health-related parameters. In particular, the G1 group was characterized by higher abundance of Lachnospiraceae, the G2 group was enriched in Christensenellaceae, Porphyromonadaceae and Rikenellaceae, and G3 in Ruminococcaceae. The three profiles were also characterized by different biodiversity, with G2 and G3 showing the highest level followed by G1. When we explored the connections between the gut microbiome and body composition, we found that the G2 microbiome cluster had the lowest median value of VAT, a specific measure of abdominal obesity.

Further studies in larger cohorts, possibly from different geographical locations, via shotgun metagenomics combined with metabolomics, will be needed to confirm our findings and provide insights on the mechanisms underlying the relationship between gut microbes and VAT, and their role in modulating adiposity and promoting a healthy life. Such mechanisms should possibly be validated in an animal model. Similarly, additional work, possibly also through culturomics approaches, is required to better understand the dynamics and ecological rules within the gut microbiota that lead to the establishment of different networks. It is reasonable to expect that in the near future the targeted manipulation of the elderly intestinal microbiota, the feasibility of which has been recently demonstrated in the context of NU-AGE,63 will become an integral component of current strategies aimed at contrasting age-related deterioration in body composition and multiple bodily functions, thus supporting healthy aging.

NU-AGE (https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/266486) is a multicentre EU FP7 project, ended in 2016, which involved 30 partners from 16 European countries, working in the field of nutrition, gerontology, immunology and molecular biology. NU-AGE objective was to study the effects of a 12-month customized Mediterranean diet (registered with clinicaltrials.gov, NCT01754012) on the aging process, including cognitive decline, bone density, muscle mass, digestive health, immune and cardiovascular systems. Enrollment of participants has been described in detail previously.64,65 Briefly, after screening for inclusion/exclusion criteria, 1,279 free-living healthy elderly aged 65 to 79 years were enrolled across five EU countries (Poland, Netherlands, UK, France, Italy) and thoroughly characterized for anthropometry, nutritional status, body composition, health and medical status, cognitive and physical functions, and a series of biochemical and inflammatory measures.66 Participants were classified according to their frailty status based on the five criteria proposed by Fried and colleagues, including weight loss, weakness (i.e., poor handgrip strength), self-reported exhaustion, slowness (i.e., slow gait speed), and low physical activity. Only non-frail (absence of all the above 5 criteria) and pre-frail (presence of 1 or 2 of the criteria) subjects were included in the study.67

As the analysis of VAT and SAT by DXA was only available for the Italian elderly, here we focused only on this cohort, of which we profiled the fecal microbiome by means of next-generation sequencing, and sought correlations with DXA variables, especially VAT and SAT, as well as with dietary habits and circulating metabolites (please see the paragraphs below). As for stool collection, each participant was asked to collect a fecal sample. The samples were immediately stored at −20°C and delivered to the Department of Experimental, Diagnostic and Specialty Medicine (University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy) where they were stored at −80°C until processing.

Height was measured by a stadiometer to the nearest 0.1 cm. Weight was measured to the nearest 0.1 kg with a calibrated scale while wearing light clothes. Body Mass Index (BMI) was calculated as weight/height2 (kg/m2). Waist circumference was measured either at the narrowest circumference of the torso or at the midpoint between the lower ribs and the iliac crest. Hip circumference was measured horizontally at the level of the largest lateral extension of the hips or over the buttocks. Hand grip strength was measured three times in the dominant hand using the Scandidact Smedley’s Hand Dynamometer® (Odder, Denmark) to the nearest 0.1 kg. Physical performance was evaluated by the sum score of 6-minute walking distance, Activities of Daily Living (ADL) scale, Instrumental Activities of Daily Living (IADL) scale and PASE questionnaire. Cognitive function was assessed by the administration of the Cambridge Mental Disorders of the Elderly Examination (CAMDEX) subjective memory score, the Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS) score and Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) score as previously reported.68 Blood pressure and heart rate were measured using the automated and calibrated electronic monitor Omron, M2 compact (Milan, Italy) as previously reported.69 The use of prescribed medicines and supplements and the clinical history were collected by a questionnaire and verified by interviewers. All measures and questionnaires were taken by trained research assistants.

Direct measurements of total and regional body composition were obtained by performing whole body DXA scan (Lunar iDXA, GE Healthcare, Madison, WI – enCORETM 2011 software version 13.6 and upgrade to estimate VAT and SAT). The scanners are compliant with standard quality control procedures and were re-calibrated daily following the manufacturers’ instructions. DXA scans were performed by trained personnel, removing all metal items prior to densitometry and placing the subjects in supine position with arms resting on the side of the participant’s body, leaving some space with respect to the trunk and centered on the scanning field. DXA scanned the following regions: total body, trunk, upper limbs, lower limbs, android region (from the two superior iliac crests and extended cranially and covering 20% of the distance to the chin) and gynoid region (from the greater trochanter of the femur directed caudally and covering two times the distance in the android region). For each scanned region, the weight (in g) of the total mass, fat mass, non-bone lean mass and bone mineral content were obtained. Measurements of VAT and SAT were obtained at android level with CoreScan software.

This work includes variables related to total fat and lean mass distribution and bone mineral content, with a focus on fat measures of the abdominal area including subcutaneous and visceral adiposity: whole-body fat mass (FM, g), whole-body fat mass index (FMI, g/m2), whole-body fat mass to lean mass ratio (FM/LM), whole-body non-bone lean mass (LM, g), whole-body non-bone lean mass index (LMI, g/m2), skeletal mass index (SMI, i.e., the appendicular lean mass to total body mass ratio), whole-body bone mineral content (BMC, g), whole-body bone mineral density (BMD, g/cm2), whole-body T-score (T-score), android fat mass to android lean mass ratio (AF/AL), android fat mass to gynoid fat mass ratio (AF/GF), VAT (g) and SAT (g) and their ratio.

Blood samples were obtained after participants had fasted (at least 8 h) and had avoided heavy exercise and alcohol in the prior 24 h. Samples were centrifuged after sitting for 30 min at room temperature and separated into plasma and serum according to a standardized operating procedure, then aliquoted and stored at −80°C until analysis.

Methods for inflammatory parameters assessment are reported in Santoro et al.69 Briefly, C-reactive protein (CRP), leptin and adiponectin were measured by ProcartaPlexTM Immunoassay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), performed using Luminex 200 instrumentation (Luminex Corporation, Austin, TX, USA), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Ghrelin and Pentraxin-3 were measured in multiplex with Bio-Plex Pro human diabetes and Pro human inflammation assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA), respectively. Plates were read and analyzed by Bio-Plex Manager Software (Bio-Rad). Plasma homocysteine was measured by an enzymatic assay using an Olympus AU400 clinical chemistry platform (Beckman Coulter, High Wycombe, UK). Serum glucose and serum insulin were determined by biochemical assay and chemiluminescent immunoassay, respectively. Insulin resistance status was calculated according to the homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) using the following formula: insulin (mIU/mL) × glucose (mmol/L)/22.5.70 Plasma albumin was analyzed using the VITROS ALB slides (Ortho-Clinical Diagnostics, UK) on a VITROS 5.1/FS analyzer. Plasma total, High-Density Lipoprotein (HDL) and Low-Density Lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol and triglycerides were measured on a konelab system and reagents were from Thermo Scientific (Asnières sur Seine, France). All the other biochemical analyses, including creatinine, uric acid, alkaline phosphatase (ALP), gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine transaminase (ALT) were measured on frozen blood and frozen urine (urea) in a centralized center with standard methodologies.

Dietary intake was assessed by 7-day food records as reported elsewhere.71 Briefly, participants were trained one to one by the interviewer receiving exhaustive instructions to correctly fill in the food diary. Food records were provided in a structured format, with tables for each day and eating occasion, time/hour, location, foods and drinks consumed, quantity and recipes in order to record all details of the meals. Participants were recommended to record data at the time the foods were eaten/consumed and not to change eating habits during the week of registration. At the end of the recorded period, the 7-day food records were accurately checked to obtain more detailed information about types of foods, dressings, preparation methods and recipes, to estimate portion sizes by using real-life models and pictures and to probe the possible consumption of forgotten foods. Consumed foods were coded according to standardized procedures and translated into nutrients by the use of WinFood® software exploiting local food composition tables: INRAN (National Institute for Research on Food and Nutrition, Italy) and IEO (European Institute of Oncology, Italy). Energy (kcal), total carbohydrate (g), total protein (g), animal and plant protein (g), total, saturated and unsaturated fat (g), fiber (g) cholesterol (g), water (g), vitamin (mg: biotin, B1, B2, B3, B6, C, E; µg: folic acid, b-carotene, A, B12, D), and calcium (mg) intake normalized on body weight (g/kg BW), were used in the analysis together with the intake of food groups (white and whole grains, fruits and vegetables, legumes, dairy products, cheese, red and processed meat, white meat, nuts and seeds, potatoes, eggs and egg products, butter and animal fat, olive oil, other vegetable oils, sugar and sweetened beverages, sugar, honey and artificial sweeteners, sweet, chocolate and snacks) (g/day) normalized on body weight. The dietary intakes from the 7-day food records were added/summed to the intakes of related dietary supplements as assessed by a specific vitamin/mineral supplements questionnaire.

Untargeted metabolomics was performed following the procedure described in Pujos-Guillot et al.72 Briefly, serum samples (100 μL) were deproteinized using cold methanol. After evaporation under nitrogen, the dry residues were redissolved in 50/50 (v/v) acetonitrile/water containing 0.1% formic acid. Pooled quality-control samples were prepared by mixing 20 μL from each of the serum samples and prepared similarly. Metabolic profiles were then determined using an ultra-performance liquid chromatography coupled to quadrupole-time-of-flight mass spectrometer (Bruker Impact HD2), equipped with an electrospray source. Separations were carried out using an Acquity HSS T3 column (Waters). Data were acquired in positive and negative ion modes with a scan range from 50 to 1,000 mass-to-charge ratio (m/z). Data were processed under the Galaxy web-based platform Worflow4metabolomics using first XCMS, followed by quality checks and signal drift correction.73 The remaining unknown compounds were identified on the basis of their exact masses which were compared to those registered in the Human Metabolome Database (HMDB) or in Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database. Database results were confirmed using appropriate standards when available, isotopic patterns, and mass fragmentation analyses, performed on a Thermo Scientific LTQ Orbitrap Velos hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San José, CA, USA) using high resolution, at 100,000 resolving power.

Microbial DNA was extracted from 250 mg of fecal material using the repeated bead-beating plus column method.74 Briefly, samples were suspended in 1 mL of lysis buffer (500 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 50 mM EDTA, and 4% SDS) and bead-beaten three times in the presence of four 3-mm glass beads and 0.5 g of 0.1-mm zirconia beads (BioSpec Products, Bartlesville, OK, USA), in a FastPrep instrument (MP Biomedicals, Irvine, CA, USA) at 5.5 movements/s for 1 min. Afterward, the samples were incubated at 95°C for 15 min and subsequently centrifuged for 5 min at 13,000 rpm. The supernatant was added with 260 μL of 10 M ammonium acetate and incubated in ice for 5 min. After a further centrifugation step, one volume of isopropanol was added to the supernatant and incubated in ice for 30 min. Precipitated DNA was washed with 70% ethanol and resuspended in 100 μL of TE buffer. The samples were depleted of RNA and proteins with 2 μL of 10 mg/mL DNase-free RNase at 37°C for 15 min and 15 μL of proteinase K (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany) at 70°C for 10 min, respectively. Final DNA purification was performed using the QIAamp DNA Stool Mini Kit (QIAGEN). The purified nucleic acids were quantified with the NanoDrop ND-1000 spectrophotometer (NanoDrop Technologies, Wilmington, DE, USA).

The V3–V4 hypervariable region of the 16S rRNA gene was PCR amplified with 341F and 805R primers with Illumina overhang adapter sequences as previously reported.75The PCR thermal cycle was as follows: denaturation at 95°C for 3 min, followed by 25 cycles of denaturation at 95°C for 30 s, annealing at 55°C for 30 s, then extension at 72°C for 30 s, and the last extension step at 72°C for 5 min. The Agencourt AMPure XP magnetic beads (Beckman Coulter, Brea, CA, USA) were used to clean PCR amplicons. Indexed libraries were obtained by limited-cycle PCR using Nextera technology. After a second clean-up as described above, libraries were pooled at equimolar concentration, denatured with 0.2 N NaOH and diluted to 6 pM. For sequencing, an Illumina MiSeq (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) platform was used with a 2 × 250 bp paired-end protocol, following the manufacturer’s instructions. Sequencing data are available at NCBI SRA under the BioProject ID: PRJNA661289.

Sequencing read quality was assessed with Fastqc tool. High-quality read couples were joined together in a single read with PANDAseq tool and the resultant reads with length lower than 350 bp and greater than 500 bp were filtered out. Single-end reads were further pre-processed with DADA2, in order to reduce the noise of the dataset, eliminating chimera sequences and duplicates, and cluster them into amplicon sequence variants (ASVs).76,77 The algorithm VSEARCH was applied to scan the representative feature sequences against the precomputed clusters from SILVA database (128 version) at 99% of sequence identity, and to assign the taxonomy with a confidence score > 0.5.78 The ASVs table was normalized by the minimum number of feature sequences in a sample. Read pre-processing and taxonomic classification were performed in QIIME 2 (release 2018) framework.79 The R packages Phyloseq and Vegan were used for statistical analysis. Beta diversity was calculated with unweighted, weighted and generalized UniFrac metrics (GUniFrac package), and the function adonis was used to test the significance of beta diversity-based sample separation in Principal Coordinates Analysis (PCoA).80,81 The separation of the three microbiome groups (G1 to G3) as found in the unweighted UniFrac-based PCoA was verified by means of hierarchical clustering with Ward as the linkage method. The congruence between PCoA groups and the hierarchical clustering separation was verified by Fisher’s exact test. The stability of the clusters was assessed by using average Jaccard similarities from the clusterboot function in the R package fpc. Alpha diversity was estimated using the number of observed ASVs and Chao1 index. Power calculation was computed with micropower R package;82 we found that the size of G1 to G3 microbiome groups allowed 90% power to detect an ω2 of 0.014.

To find associations between the gut microbiota profiles and host characteristics, we adopted the sparse partial least square (sPLS) regression analysis as implemented in the mixOmics package in R, modeling the genus-level relative abundances to the DXA measures or metabolite classes via multiple regressions.83 The number of components was tuned to 2, with perf function, retaining all DXA/metabolomic variables and all taxa in the model. Bacterial abundances were transformed as Centered Log Ratio (CLR). The associations between genera and DXA/metabolomic matrices were visualized projecting the variables inside a correlation circle plot (plotVar), with associated variables projected in the same direction.84 Hierarchical clustering (cim) on the sPLS regression model was plotted with Pearson correlation as distance and complete linkage method. As for diet, the food groups most contributing to the PCoA ordination space were identified using the function “envfit” of vegan. Significant differences among the microbiota groups identified by PCoA in taxon relative abundance as well as in measures of DXA-related variables, dietary and metabolomics data and other health-related parameters, were assessed using the Kruskal-Wallis test. Wilcoxon test was adopted as a post-hoc test to check for differences between each pair of groups, adjusting p values for multiple testing via Benjamini–Hochberg method. A p value ≤ 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

A.S. and S.R., conceptualization; A.S., S.R. and S.T., project administration; P.B. and C.F., resources; M.B. and S.T., library preparation and sequencing; T.T. and S.R., bioinformatic and biostatistic analysis; A.B. G.B. and C.G., DXA analysis; C.N., F.K. and P.O.T. collected and contributed to data; A.S. S.S. and G.G., analysis of demographic, biochemical, nutritional and other health-related data; E.P-G. and B.C., serum metabolomics; T.T., S.R., S.T. and A.S., writing - original draft; E.P-G. and B.C., writing - review & editing. All authors discussed the results and commented on the manuscript.

The authors declare no competing interests.

Supplemental data for this article can be accessed on the publisher’s website.

