Gut microbiome profiles in Thai healthy pregnant women and its association with types of foods

Gut microbiome colonization during early life is significant for immunological and physiological development. Maternal microbiome is associated with proper development of infants. The aim of this study was to determine the gut microbiome profiles among Thai healthy pregnant women and its associated factors.

A multicenter, open trial prospective study was performed at three hospitals in Northern, Central, and Northeastern regions of Thailand. Thai healthy pregnant women attending antenatal clinics were recruited. Fecal samples of subjects at the third trimester of pregnancy were collected with sterilized techniques. The gut microbiome profiles and bacterial diversity were assessed using 16Ss RNA gene sequencing. Demographic data, dietary intake, and anthropometric data were recorded and analyzed.

There were 86 healthy pregnant women. The dominant of gut microbiome profiles were Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes. Pregnant women in the Central region had significantly higher of Ruminococcaceae and Lachnospiraceae than those in other regions (p < 0.001). Pregnant women in the Northern region significantly consumed more glutinous rice than those in other regions (p < 0.001). Glutinous rice intake was positively correlated with Bacteroidetes (rho = 0.405, p = 0.01) and negatively correlated with Firmicutes (rho = − 0.440, p = 0.001). Alpha diversity was not correlated with pre-pregnancy body mass index (BMI) or gestational weight gain.

The gut microbiome profiles mainly found in Thai healthy pregnant women were Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes. The gut microbiome profiles in pregnant women found in this study possibly depended on dietary patterns. Glutinous rice with high amylopectin is probably related to abundance of Bacteroidetes.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12884-022-04397-5.

Pregnancy is a stage of several changes including hormonal, metabolic, and immunological parameters that affect maternal health and facilitate optimal fetal growth and development [1]. There is evidence showing that the maternal microbiome impacts the development and health outcomes of offsprings during prenatal and early postnatal periods [2, 3], but the mechanisms are unclear. There are a few studies of the profiles of gut microbiome in pregnant women [4]. In addition, there is the discrepancy in the nature of microbiome changes during pregnancy [3, 5, 6]. The differences may be explained by the difference in various factors such as gestational age, genetics, ethnicity as well as environmental factors. It has been shown that maternal diets [7–9], pre-pregnancy weight, and weight gain during pregnancy [10–12] contribute to the composition of the microbiome during pregnancy.

Gut microbiome is related to maternal health during pregnancy and fetal outcomes, and variations of diet influence its profiles. To our knowledge, there is no report on gut microbiome profiles in Thai pregnant women. This study was conducted to determine the gut microbiome profiles among pregnant women with different eating habits and food types in three regions of Thailand.

This study was a part of a multicenter prospective cohort study of the gut microbiome profiles in infants aged 0-1 year. Healthy pregnant women aged 18-42 years from three different geographic regions of Thailand as follows: Northern (Suandok Hospital, Chiang Mai), Central (Ramathibodi Hospital, Bangkok), and Northeastern (Maharat Nakhon Ratchasima Hospital, Nakhon Ratchasima) were enrolled. The study was performed during December 2015 to June 2017. Exclusion criteria were having alcohol consumption more than 7 units per week (one unit equals to a glass of beer, wine, or a measure of spirits), receiving antibiotics within 2 weeks of fecal sampling, and receiving immunomodulatory drugs within 4 weeks prior to delivery. The study protocol was approved by Committee of Human Rights Related to Research Involving Human Subjects, Faculty of Medicine Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol University (ID10-58-16). All participants provided written informed consent before enrollment.

Demographic data including maternal age, religion, socioeconomic status, and maternal education level were collected using questionnaires. Antenatal and perinatal data were reviewed from medical records of mothers who had antenatal care and delivered their babies at the study hospitals. For mothers attended antenatal care and delivered elsewhere, Thai handbooks of mother-and-child health were reviewed. Anthropometrics were assessed by using standard digital scales. Pre-pregnancy weight, gestational weight gain, and gestational age were collected using hospital records. Pre-pregnancy BMI was calculated by dividing weight (kg) with height square (m2).

Dietary intakes were collected by a nutritionist using semi-quantitative food frequency questionnaires (FFQ) (Supplementary Table 1), which was constructed to focus on food sources of fiber, prebiotics, and probiotics. Moreover, as rice is the main carbohydrate source for Thai people, we categorized by type of rice as white rice and glutinous rice. Participants provided the frequency and the average quantity of each food item consumed during 4 months before data collection. Three non-consecutive (2 weekdays and 1 weekend) 24-h dietary recalls were obtained by a nutritionist to determine energy and macronutrients intakes of all participants using 24-h food record forms. Dietary intakes of energy, macronutrients, and fiber intakes were calculated using the INMUCAL-nutrients software of Institute of Nutrition, Mahidol University [20], and compared with Thai Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) 2020, Department of Health, Ministry of Public Health as a reference [21]. Due to lack of information on dietary prebiotics and probiotics in the INMUCAL-nutrients software, dietary intakes of prebiotics and probiotics intakes were calculated using nutrition labeling on food product instead.

A stool sampling kit consisting of a sample collection tube, sterile wooden tongue depressor and sterile baby pad was given to each participant at 34-36 weeks of gestation. Researcher provide a leaflet providing instruction for fecal collection to participants. According to Bahl et al., fresh feces samples were collected in sterile tubes, transported on ice, and immediately stored at − 20 °C in the laboratory for 7 days before DNA extraction [22].

Before the extraction, 0.2 g of stool samples were mechanically homogenized with a Mini BeadBeater 8 (BioSpec, USA) for 4 min at 5,000 rpm according to Smith et al. [23]. After that, genomic DNA from each fecal sample was extracted using a QIAamp DNA stool Mini kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. The V3-V4 region of 16S rRNA gene was amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using the extracted DNA as template and universal primer (16S Amplicon PCR Forward Primer, 5′-TCGTCGGCAGCGTCAGATGTGTATAAGAGACAGCCTACGGGNGGCWGCAG-3′ and 16S Amplicon PCR Reverse Primer: 5′-GTCTCGTGGGCTCGGAGATGTGTA TAAGAGACAGGACTACHVGGGTATCTAATCC-3′) with barcode sequence. Sequences were generated using the Illumina MiSeq (2 × 300 bp) instrument.

The raw sequence data was demultiplexed using the q2-demux plugin, and reads with expected errors (maxEE) higher than 3.0 was discarded by denoising software, DADA2 pipeline (version 1.10) (via q2-dada2) [24]. A phylogeny was constructed using the SEPP q2-plugin, placing short sequences into sepp-refs-gg-13-8.qza reference phylogenetic tree [25]. Alpha diversity (observed_OTUs, Faith_PD, and Shannon) and beta diversity based on UNIFRAC distance (phylogenetic) and Bray Curtis distance (non-phylogenetic) are obtained. High-quality sequences were estimated using q2-diversity after samples were rarefied (subsampled without replacement) to 11,478 reads per sample. Taxonomy was identified using the QIIME 2 classifier (version 2020.8) with the Greengenes version 13.8 database [26]. Permutation multivariate analysis of variance-PERMANOVA with 999 permutation and Kruskal-Wallis were used to test the significance of alpha and beta diversity, respectively. Principal component analysis (PCA) and distance-based redundancy analysis (dbRDA) with 999 permutations were performed using the RDA function in the Vegan package of R version 3.5.3.

LEfSe algorithm (found in the online interface Galaxy: https:// huttenhower. sph.harvard.edu) was used for identification of significant differences in relative abundance of bacterial taxonomy. A LEfSe analysis was performed using phylum to genus-level data in order to identify the relevant taxa responsible for the differences found in pregnant women in the study regions. For the LEfSe analysis, the α value for the factorial Kruskal-Wallis test in the one-against-all strategy was set at 0.05. OTUs with an average abundance was greater than 0.1% in all samples. The abundances were normalized to the sum of 1 million values in each sample. Then linear discriminant analysis (LDA) is performed. The threshold of the logarithmic LDA score was set at 2.0 for discriminative features.

We compared demographic data and dietary habits of pregnant women by regions using Chi-square test for categorical variable and ANOVA test or Kruskal-Wallis test for continuous variables. Differences in relative abundance of each taxa among the subjects in the three regions were analyzed using LEfSe analysis as above mentioned. Differences in the community structures between samples were calculated with weighted Unifrac distance. Based on the Unifrac distance matrix, PERMANOVA analysis was performed with 999 permutations to evaluate significance of differences among the microbiome community.

R is a software environment for statistical analyses and graphics. To examine the association of main dietary intake and the beta diversity of microbiome, the envfit function was performed on the PCA ordination with 999 permutation. The beta diversity explained by the foods and/or residential regions was estimated by the dbRDA function in the R vegan package and R2 and p-value were estimated by the ‘RsquareAdj’ and ‘Anova’ functions in the R vegan package version 3.5.3. Correlation between glutinous rice intake and abundance of each bacteria taxon was analyzed by Spearman’s rank test.

There were 86 pregnant women enrolled in this study (11, 65, and 10 from Northern, Central, and Northeastern regions, respectively). The demographic data are shown in Table
1. There was no significant difference in these data among different regions.

A total of 13,997,843 sequencing reads were generated and clustered into 1819 OTUs. Of total reads, almost all of the OTUs were classified into the level of specific families. Mean relative abundance (%) at the phylum level was as follows: Bacteroidetes (57.8-78.4%), Firmicutes (13.8-32.6%), Proteobacteria (6.4-8.1%), Fusobacteria (0.4-7.6%), Actinobacteria (0.1-1.5%), and others (0.1-0.8%). At the family level, the gut microbiome was generally dominated by Bacteroidaceae (30.5-50.6%), Prevotellaceae (14.9-17.8%), Lachnospiraceae (4.5-12.0%), Ruminococcaceae (2.2-7.3%), and Sutterellaceae (2.9-4.1%). The abundance of gut microbiome genera or phylum was not significantly correlated with either pre-pregnancy BMI or gestational weight gain. Furthermore, alpha diversity was not correlated to pre-pregnancy BMI (observed OTUs: rs = − 0.187, p = 0.085; Faith_PD: rs = − 0.173, p = 0.111; Shannon: rs = − 0.116, p = 0.288) or gestational weight gain (observed OTUs: rs = − 0.054, p = 0.619; Faith_PD: rs = − 0.046, p = 0.673; Shannon: rs = − 0.031, p = 0.774).

We used pairwise weighted UniFrac distances and Bray Curtis distance in Fig.
1 for detect the difference the gut microbiome between region. We found that there were statistical differences in the community structures between Northern, Central and Northeast regions (p = 0.001). In addition, a LEfSe analysis showed the statistical differences in the abundance of certain taxonomic groups among the three regions as shown in Fig.
2. The gut microbiome of pregnant women in the Northern region was more highly colonized by phylum Bacteroidetes to genus Bacteroides than that in other regions; whereas the gut of pregnant women in the Central region was more highly colonized by phylum Firmicutes, orders Clostridiales, such as families Ruminococcaceae and Lachnospiraceae, than other regions. Genus Blautia and Bilophila were enriched in the gut of pregnant women in the Northeastern region.

Total alpha diversity tended to be higher in pregnant women in the Central region than that in women in the Northern and Northeastern regions, as indicated by the number of observed OTUs (p = 0.0014), Faith_PD (p = 0.006), and Shannon (p < 0.001). Distribution of these alpha diversity indices in each group of regions are shown in Fig.
3.

The median of energy intake in pregnant women was 1955 kcal/day (range 1450-2510), equivalent to 87.44% of Thai DRIs for energy. The energy distribution (%) from carbohydrate: protein: fat was 52: 16: 32, respectively. Which was similar to recommended energy distribution from Thai DRIs [27]. The median intake of protein in participants was 80 g/day (range 72-102), equivalent to 95.24% of Thai DRI for protein. There was no significant difference in the daily energy and nutrient intakes of pregnant women in different regions (Table
2).

There was no significant difference in other food items such as bread and cereal, milk product, fruit, fish, sea food, meat, and oil consumption (Table
3).

RDA analysis indicated that dietary patterns consisting of 11 main food items explained 43.8% of variation of gut microbiome profile in our 86 subjects. In contrast, residential regions explained only 7.0%, suggesting that the consumed foods had dominant impact on gut microbiome. Further, we performed an envfit analysis to extract dominant dietary factors to affect the gut microbiome structure of pregnant women. As shown in Fig.
4, the intake of three food items, namely glutinous rice, white rice, and vegetables, discretely showed a strong significant correlation with gut microbiome variance in pregnant women. Notably, glutinous rice showed very high R2 score (0.62) in association with Bacteroidaceae. On the other hand, the correlation vector of white rice oriented opposite to glutinous rice that directed to the family members of Firmicutes group, such as Ruminococcaceae and Lachnospriaceae. Further, vegetable are solely associated with Prevotellaeae.

To determine the correlation between glutinous rice intake and gut microbiome commensals in more detail, Spearman’s correlation coefficient was used for calculation between glutinous rice intake and the relative abundance of each taxonomic group (Table
4). We found that glutinous rice intake was correlated positively with Bacteroidetes and negatively with Firmicutes. The genus Bacteroides show strong correlation with glutinous rice intake (rho = 0.738, p < 0.001), while the genus Prevotella was negatively correlated with glutinous rice intake (rho = − 0.487, p < 0.001). For Firmicutes, the families Ruminococcaceae and Lachnospiraceae showed a significantly negative correlation with glutinous rice intake (rho = − 0.315, p < 0.05 and − 0.394, p < 0.001, respectively). Genus Enterobacteriaceae, from the phylum Proteobacteria was not associated with glutinous rice consumption.

This study was the first study to compare gut microbiome profiles of Thai pregnant women from different regions with different dietary cultures. We found that the overall microbiome composition in pregnant women in their third trimester resembled the typical composition in healthy Thai adults [28, 29], with a dominance of taxa from the phylum of Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes, and Proteobacteria. However, Koren et al. reported that gut microbiome profiles significantly changed from the first to the third trimesters. There was an increase in predominance of Proteobacteria and Actinobacteria but a decrease in alpha diversity with advancing gestational age [3]. In a prospective case-control study of 40 pregnant women, DiGiulio et al. analyzed microbiome composition of 3767 specimens collected weekly during pregnancy and monthly after delivery. They found no dramatic change during gestation or upon delivery in gut microbiome composition or richness indexes [5]. However, the results from the present study cannot conclude the possibility of change in the taxonomic structure of gut microbiome profiles when pregnancy progressed for we obtained samples only one time in the third trimester.

In the present study, pregnant women in the Northern region consumed glutinous rice more than those in other regions, and they had a high abundance of Bacteroidetes. Amylopectin in glutinous rice may help promote the growth of Bacteroidetes in the gastrointestinal tract of pregnant women. However, this hypothesis cannot be proven in the present study. The present study has limitations due to the relatively small sample size, no data of microbiome profile of pregnant women in the Southern region, as well as lack of microbial function and biochemical information. Further studies are needed to demonstrate and understand the mechanical property of amylopectin and its contribution to promoting the growth of Bacteroidetes.

The results from the present study suggest that gut microbiome profiles in pregnant women are associated with distinct main carbohydrate consumption, with Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes being prominent gut microbiome. Glutinous rice is related to abundance of Bacteroidetes. Further study is needed to understand how Bacteroides species dominate microbiome of pregnant women consuming glutinous rice.



Publisher’s Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

