Microbes, metabolites and (synaptic) malleability, oh my! The effect of the microbiome on synaptic plasticity

The microbiome influences the emotional and cognitive phenotype of its host, as well as the neurodevelopment and pathophysiology of various brain processes and disorders, via the well‐established microbiome–gut–brain axis. Rapidly accumulating data link the microbiome to severe neuropsychiatric disorders in humans, including schizophrenia, Alzheimer's and Parkinson's. Moreover, preclinical work has shown that perturbation of the microbiome is closely associated with social, cognitive and behavioural deficits. The potential of the microbiome as a diagnostic and therapeutic tool is currently undercut by a lack of clear mechanistic understanding of the microbiome–gut–brain axis. This review establishes the hypothesis that the mechanism by which this influence is carried out is synaptic plasticity – long‐term changes to the physical and functional neuronal structures that enable the brain to undertake learning, memory formation, emotional regulation and more. By examining the different constituents of the microbiome–gut–brain axis through the lens of synaptic plasticity, this review explores the diverse aspects by which the microbiome shapes the behaviour and mental wellbeing of the host. Key elements of this complex bi‐directional relationship include neurotransmitters, neuronal electrophysiology, immune mediators that engage with both the central and enteric nervous systems and signalling cascades that trigger long‐term potentiation of synapses. The importance of establishing mechanistic correlations along the microbiome–gut–brain axis cannot be overstated as they hold the potential for furthering current understanding regarding the vast fields of neuroscience and neuropsychiatry. This review strives to elucidate the promising theory of microbiome‐driven synaptic plasticity in the hope of enlightening current researchers and inspiring future ones.

The microbiome–gut–brain axis refers to the way the resident gut microbiome communicates with and impacts the central nervous system. It has been firmly established (Ma, Forney & Ravel, 2012; Zarco, Vess & Ginsburg, 2012; Shreiner, Kao & Young, 2015; Tognini, 2017; Stiemsma & Michels, 2018; Altmäe, Franasiak & Mändar, 2019; Binyamin et al., 2020) that the microbiome is critical for normal physiological development and maintenance of homeostasis in all major multi‐organ systems of the body, and any significant perturbations to the microbiome may lead to a host of severe disorders (Shamriz et al., 2016; Seo, Boros & Holtzman, 2019; Goldberg et al., 2020; Shouval et al., 2020; Xavier et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020). Although the terms ‘microbiota’ and ‘microbiome’ are often used interchangeably, there is a small but important distinction. ‘Microbiota’ refers to the ecosystem of microorganisms in a given physiological environment, and includes colonizing entities such as bacteria, archaea, viruses, and eukaryotes, whereas ‘microbiome’ refers to the entirety of the microorganisms themselves along with their genetic material. This review focuses on the bacterial constituents of the gut microbiome (other constituents of the gut microbiome are not within the scope of this review).

Our review provides initial support for this hypothesis and identifies mechanisms for further research through a discussion of potential research directions necessary to elucidate the connection between the microbiome and synaptic plasticity in the ENS and CNS. Understanding the mechanistic interaction between the microbiome and plasticity is of prime importance because of synaptic plasticity's involvement in severe neuropsychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia, ASD, bipolar disorder and depression. Relevant literature was sourced using the following search pattern: after searching for “synaptic plasticity” and becoming acquainted with the relevant terminology, each focal term was queried together with "microbiome", e.g “microbiome + synaptic plasticity”, “microbiome + LTP”, “microbiome + calcium signalling”, etc.

An in‐depth review of the many aspects of synaptic plasticity is beyond the scope of this paper. Briefly, there are several types of plasticity associated with the frequency of stimuli received at the neuron, the brain region and the type of cells involved. Here we focus on plasticity‐associated mechanisms and signalling pathways that have been shown to be modulated by the microbiome, including neurotransmitters (De Vadder et al., 2018; Jadhav et al., 2018), calcium signalling (Engevik et al., 2019; Schalla & Stengel, 2020) and immune mediators (Schirmer et al., 2016; Fung et al., 2017; Kim, 2018; Xue et al., 2018; Cerovic, Forloni & Balducci, 2019). Additionally, we focus mainly on LTP because it is studied more robustly and is easily observed phenotypically, especially in terms of microbial involvement in its induction.

Contrary to the decades‐long belief that immune cells are only present in the brain during severe pathological situations (D'Agostino et al., 2012), it is now known that several immune mediators, under tightly controlled regulation, are necessary for homeostatic brain processes, including plasticity (Levin & Godukhin, 2017). The immune system is also functionally prominent in the ENS, where, in conjunction with all the neurotransmitters known to operate in the brain, it mediates many aspects of ENS functionality (Sasselli et al., 2012; Yoo & Mazmanian, 2017). The main branches of the gut–brain axis are comprised by numerous molecular and genetic pathways that are known to contribute to the induction and maintenance of synaptic plasticity.

Germ‐free (GF) animals are raised in a completely sterile environment, allowing them to serve as a platform for microbial transplants towards understanding causative effects of microbiome and host state on one another. While GF mice offer a blank slate for such studies, there is accumulating evidence that the GF condition is implicated in a range of health complications across the lifespan, which could make interpretation of findings more challenging (Dominguez‐Bello et al., 2019).

There is thus a growing body of evidence that links the microbiome to the induction and maintenance of synaptic plasticity in both the ENS and CNS, suggesting that this crosstalk may be a key component of the microbiome–gut–brain axis.

The gut epithelium is the site of initial interaction between the resident microbiome and the host (Kabouridis et al., 2015; Okumura & Takeda, 2017; Solis et al., 2020). The physiological environment of the gut encompasses well‐developed neurological, immune and endocrine systems. The ENS is an autonomic neuronal network which communicates bi‐directionally with the CNS and autonomic nervous system (ANS) by way of both sympathetic and parasympathetic fibres synapsing in the gut. Enteric neurons express mechanoreceptors, chemo‐sensors and other signals which transmit a wide array of sensory, motor, molecular and vasodilator information back to the brain via the vagus nerve. The microbiome is thought to influence the neuronal activity of the ENS and CNS by secretion of neuromodulatory molecules (Fig. 1; Cryan & O'Mahony, 2011; Tognini, 2017; Strandwitz, 2018). Dopamine, noradrenaline (NA), 5‐HT, GABA and Ach are known to be produced by a wide array of bacteria (Strandwitz, 2018). Additionally, the gut microbiome was shown to play a significant role in the metabolism of tryptophan (Gao et al., 2020), which is the precursor of 5‐HT synthesis by the host. This is important because the majority of the body's 5‐HT is synthesised and utilized in the gut, with evidence of a constant feedback loop with 5‐HT synthesis in the brain.

The immune system is known to mediate processes in the CNS, with substantial evidence linking it to the induction of synaptic plasticity (Di Filippo et al., 2013). It is firmly established that increased systemic inflammation in later life contributes to decreased synaptic plasticity in the brain (Deleidi, Jãggle & Rubino, 2015), with pertinent evidence of an altered microbiome later in life (Nagpal et al., 2018) to support the hypothesis that the three phenomena are connected.

The importance of neurotransmitters in the microbiome–gut–brain axis is compounded by the importance of neurotransmitters to a host of CNS (Lesch & Waider, 2012; Kraus et al., 2017) and ENS (Boesmans et al., 2008) processes and the ability of the microbiome to synthesise molecularly identical neurotransmitters that are biologically active in the host (Strandwitz, 2018). Additionally, the microbiome is known to mediate tryptophan metabolism by the host (O'Mahony et al., 2015). The neurotransmitter 5‐HT plays a vital role in both the CNS (Daubert & Condron, 2010) and ENS (Sasselli et al., 2012).

Taken together, these studies suggest the ability of the gut microbiome to influence the CNS and ENS serotonergic system profoundly, supporting our hypothesis that the gut microbiome is implicated in synaptic plasticity.

Dopamine acts on both excitatory and inhibitory synapses distributed throughout the brain, but a high density of dopaminergic receptors in specific areas has led to the recognition of several major dopaminergic pathways implicated in a host of brain functions and neuropsychiatric disorders (Pignatelli & Bonci, 2015; Aarts et al., 2017; Parashar & Udayabanu, 2017). In the gut, several types of dopamine receptors mediate vasoactive and homeostatic effects.

In a murine model of PD (CDNF‐knockout mice), cerebral dopamine neurotrophic factor (CDNF) restored dopaminergic function in the nigrostriatal area of the brain (Lindahl et al., 2020). Lindahl et al. (2020) demonstrated that CDNF protects against enteric neuropathy occurring in old age, specifically in the submucosal plexus, which corresponds to enteric pathologies present in human PD patients. Interestingly, the CNS concentration of dopaminergic neurons in the CDNF‐knockout mice used for this study was unaltered.

The complex mechanisms of neuro‐immune regulation of gut physiology are numerous; therefore, a detailed exploration is beyond the scope of this review. We briefly review the main pathways by which neuro‐immune regulation is carried out, with evidence of microbial intervention on several aspects of this functional relationship.

The vagus nerve (Bonaz et al., 2017), acting as a conduit between the ENS and the brain, synapses in the solitary tract nucleus, which sends projections to most regions of the brain, including the hypothalamus, further cementing the interconnectedness between the various branches of the microbiome–gut–brain axis. Evidence of vagus‐dependent microbial influence on the CNS includes (Fülling, Dinan & Cryan, 2019) Campylobacter jejuni's ability to increase anxiolytic behaviours, as well as Fos transcription factor (belonging to the IEG family) activity in vagal afferents and the solitary tract nucleus, the prevention of beneficial effects of L. rhamnosus JB‐1 in vagotomized mice (Liu et al., 2021) and the rescuing of social deficit by L. reuteri in animal models of ASD. The vagus nerve is also among the hypothesized channels by which bile acids (BAs) (Wu et al., 2020) and short‐chain fatty acids (Goswami, Iwasaki & Yada, 2018) exert their influence on the CNS. Short‐chain fatty acids are the product of microbial fermentation of dietary fibre and are thought to modulate a wide range of brain activities via immune, endocrine, vagal and other humoral pathways (Dalile et al., 2019). BAs are metabolically active hormonal mediators, known to be regulated by the microbiome (Monteiro‐Cardoso, Corlianò & Singaraja, 2021). BAs are synthesised in the liver and are systemically active, with BA receptors widely distributed in the brain as they are capable of crossing the blood–brain barrier. Hypothesized to act via the vagus nerve, BAs have been implicated in severe neuropsychiatric diseases (Sandhu et al., 2017).

The most direct evidence of the involvement of the microbiome in the regulation of synaptic plasticity comes from electrophysiological recordings of synaptic activity under different conditions of microbial treatment or after modulation of the host microbiome. Detecting changes in paired‐pulse facilitation is one mechanism to test effects on synaptic function.

The implications of direct microbial influence on electrophysiological events necessary for the induction and long‐term maintenance of synaptic plasticity are vastly important for understanding the mechanisms of the microbiome–gut–brain axis.

One of the mechanisms responsible for synaptic plasticity is dynamically regulated gene expression and associated protein synthesis (Glanzman, 2010; Korb & Finkbeiner, 2011; Gipson, Kupchik & Kalivas, 2014; Berger et al., 2017). Patterns of gene expression vary widely, depending on the brain region undergoing the plasticity‐induced changes and the type of plasticity process taking shape, and these mechanisms have been studied extensively in humans and animal models. IEGs (Coppens et al., 2011) are heavily involved in plasticity induction due to their fast transcription that does not require de novo protein synthesis (Okuno, 2011). Prominent IEGs include the Arc, Fos and Egr gene families. Recently, researchers have begun to uncover connections between the gut microbiome and gene expression associated with plasticity (Dinan & Cryan, 2017).

Due to its highly diverse functionality, BDNF is necessary for a number of brain processes, both homeostatic and plastic in nature. Evidence linking the modulation of BDNF to the microbiome signifies a step towards unravelling the mechanistic relationship between the microbiome and synaptic plasticity.

The existence of a microbiome–gut–brain axis is overwhelmingly supported, with correlations between the microbiome and a wide spectrum of cognitive, emotional and behavioural phenotypes, in health and disease, as well as homeostatic brain functionality. Currently, the vast potential of the microbiome as a diagnostic and therapeutic tool is undercut by a dearth in the mechanistic understanding of how the microbiome exerts its influence on the host's brain; however, some promising evidence is emerging. Probiotics (live, beneficial microorganisms introduced to the host), prebiotics (non‐digestible dietary fibre that serves as an energy source for the host's resident microbiome) and synbiotics (a combination of the two) have been increasingly used in a clinical setting by a variety of medical fields, exhibiting salubrious health effects, including normalization of neuropsychiatric symptoms (Moosmang, 2005; Kali, 2016; Cepeda, Katz & Blacketer, 2017; Mörkl et al., 2020; Morshedi, Saghafi‐Asl & Hosseinifard, 2020; Skott et al., 2020).

5‐HIAA, 5‐hydroxyindoleacetic acid; ASD, autism spectrum disorder; BDNF, brain‐derived neurotrophic factor; CaMKII‐α, calcium/calmodulin‐dependent protein kinase type II subunit alpha; CNS, central nervous system; ENS, enteric nervous system; EPSP, excitatory postsynaptic potential; fMRI, functional magnetic resonance imaging; Fos, transcription factor belonging to the immediate early gene family; GABA, gamma aminobutyric acid; HPA, hypothalamus–pituitary–adrenal axis; LPS, lipopolysaccharide; LR, Lactobacillus reuteri; LTP, long‐term potentiation; NF‐κB, nuclear factor kappa‐light‐chain‐enhancer of activated B cells; TRPV1, transient receptor potential vanilloid 1.

The objective of this review was to highlight the multi‐factorial involvement of the microbiome with the vastly important process of synaptic plasticity, and to emphasize the need for a research paradigm shift, where the pathophysiology of complex neuropsychiatric and neurodegenerative disorders is involved (Table 1). We believe that studying the microbiome–gut–brain axis should henceforth include a significant neuroscience‐driven research methodology. In‐depth explorations into the intricate processes involved with synaptic plasticity should put equal emphasis on the microbial and the neuronal–electrophysiological aspects of the process. Indeed, they should focus on the contribution of the microbiome and its metabolites, given their undisputed importance to cognitive, emotional and behavioural aspects of the host. Such processes have been shown to depend heavily on successful induction and maintenance of synaptic plasticity.



