Alterations in the gut microbiome and metabolism with coronary artery disease severity



Coronary artery disease (CAD) is associated with gut microbiota alterations in different populations. Gut microbe-derived metabolites have been proposed as markers of major adverse cardiac events. However, the relationship between the gut microbiome and the different stages of CAD pathophysiology remains to be established by a systematic study.

Based on multi-omic analyses (sequencing of the V3-V4 regions of the 16S rRNA gene and metabolomics) of 161 CAD patients and 40 healthy controls, we found that the composition of both the gut microbiota and metabolites changed significantly with CAD severity. We identified 29 metabolite modules that were separately classified as being positively or negatively correlated with CAD phenotypes, and the bacterial co-abundance group (CAG) with characteristic changes at different stages of CAD was represented by Roseburia, Klebsiella, Clostridium IV and Ruminococcaceae. The result revealed that certain bacteria might affect atherosclerosis by modulating the metabolic pathways of the host, such as taurine, sphingolipid and ceramide, and benzene metabolism. Moreover, a disease classifier based on differential levels of microbes and metabolites was constructed to discriminate cases from controls and was even able to distinguish stable coronary artery disease from acute coronary syndrome accurately.

Overall, the composition and functions of the gut microbial community differed from healthy controls to diverse coronary artery disease subtypes. Our study identified the relationships between the features of the gut microbiota and circulating metabolites, providing a new direction for future studies aiming to understand the host–gut microbiota interplay in atherosclerotic pathogenesis.

The online version of this article (10.1186/s40168-019-0683-9) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

Despite the widespread use of medical therapy in the last decade, cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) remain the leading causes of mortality and morbidity in many developed and developing countries, CVDs remain responsible for 17.7 million deaths every year (constituting 31% of all global deaths), and this number corresponds to one of every three deaths in the US and one of every four deaths in Europe [1]. Coronary artery disease (CAD) refers to the myocardial dysfunction and/or organic lesions caused by coronary artery stenosis and insufficient blood supply. Based on clinical symptoms, the extent of arterial blockage and the degree of myocardial injury, CAD is divided into different categories: stable coronary artery disease (SCAD), unstable angina (UA) and myocardial infarction (MI) [2]. SCAD refers to the syndrome of angina pectoris including recurrent, transient episodes of chest pain reflecting demand-supply mismatch [3]. Patients with spontaneous attacks of prolonged angina-type chest discomfort occurring at rest that are associated with vulnerable plaques are categorized as patients with UA [4]. MI is usually accompanied by severe and persistent chest pain, typical ECG changes, and elevated serum biomarkers of myocardial necrosis like cardiac troponins [5]. UA and MI are also referred to as acute coronary syndrome (ACS) (detailed diagnostic criteria are summarized in Additional file 3). The progression of atherosclerotic plaque is considered to be dynamic and complicated, and the detailed mechanisms underlying the formation, development and dislodgement of plaque are largely unknown. Identifying biomarkers of the risk of plaque destabilization and rupture in patients is important for preventing the transition from coronary stability to instability and the occurrence of thrombosis events.

To address the questions above, we analysed the gut microbial characteristics of 161 CAD patients (SCAD group N = 44, UA group N = 80, and MI group N = 37) and 40 healthy controls through high-throughput sequencing. In addition, we used untargeted liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) to analyse the metabolic profiles of these patients. Based on these multi-omic analyses, we identified specific features of the gut microbiota and host metabolite profiles that are associated with increases in CAD severity and further established relationships, particularly between several bacterial co-abundance groups (CAGs) and serum metabolite function modules. This information may be used to construct a disease classifier for discriminating between healthy controls and different CAD subgroups (an overview of the workflow is provided in Additional file 1: Figure S1). Our study reveals that the integration of metabolomic and 16S rRNA V3-V4 sequencing analyses might reveal the interactions that occur between the host and the gut microbiome.

A total of 201 participants were enrolled at Peking Union Medical College Hospital and were further divided into the following four groups based on guidelines for diagnosis (detailed in the “Materials and methods” section): control group (N = 40), SCAD group (N = 44), UA group (N = 80), and MI group (N = 37). The traditional cardiovascular risk factors of the 201 subjects are summarized in Table
1, and the extrinsic host factor profiles, including diet, lifestyle, and stool consistency, are summarized in Additional file 2: Table S1. Compared with the healthy subjects, the patients in the SCAD, UA and MI groups showed disruptions in glucose and lipid metabolism and an increased inflammatory state. Except for the significant differences in the hs-CRP levels between SCAD vs. MI and UA vs. MI, the risk factors showed no significant difference between comparisons of CAD subgroups. The atherosclerosis burden was quantified using the Gensini score [15], and the median scores of the various groups were as follows: SCAD, 35.25 (24, 65.5); UA, 44.25 (33, 60); and MI, 62.5 (47, 74.5). We observed that the Gensini score level increased significantly with the development of atherosclerosis and showed significant difference between SCAD vs. MI (P < 0.001, Mann-Whitney U test) and UA vs. MI (P <0.05, Mann-Whitney U test) (Additional file 1: Figure S2). We also found that the MI group exhibited a high proportion of three-stenosed vessels (51.4%), which was consistent with the coronary atherosclerotic burden observed in other populations diagnosed with CAD [16]. Cardiac troponin I (cTnI) has been found to have excellent sensitivity and specificity as an indicator of myocardial necrosis [17], the median levels of cTnI in our study were 0, 0.005 (0, 0.02), 0.003 (0, 0.014) and 0.08 (0.06, 1.1) μg/L from Control subjects, SCAD, UA to MI patients, respectively. And significant differences in the cTnI levels were found in all pairwise comparisons with the exception of the SCAD vs. UA. (SCAD vs. MI, P < 0.001; UA vs. MI, P < 0.001; Mann-Whitney U test). According to the results of cardiac catheterization and biochemical data, we suppose that the integration of the Gensini score, number of stenosed vessels and cTnI level can indicate the severity of CAD.

To identify the serum metabolome features of the patients in different CAD categories, untargeted metabolome profiles were generated on fasting serum samples by LC-MS. Considering the variable stability of metabolites and in order to collect all possible metabolites in serum, we optimized the sample preparation and detection for both polar ionic and lipid modes. Metabolomic (polar ionic mode) and lipidomic (lipid mode) profiling yielded 7061 features and 4975 features, respectively. We conducted a “cross-comparison scheme”, in which the various stages of CAD were compared with normal coronary arteries and to each other: control vs. SCAD for plaque formation and growth, SCAD vs. UA for transition from coronary stability to instability, SCAD vs. ACS for plaque rupture and erosion, and UA vs. MI for cardiac events [18]. Based on the OPLS-DA models of metabolite profiling data, we found that the serum metabolites were significantly different between all patients with CAD and healthy controls. The patients with SCAD status exhibited significantly different metabolite profiles compared with the healthy subjects and the patients with ACS. Moreover, the patients with UA and MI, which are two different stages of ACS, also showed significant differences (Additional file 1: Figures S3 and S4).

Taken together, the results suggested that the CAD patients had significantly different metabolite profiles compared with healthy controls, and the metabolite levels may further shift with different CAD severity.

As shown in the results, many CAD-associated metabotypes are involved in the metabolism of aromatic compounds, which may be co-metabolites of the gut microbiota and the host. We then investigated the changes in the gut microbiome in the CAD subgroups by sequencing the faecal 16S rRNA V3-V4 region. No significant differences in the richness and diversity of the gut microbiota were found between the healthy control subjects and the patients with SCAD, while the UA group exhibited higher values of observed operational taxonomic units (OTUs) and a higher Chao1 index than the healthy control group (Additional file 1: Figure S6). To assess the overall structure of the gut microbiota, the score plot of the principal coordinate analysis based on unweighted UniFrac distances was constructed, and the results showed that with intensification of the pathophysiological process of coronary AS, the structure and composition of the microbiota differed significantly (Additional file 1: Figure S7). We explored the associations between variations in the gut microbiota and host characteristics using Adonis. Eighteen parameters were significantly associated with gut microbial variations derived from between-sample unweighted UniFrac distances (P < 0.1 of PERMANOVA, Fig.
2a, Additional file 2: Table S5). Bristol stool type, CAD phenotype indicators, inflammatory factors, lifestyle and medication use were among the strongest explanatory factors, which was consistent with the results observed for Western populations [19].

As bacteria work as functional groups (guilds) in the gut ecosystem [20], we next constructed a co-abundance network in which the 274 OTUs were shared by at least 20% of the samples based on SparCC correlation coefficients and clustered the OTUs into 24 CAGs. Of these, CAG4, CAG14, CAG15 and CAG16 decreased significantly in patients with CAD compared with the healthy controls (Wilcoxon rank sum test, P < 0.05, Fig.
2b). Of the OTUs in these CAGs, 81.6% belonged to Lachnospiraceae and Ruminococcaceae (Fig.
2c), members of which may protect against inflammation by producing butyric acid [21, 22]. Then, we analysed CAGs with significant abundance differences in different subgroups (Fig.
2b). Notably, the abundance of CAG17 was significantly higher in the group with more severe disease. This CAG comprised many Proteobacteria phylotypes (Fig.
2c), such as Klebsiella, Streptococcus, Haemophilus and Granulicatella, members of which have been reported as pathogens or opportunistic pathogens [23–26]. Through Spearman correlation analysis, we did not identify any CAGs that were directly correlated with the three major phenotype indicators of CAD. However, we showed that the CAGs had significant correlation with age, inflammatory markers (hs-CRP and IL-18), blood lipids and dietary fibre intake (Additional file 1: Figure S8).

We subsequently assessed the correlation between the gut microbiota and serum metabolites to further explore the characteristics of the microbiota in patients with different CAD severities. Given an FDR of 5%, 9 gut microbiota CAGs were significantly correlated with 14 metabolic modules, as demonstrated through Spearman correlation coefficients, and these metabolic modules were further correlated with the Gensini score, number of stenosed vessels or cTnI level, which can represent the CAD severity (Fig.
3 and Additional file 2: Table S6).

As mentioned previously, the gut bacterial CAGs were not directly correlated with the three major phenotype indicators of CAD. The concerted changes within the microbiome and metabolome allowed us to construct interaction networks for CAGs and the CAD-associated metabolite modules, indicating that the gut microbiota may influence CAD severity by interacting with host metabolites.

To determine whether the gut bacterial CAGs and metabolite modules can be regarded as identification biomarkers for distinguishing various stages of CAD from normal coronary arteries and from each other, random forest models were constructed to classify different stages of CAD based on 24 CAGs and 72 serum metabotypes, and receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves were used to test the classification (details are shown in the “Materials and methods” section). We mainly established five models, namely, Control vs. CAD, Control vs. SCAD, SCAD vs. UA, SCAD vs. ACS and UA vs. MI.

Overall, the CAD-associated microbial and metabolic features captured by the classifier offered further evidence of the dysbiotic gut microbiome and highlighted its great potential for the detection of various stages of CAD.

In the current study, we demonstrated that CAD patients had significantly different serum metabolite profiles and gut microbiota compared with healthy controls and showed that the metabolites and gut microbiota may further shift during the development of CAD. Through multi-omics analyses, our study found that CAGs and metabotypes that exhibited significant changes with the development of CAD were significantly correlated and might be used independently as biomarkers for CAD subtype diagnosis.

The gut microbial ecosystem, which is arguably the largest endocrine organ in the body, is capable of producing a wide range of biologically active compounds that may be carried via circulation and distributed to distant sites within the host and thereby influences different essential biological processes of the host [54]. In addition, bacteria in the gut constitute a complex ecosystem in which different species exhibit specialized functions and interact as a community. The bacteria in the human gut may survive, adapt, and decline as CAGs in response to environmental perturbations [55]. Therefore, multi-omic studies may provide an improved global understanding of the functional variations that occur in CAD populations. Further studies are needed to investigate the mechanism of action of the key microbiota and metabolites identified in our study during CAD progression.

AS is a chronic, long-term pathologic process that is associated with inflammatory reactions. The mechanism responsible for the sudden conversion of a stable situation to an unstable condition is usually plaque disruption, which tends to occur after decades of progression, and these vulnerable plaques may suddenly cause life-threatening coronary thrombosis [56, 57]. Therefore, the identification of an effective and convenient biomarker for monitoring vulnerable plaques is very important for prevention of acute MI. Mounting evidence shows that key members of the gut microbiota might be potential candidates [6, 7, 58], but most studies on the gut microbial variations associated with CAD were limited to case-control studies. Our results showed that alterations in the gut microbial community and serum metabolites in different CAD subgroups and alterations in the gut microbiota were correlated with CAD severity via the mediation of serum metabolites. Furthermore, the combination of specific bacterial CAGs and metabolite modules exhibited potential diagnostic value for differentiating patients with different CAD subtypes. These findings may provide new insights for revealing novel potential aetiologies for AS, understanding the role of gut microbiota in CAD, and modulating gut microbiota as a therapeutic target.

We consecutively recruited 40 healthy volunteers and 161 CAD patients who were hospitalized for coronary angiography in Peking Union Medical College Hospital. Patients who exhibited ≥ 50% stenosis in at least one main coronary artery were diagnosed with CAD. Coronary atherosclerotic burden was evaluated using the Gensini score by two professional cardiologists (Additional file 1: Figure S2a). CAD patients were further divided into three subgroups as follows: (1) SCAD, (2) UA and (3) MI. The detailed diagnose criteria of CAD subgroups are summarized in Additional file 3: Supplementary Methods. For controls, we enrolled subjects who exhibited negative results upon coronary artery CT or coronary angiography examination or were identified as having no CAD-related clinical signs and symptoms. Subjects were excluded if they had gastrointestinal diseases, malignant tumours, autoimmune disorders, infectious diseases, renal dysfunction (severe renal disease creatinine > 3.0 mg/dl), a history of gastrointestinal surgery in the previous year or were administered antibiotics for more than 3 days in the previous 3 months.

In addition, we also included a small verification cohort, which was also divided into control group (N = 12), SCAD group (N = 11), UA group (N = 11) and MI group (N = 3), and met the same inclusion and exclusion criteria as the discovery phase cohort. The study was performed in accordance with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki. Subjects provided written, informed consent for participation in the study.

Sample analysis was performed on Waters ACQUITY ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography system (Milford, MA) coupled with a Waters Q-TOF Micromass system (Manchester, UK) in both positive and negative ionization modes. In order to detect more metabolites as much as possible, we performed both polar ionic and lipid mode depending on the properties of the serum metabolites. Detailed parameters for the sample preparation and HPLC-MS experiment parameters were provided in the Additional file 3: Supplementary Methods.

The raw data were imported to the Progenesis QI (Waters) for peak alignment to obtain a peak list containing the retention time, m/z, and peak area of each sample [59]. By using retention time and the m/z data pairs as the identifiers for each ion, we obtained ion intensities of each peak and generated a matrix containing arbitrarily assigned peak indices (retention time-m/z pairs), ion intensities (variables) and sample names (observations). The matrix was further reduced by removing peaks with missing values in more than 80% samples and those with isotope ions from each group to obtain consistent variables. The CV (coefficient of variation) of metabolites in the QC samples was set at a threshold of 30%, as a standard in the assessment of repeatability in metabolomics data sets. The nonparametric univariate method (Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon test) was used to analyse metabolites that differed in abundance between the different subgroups corrected for false discovery rate (FDR) to ensure that the peak of each metabolite was reproducibly detected in the samples. Then, the peak list was imported into SIMCA-P 14.0 software (Umetrics AB, Umeå, Sweden) to acquire clustering information and important variables between the CAD subgroups and the control group. Metabolites selected as biomarker candidates for further statistical analysis were identified on the basis of variable importance in the projection (VIP) threshold of 1 from the tenfold cross-validated OPLS-DA model, which was validated at a univariate level with adjusted P < 0.05. The online HMDB database (http://www.hmdb.ca) (version: 4.0) [60] and KEGG database (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/) (updated: September 14, 2016) [61], Lipid maps Structure Database (LMSD) (updated: October, 2017) [62] and METLIN (version: 1.0.5673.40082) [63] were used to align the molecular mass data (m/z) to identify metabolites. The mass error used was 0.005 Da for ms1 and 15 ppm for ms2. MetaboAnalyst (https://www.metaboanalyst.ca) (version 4.0) was used for the identification of metabolic pathways [64].

Clusters of co-abundant serum metabolites were identified using the R package WGCNA [65]. Signed, weighted metabolite co-abundance correlation networks were calculated for all examined individuals. A scale-free topology criterion was used to choose the soft threshold β = 14 for serum metabolites correlations. Clusters were identified with the dynamic hybrid tree-cutting algorithm using a deepSplit of 4 [66]. The serum polar metabolite and serum molecular lipid clusters (labelled P01–P42 and L01–L30, respectively) were collectively termed metabolite clusters.

Bacterial DNA was isolated from faecal samples using the bead-beating method as previously described [67]. The extracted DNA from each sample was used as the template to amplify the V3–V4 region of 16S rRNA genes using PCR. PCR amplification, sequencing of the PCR amplicons and quality control of raw data were performed as described previously [68]. A sequencing library of the V3–V4 regions of the 16S rRNA gene was prepared as described previously [69]. The purified products were mixed at an equal ratio for sequencing using an Illumina MiSeq system (Illumina Inc., USA).

Operational taxonomic units (OTUs) were delineated at the cutoff of 97% using the USEARCH v.8.0 [70]. The protocol can be found on the website http://drive5.com/usearch/manual/uparse_pipeline.html. The detailed procures were stated in our previous publication [69]. Representative sequences for each OTU were built into a phylogenetic tree by FastTree and subjected to the RDP classifier (RDP database version 11.5, http://rdp.cme.msu.edu/classifier/classifier.jsp) [71] to determine the phylogeny with a bootstrap cut-off of 80%.The sequences of all the samples were downsized to 10,800 (1000 permutations) to match the difference in sequencing depth. α- and β-diversity analyses were performed using Qiime v1.8.0 [72]. Shannon’s index, the observed OTUs, and Chao1 index were evaluated. A normalized OTU abundance table was used for the β-diversity analysis, including principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) based on Bray-Curtis, weighted UniFrac, and unweighted UniFrac distances.

PERMANOVA was used to test for statistical significance between the groups using 9999 permutations. To calculate the variation explained by each of our collected host factors, we performed an Adonis test implemented in R. Each host factor was calculated according to its explanation rate, and P values were generated based on 9999 permutations.

The OTUs shared by at least 20% among all the samples were considered key OTUs. The correlation among 274 key OTUs was calculated by the SparCC algorithm [60] with a bootstrap procedure repeated 100 times, and then correlation matrices were computed from the resampled data matrices. Once the bootstrapped correlation scores have been computed, only OTUs with correlation scores greater than 0.4 were classified into CAGs. Meanwhile, we threshold the P value at the desired cut-off < 0.05. The correlation values were converted to a correlation distance (1-correlation value), and the OTUs were clustered using the Ward clustering algorithm via the R package WGCNA. Similar clusters were subsequently merged if the correlation between the CAG’s eigenvectors exceeded 0.8. The CAG network was visualized in Cytoscape (version 3.2.1).

Spearman correlations between CAGs, serum metabolite modules and clinical parameters were calculated using R, and both differential abundances of CAGs and CAD-associated metabotypes were tested by the Wilcoxon rank sum test. Wherever mentioned, the Benjamini-Hochberg method was used to control the FDR. The visual presentation of multiple omics correlations was performed using the R. ggplot2 package.

Using the profiles of CAGs and metabolite modules, the discovery phase samples were randomly divided into a training set and a test set. A random forest classifier was trained on 70% of the samples and tested on the remaining 30% of our samples using the random forest package in R. Then, based on this model, we used another independent cohort for further prediction. We used tenfold cross-validation within the training set. We built an optimal set of variables at the lowest cross-validational error. Thus, the predictive model was constructed using the most important variables, which were further applied for ROC analysis. The performance of the smaller models was measured as AUC when applied to the test set, and the confidence intervals for the ROC curves were calculated using the pROC R package.



The data set supporting the results of this article has been deposited in the Sequence Read Archive (SRP) under BioProject accession code SRP167862.

The study was approved by local ethics committees (JS-1195, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Beijing), and informed consent was obtained from all subjects.

Not applicable.

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

