Managing the Microbiome: How the Gut Influences Development and Disease

The microbiome lies at the forefront of scientific research, as researchers work to uncover its mysterious influence on human development and disease. This paper reviews how the microbiome is studied, how researchers can improve its study, and what clinical applications microbiome research might yield. For this review, we analyzed studies concerning the role of the microbiome in disease and early development, the common methodologies by which the microbiome is researched in the lab, and modern clinical treatments for dysbiosis and their possible future applications. We found that the gut microbiome is essential for proper development of various physiological systems and that gut dysbiosis is a clear factor in the etiology of various diseases. Furthermore, we found that germ-free animal models and microbiome manipulation techniques are inadequate, reducing the efficacy of microbiome research. Nonetheless, research continues to show the significance of microbiome manipulation in the clinical treatment of disease, having shown great promise in the prevention and treatment of dysbiosis. Though the clinical applications of microbiome manipulation are currently limited, the significance of dysbiosis in the etiology of a wide array of diseases indicates the significance of this research and highlights the need for more effective research methods concerning the microbiome.

The human “microbiome”, as it is often referred to today, is the collection of 10–100 trillion symbiotic microbes that live on and within the human body [1]. This microbiome represents the direct link between all living things on the planet and presents a unique avenue for researchers to understand this living link. As early as 1683, Dutch scientist Antonie van Leeuwenhoek noted in his own oral and fecal samples, “little living animalcules, very prettily a-moving” [2,3,4]. The scientific community, building upon these centuries of research, has now come to understand that the human microbiome plays a profound role in human development and growth, and in adult health. Microbiota can be found on nearly every surface of the human body, and diversely influence critical events in early development, the digestion of food, and the onset of disease [5]. While the progress made since Leewenhoek’s original discovery has been exponential, researchers have only begun to understand the role the human microbiome plays in our daily function.

Rodent models have found popularity in gut microbiome research (Figure 1), having been subjected to a wide range of methods to change their microbiota. A popular field applied to research in rodents is gnotobiology, the study of animals that are completely devoid of microorganisms or those that contain a defined and known set of microbial species. In such experiments, the mice are either germ-free (GF) and thus contain no species at all, monoxenic with just one known colonized species, or have defined microbiota with all species known [6]. There is a clear advantage in using GF mice when compared with a mono-associated (monoxenic) or defined microbiota. However, the microbiome plays a crucial role in development and GF mice exhibit related physiological consequences, including underdeveloped immune systems. A study found that GF 129S6 and GF C57BL/6 mice contained nearly no Th17 cells, and GF Swiss–Webster mice completely lacked any presence of Th17 cells [7]. Transplanting fecal matter from normal Jackson B6 or Taconic B6 mice into C57BL/6 mice via oral gavage resulted in normal Th17 cell levels after 10–12 days. However, these abnormalities in the development of gnotobiotic models, as well as their high cost, have limited their use in research.

Thus, current methodology for microbiome research is still lacking. Gnotobiotic animals and heavy antibiotic regimens each yield significant problems in the efficacy of the animal model. To use a subject animal that would begin the study with altered brain function, cytokine expression, and physiology would cast doubt on any conclusions as they relate to humans or even a typical rodent model. Similarly, oral gavage has been shown to be inefficient at best and dangerous at worst in current models. Clearly, there remains a need for a new methodology for microbiome research, one that allows for easy, repeated access to the subject animals’ microbiota.

The vast and diverse nature of the microbiome plays many significant roles in human development (Figure 1). Current research shows select microbiota are present in humans as early as at birth. As the newborn is pushed through the vaginal opening, a direct pathway for intergenerational microbial transmission is formed following the rupturing of the chorioamniotic membrane [15]. This exchange provides a foundation for the microbiota to grow over the course of early childhood, with a powerful upsurge in microbiome development at a young age.

Continued research on intestinal stem cells through a study that housed both GF and SPF mice at weaning age introduces more ways in which the gut microbiota drives GI tissue development. Variable regrowth of intestinal stem cells following radiation-reduced injury revealed the necessity for a microbiome to promote growth of the epithelium. Results revealed that the erythroid differentiation regulator-1 (Erdr1) gene was only induced in the SPF mice, not GF mice. This link was attributed to the Erdr1 gene. Although evidence does not point to a specific interaction between elements within the microbiome and the Erdr1 gene, the presence of a microbiome in itself is necessary for organoid growth within the intestines [26]. The aforementioned mechanisms define the foundational necessity for a microbiome in GI development. Research on the GF rat as far back as 1984 reveals that the cecum can expand up to five times its size in the absence of a microbiome. Alongside the muscle atrophy that occurs without the bacteria necessary for growth, this junction between the small and large intestine experiences a disturbance in solute-water resorption that causes a severe increase in osmotic pressure. The discovery of this abdominal distension in GF rats presents an example of the physical manifestations that can occur due to abnormal GI system development [27].

From the previous sections of this review, it is clear that the microbiome represents a crucial facet of early development in humans. However, the rapid expansion of the field of microbiome research continues to shed light on the microbiome as a contributing facet of the etiology and presentation of a wide array of diseases as well. The human microbiome, like any other organ system, does not operate independently. An imbalance in the microbiome, a condition known as gut dysbiosis, can lead to significant downstream effects on the body. However, understanding this connection between dysbiosis and disease may allow researchers to better understand the etiology of some of the most prevalent diseases in society, and develop new avenues for their treatment.

With CDI occurring in patients with disrupted intestinal microbiota, it follows that a healthy gut microbiome can prevent the colonization of the Clostridioides difficile bacteria. This mechanism, known as “colonization resistance”, suggests that established and healthy microbiota will outcompete the pathogen, stimulate the development of protective mucosal barriers, produce inhibitory substances, and stimulate the host immune system [40]. Thus, recent research has sought out new ways of establishing colonization resistance in CDI patients to prevent reinfection following antibiotics. However, it is important to note that it is still largely unknown whether it is the lack of certain bacteria that cause disease or whether it is the disease that causes the lack of bacteria.

The imbalance of bacterial species within the human gut microbiota proves to be a significant commonality among the onset of various debilitating conditions (Figure 1). As these correlations between gut dysbiosis and disease become prevalent in current research of the microbiome, several measures have been taken in expanding such discoveries through the application of medical supplementation and treatments. Likely for all of human history, the microbiome has influenced the physiology and disease of humans, yet only recently have researchers begun to understand how they might alter the physiology of the microbiome to improve life. Current medical practices have proven to reduce bacterial disruption within the colon that manifests into the aforementioned infection known as Clostridium Difficile (C. difficile). The therapeutic treatment for C. difficile is implemented through FMT, which intends to introduce healthy bacteria in order to favorably restore the gut bacteria of infected individuals.

CFU represents bacterial colony forming units. Probiotics with a higher encapsulation efficiency were able to best withstand pH levels as low as 2, with survival rates at around 6 log CFU mL−1. High encapsulation efficiencies also allowed bacteria to better survive in high temperature conditions. A temperature of 50 °C was determined to be the most ideal for probiotic survival, which was around 9 log CFU mL−1 [63]. Probiotic transport can also be aided by ingesting bacteria alongside food products. An in vitro study of oral probiotic ingestion successfully mimicked the protection provided by encapsulation of bacterial species by preparing products in a buttermilk base. After providing a dose of at least 106 CFU each day, the strains survived for up to two weeks in the GI tract following ingestion [64]. With the current use of medical treatment and supplementation methods, the gut microbiome is becoming a desirable area of study for future medical intervention. Although the various therapeutics outlined for gut dysbiosis play a role in temporary relief, continued research aims to discover options that can provide lasting enhancement for the human gut microbiome.

As previously discussed, FMT appears to be one of the clear routes forward for the treatment of gut dysbiosis. Studies continue to show its efficacy both in the treatment of CD currently, and the possible clinical treatment of irritable bowel disease (IBD) in the future. One 2015 study showed that, in a study of nine pediatric patients, seven achieved remission within two weeks of FMT, and five were in remission at six and twelve weeks after FMT without any additional medical therapy [65]. A similar study among adults from Wei et al. found significant improvements in quality of life among the study’s 14 IBD patients [66].

Though the aforementioned studies did not report any adverse side effects of the treatment, FMT is still a relatively new procedure. There are trillions of bacteria in our gut, and future research must focus on which of these are beneficial and which are harmful in order to improve the efficacy of treatments such as FMT. However, this unique microbial fingerprint presents a novel pathway for scientists to develop the clinical applications of this research. The wide array of diseases shown to be connected to the microbiome in their etiology, ranging from neurological to gastrointestinal in nature, highlight the broad range of applications the results of this research may have. Going forward, it is likely that researchers will begin to marry the two popular concepts of FMT and probiotic supplementation to create targeted microbiota treatments, uniquely composed based on the patient’s disease, gender, age, and/or any other unique factor. Though a large gap still remains between laboratory research and clinical applications, there is no doubt that the microbiome will play a substantial role in the future of modern medicine.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

