Cognitive behavioral therapy for irritable bowel syndrome induces bidirectional alterations in the brain-gut-microbiome axis associated with gastrointestinal symptom improvement

There is growing recognition that bidirectional signaling between the digestive tract and the brain contributes to irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). We recently showed in a large randomized controlled trial that cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) reduces IBS symptom severity. This study investigated whether baseline brain and gut microbiome parameters predict CBT response and whether response is associated with changes in the brain-gut-microbiome (BGM) axis.

Eighty-four Rome III-diagnosed IBS patients receiving CBT were drawn from the Irritable Bowel Syndrome Outcome Study (IBSOS; ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00738920) for multimodal brain imaging and psychological assessments at baseline and after study completion. Fecal samples were collected at baseline and post-treatment from 34 CBT recipients for 16S rRNA gene sequencing, untargeted metabolomics, and measurement of short-chain fatty acids. Clinical measures, brain functional connectivity and microstructure, and microbiome features associated with CBT response were identified by multivariate linear and negative binomial models.

At baseline, CBT responders had increased fecal serotonin levels, and increased Clostridiales and decreased Bacteroides compared to non-responders. A random forests classifier containing 11 microbial genera predicted CBT response with high accuracy (AUROC 0.96). Following treatment, CBT responders demonstrated reduced functional connectivity in regions of the sensorimotor, brainstem, salience, and default mode networks and changes in white matter in the basal ganglia and other structures. Brain changes correlated with microbiome shifts including Bacteroides expansion in responders.

Pre-treatment intestinal microbiota and serotonin levels were associated with CBT response, suggesting that peripheral signals from the microbiota can modulate central processes affected by CBT that generate abdominal symptoms in IBS. CBT response is characterized by co-correlated shifts in brain networks and gut microbiome that may reflect top-down effects of the brain on the microbiome during CBT.

Video abstract video file.(83M, mp4)

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s40168-021-01188-6.

Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a common disorder of brain-gut interactions [1, 2] defined by recurrent abdominal pain associated with altered bowel habits in the absence of any gastrointestinal structural, inflammatory, immunologic, or biochemical pathology [3]. Due to the lack of reliable biomarkers capable of IBS classification, symptom improvement and efficacy of treatment are usually assessed by patient-reported measures [4, 5].

We prospectively recruited 84 IBS participants from the parent randomized, controlled, parallel CBT trial (the Irritable Bowel Syndrome Outcome Study) [14] and assessed brain resting-state functional connectivity and microstructure at baseline and 2 weeks following CBT treatment. Composition and function of the gut-microbiome were characterized in 34 CBT recipients. By assessing relative abundances and functions of the gut microbiota, multimodal brain imaging, and detailed clinical measures, we aimed to test two major hypotheses: (1) Do baseline brain and/or microbiome parameters predict treatment outcomes? (2) Is successful treatment response to CBT associated with alteration of brain and microbiome parameters?

Institutional Review Boards at each of two sites approved the protocols governing participants: University at Buffalo (12/18/2012-12/13/2017) and Northwestern University (11/21/2012-10/21/2015). An independent Data Safety Monitoring Board appointed by the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases monitored the study bi-annually for participant safety, study conduct, and progress. Patients and the public were involved in the development and qualitative testing of clinical materials used in this study.

IBS participants recruited for this study of biological mechanisms related to IBS symptom improvement after CBT came from the larger parent study, the IBSOS (n=436), the results of which have been published previously [14]. Detailed inclusion and exclusion criteria have been previously published [14, 16]. In brief, adults aged between 18 and 70 years diagnosed with IBS via Rome III criteria [17] who rated their symptoms as “moderately severe” (i.e., occurred at least twice weekly and caused life interference) were included. Patients were excluded if they had another primary GI disease, malignancy in the past 5 years, major psychiatric comorbidity, were undergoing IBS-targeted psychotherapy, could not commit to completing all scheduled visits, reported a gastrointestinal infection within 2 weeks before evaluation, or used a gut-sensitive antibiotic during the 12 weeks prior to evaluation. Eighty-four participants underwent neuroimaging and detailed clinical assessment, and thirty-four participants underwent assessment of microbiome parameters and dietary intake (Diet History Questionnaire II; further description provided in the Supplementary Methods). These participant numbers were based on funding availability, and no selection criteria were applied beyond the inclusion/exclusion criteria of the parent study.

Eligible patients were randomized to receive 10 sessions of clinic-based CBT or 4 sessions of largely home-based CBT with minimal therapist contact over a 10-week acute phase as previously described [14]. The 10 session version was delivered once a week for 10 weeks, while the 4 session version was delivered at week 1, week 3, week 5, and week 10. For these analyses, the two CBT protocols were combined as they include the same components and procedures (patient education, self-monitoring, muscle relaxation, worry control, flexible problem solving, relapse prevention) and have been shown to have efficacy equivalence [14, 18].

Clinical measures were obtained at pre-treatment baseline and 2 weeks after completion of CBT. The 2 week delay was intended to reduce the effects of treatment related processes such as the relationship with the therapist and expectation for improvement. Details of the measures used in the larger study have been previously published [18, 19]. The IBS Symptom Severity Scale (IBS-SSS) [4] was used to measure symptom severity including pain, distention, bowel dysfunction, and quality of life/global well-being. The threshold for clinical improvement was set a priori at a decrease of 50 points or greater [4]. Participants meeting this criterion were classified as a responder. Additional clinical measures included IBS self-efficacy, pain unpleasantness, perceived stress, and mood (further description provided in the Supplementary Methods).

All participants underwent baseline and post-treatment imaging sessions in a 3T Siemens Prisma MRI Scanner (Siemens, Erlangen, Germany) for a high-resolution T1 structural scan, resting-state functional scan, and diffusion tensor image (details of acquisition and processing provided in the Supplementary Methods).

Baseline differences and pre-post CBT treatment changes in resting-state functional connectivity were measured separately in responders and in non-responders. A paired t test controlling for age and sex, using the general linear model (GLM) framework in CONN, was conducted on all connections of the average 165 × 165 matrix before and after CBT. This was done separately for CBT responders and then for CBT non-responders. Significance was set at α=0.05, and all tests were corrected using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure at the seed-level. Visualizations were done using circos 0.69 in Linux [20].

The voxelwise associations between baseline and pre-post treatments changes in diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) parameters were evaluated separately in responders and non-responders to CBT within white matter and subcortical structures including the basal ganglia, thalamus, and brainstem. Statistical parametric maps (SPM) were generated using a GLM that accounted for both age and sex. The model involved comparing SPMs that quantified the difference in change in fractional anisotropy (FA) or apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) as a result of treatment in CBT responders and then for non-responders. The GLM was implemented using AFNI (https://afni.nimh.nih.gov). The resulting SPMs were thresholded at a level of significance p<0.05 for each contrast of interest, and a cluster size threshold greater than 250 μL. This minimum cluster size is similar to previous studies using cluster-based permutation correction [21–23], while also trying to maximize the sensitivity to DTI changes.

Fresh frozen fecal samples were obtained from 34 patients in this cohort after the baseline screening visit and within 2 weeks after the end of treatment. Participants were provided with home stool collection kits and were asked to store their stool samples in a freezer immediately after collection until pick up by a courier service within 24–48 h of collection for storage at −80°C. Frozen fecal samples were later ground into a coarse powder by mortar and pestle under liquid nitrogen then aliquoted. DNA extraction by bead beating and amplification of the V4 hypervariable region of the 16S rRNA gene were performed according to our published protocol [24, 25]. The library underwent 2×250 sequencing on an Illumina HiSeq 2500 to a mean depth of 107,433 merged sequences per sample. QIIME 1.9.1 was used to perform quality filtering, merge paired end reads, and cluster sequences into 97% operational taxonomic units [26]. Taxonomy was assigned using the Greengenes May 2013 database. Microbial alpha diversity was assessed on datasets rarefied to equal sequencing depth (37,662) using the Chao1 index of richness, Faith’s phylogenetic diversity, and the Shannon index of evenness. Microbial composition was compared across samples by weighted UniFrac distances and visualized with principal coordinates analysis [27]. The significance of differences in microbial composition was assessed using multivariate Adonis with 100,000 permutations [28]. Differential abundance of microbial genera at baseline was determined using multivariate negative binomial mixed models implemented in DESeq2 with bowel habit subtype and sex as covariates [29]. Longitudinal Adonis and DESeq2 models comparing pre- vs. post-treatment values included participant identifier as a covariate.

Fecal aliquots were shipped to Metabolon, Inc. and run as a single batch on their global HD4 metabolomics platform. Compounds were identified by comparison of spectral features to Metabolon’s proprietary library that includes MS/MS spectral data on more than 3300 purified standards. Results were provided as scaled, imputed abundances of 872 known compounds. Stool aliquots additionally underwent a targeted LC-MS/MS analysis to measure concentrations of nine short-chain fatty acids. Global metabolomics profiles were compared across participants and visualized in two dimensions using the square root of the Jensen-Shannon divergence and non-metric multidimensional scalin g[25]. Stress is a measure used to assess goodness of fit of the reduced dimensions; 0.2 is typically used as a cutoff for suitable fit. Significance of differences between CBT responders and non-responders was determined by Adonis, adjusting for bowel habit and sex. Statistical significance of short-chain fatty acids, serotonin, dopamine, and histamine between CBT responders and non-responders at baseline or between pre- vs. post-CBT values was assessed by the non-parametric Mann–Whitney U test. Differential abundance testing across the entire dataset was performed on log-transformed data using GLMs that included bowel habit and sex as covariates. Significance was calculated using empirical Bayes moderated t statistics implemented in the limma R package [30]. Participant identifier was utilized as a covariate in Adonis and limma analyses of longitudinal data.

To determine how well baseline microbiome, clinical, or brain data predicted CBT response (responder/non-responder status), random forests classification with 5-fold cross-validation was implemented using the caret R packag e[31]. The accuracy of the resulting classifiers was determined by calculating the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC). Contribution of each variable to classifier accuracy was assessed by variable importance scores, which represent the decrease in classifier accuracy when that variable is permuted. Significance of differences in accuracy of the derived classifiers was assessed using the bootstrap method of roc.test in the pROC R package.

Partial correlations controlling for age and sex were run between significant brain changes and microbiome or clinical changes in CBT responders compared to non-responders. P values were adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing with the Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate procedure and significant q values were reported.

Of the 84 IBS participants who underwent neuroimaging, 58 (69%) were classified as CBT responders while 26 (31%) were classified as non-responders based on 50-point or greater decrease on the IBS Symptom Severity Scale post-treatment. Baseline clinical and brain-gut-microbiome parameters were compared between CBT responders and non-responders to determine whether treatment outcome could be predicted.

There were no differences in any of the clinical measures at pre-treatment baseline between responders and non-responders among the 84 subjects who underwent neuroimaging (Table S1).

Responders showed greater baseline connectivity than non-responders between the central autonomic network (right suborbital sulcus) and the emotional regulation network (right inferior frontal sulcus, q=.02; right triangular part of the inferior frontal sulcus, q=.02).

No statistically significant differences in baseline fractional anisotropy (FA) or apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) were observed between CBT responders compared to non-responders after adjusting for multiple hypothesis testing.

A subgroup of 34 subjects underwent fecal sampling for microbiome analysis by 16S rRNA gene sequencing. This included 22 CBT responders (65%) and 12 non-responders (35%), who did not differ by clinical measures or baseline stool consistency as assessed by the Bristol Stool Scale (Table S2). Microbial alpha diversity measures of richness, evenness, and phylogenetic diversity did not significantly differ between responders and non-responders, while beta diversity analysis demonstrated a significant difference by responder status (p=.016) (Figs.
1,
5A). Responders had increased Roseburia, Lachnobacterium, and unclassified Lachnospiraceae (all members of the Clostridiales order) and decreased Bacteroides, Parabacteroides, and Prevotella (all members of the Bacteroidales order) compared to non-responders (Fig.
1C). The inverse relationship between the Clostridiales order and Bacteroides (the predominant genus enriched in non-responders) was apparent in the principal coordinates analysis plot, in which a gradient of Clostridiales (with a Bacteroides gradient in the reverse direction) separates baseline samples (Fig.
1A, B). Baseline severity as defined by IBS-SSS was not significantly associated with microbial diversity or composition (Figure S1).

Fecal targeted and untargeted metabolomics analysis was performed on the 34 subjects to investigate the functional characteristics of the baseline microbiota associated with CBT response. Given the enrichment in responders of Roseburia, known to be a source of short-chain fatty acids such as butyrate, fecal short-chain fatty acid concentrations were measured. No significant differences were observed in 9 short-chain fatty acids between CBT responders and non-responders (Figure S2). The abundances of microbiome-derived neurotransmitters such as serotonin, norepinephrine, GABA, dopamine, and histamine were then assessed. Of these, fecal serotonin levels were increased in responders compared to non-responders (p=.03) (Fig.
1C). Norepinephrine and GABA were not detected, and there was no difference in dopamine or histamine between responders and non-responders. Expanding the analysis to the remaining fecal metabolites, there was no significant overall difference in global metabolomics profile between CBT responders and non-responders (Fig.
1D). Differential abundance testing did not reveal any metabolites with a statistically significant association with CBT response after correcting for multiple hypothesis testing, though 55 metabolites were nominally significant (Table S3).

We assessed baseline dietary intake for the 34 subjects who underwent fecal sampling using a food frequency questionnaire. CBT responders had lower carbohydrate intake, higher total fat and monounsaturated fat intake, and a trend towards increased fiber intake compared to non-responders (Table S4). However, there were no significant differences in intake of 32 food groups or 122 individual nutrients, including tryptophan.

Random forest classifiers were created from baseline clinical data, brain features, or microbial taxa and assessed by 5-fold cross-validation. Of these, only the microbiome classifier had high accuracy to predict CBT response (AUROC 0.96). In contrast, a classifier constructed from demographic traits and baseline clinical measures had AUROC 0.57. Classifiers constructed using differentially abundant resting-state connections, FA, or ADC clusters had AUROC of 0.66, 0.51, and 0.49, respectively; when all brain datasets were combined, the resulting classifier had AUROC of 0.67. The increased accuracy of the microbiome classifier was highly significant by bootstrap analysis (p=6×10−5 and p=.0001 compared to the clinical/demographic and combined brain classifiers, respectively; there was no significant difference between the clinical/demographic and brain classifiers) (Fig.
2A). The taxa contributing most to microbiome classifier accuracy were unclassified Erysipelotrichaceae, unclassified Lachnospiraceae, Roseburia, and Bacteroides (Fig.
2B).

Post-treatment changes in clinical, neuroimaging, and microbiome parameters were compared between responders and non-responders to characterize the differential effects of CBT on the brain-gut-microbiome axis in responders.

Following the intervention, responders among the 84 subjects with neuroimaging data had a significant decrease in abdominal pain unpleasantness (Gracely, p=1×10−6), IBS symptom intensity (Gracely, p=4×10−10), negative mood ratings (POMS, p=.002), and perceived stress (PSS, p=1×10−5) compared to non-responders (Table S5). In addition, responders had a significant increase in IBS self-efficacy (p=2×10−14) and positive mood ratings (p=.0001). Although not as high and widespread as in the responders, the non-responders also had a significant increase in IBS self-efficacy (p=.001), and a decrease in IBS symptom intensity (p=.03).

Following CBT, responders showed a decrease in connectivity between multiple regions associated with specific brain networks, including the sensorimotor, default mode, salience, and emotion regulation networks (Table
1, Fig.
3). They also exhibited decreases in connectivity between regions associated with the brainstem and default mode and sensorimotor networks (all q<.05). Non-responders showed a decrease in connectivity between two links, one within the posterior cingulate (default mode network, q=.047) and one between the middle frontal gyrus (central executive network) and inferior occipital gyrus and sulcus (occipital lobe, q=.047). No increases in connectivity were observed for anyone undergoing CBT.

A significantly higher change in FA was observed in CBT non-responders within the left inferior longitudinal fasciculus (Fig.
4A; cluster size = 327 μL). Additionally, we observed a significantly higher ADC in CBT responders bilaterally within areas encompassing the basal ganglia and anterior thalamus (Fig.
4B; left cluster size = 277 μL, right cluster size = 258 μL) as well as the isthmus of the corpus callosum (Fig.
4C; cluster size = 392 μL) in CBT responders compared with non-responders.

Responders among the 34 subjects that underwent fecal sampling were found after CBT to have statistically significant post-treatment decreases in richness and phylogenetic diversity, whereas non-responders analyzed separately had no change in microbial diversity after treatment (Fig.
5A). Responders also demonstrated a highly significant shift in microbial composition (p=2×10−5) whereas non-responders showed no overall change in microbial composition (Fig.
5B). Differential abundance testing revealed five genera that were enriched in responders after CBT, including Bacteroides, Odoribacter, Parabacteroides, Anaerotruncus, and unclassified S24-7 (Fig.
5C). Of these, Bacteroides was the most abundant and had the greatest magnitude of change (2.5 fold increase, q=4×10−5), resulting in conversion of many patients to Bacteroides-predominant microbiota by the end of treatment (Fig.
5B). Metabolomics profiles did not differ between baseline and end of treatment for both groups, and no differentially abundant metabolites or short-chain fatty acids were identified in CBT responders after treatment when adjusting for multiple hypothesis testing (Table S7, Figure S2).

CBT responders among the 34 subjects that underwent microbiome analysis did not have any significant changes in dietary macronutrient content or intake of specific food groups and nutrients as assessed by a food frequency questionnaire administered 2 weeks after completion of CBT (Table S8). There were no significant changes in stool consistency as assessed by the Bristol Stool Scale in either responders or non-responders (Figure S3).

In responders, decreased connectivity between key nodes of the salience network (right anterior mid-cingulate cortex and left anterior insula) was associated with higher positive mood ratings (POMS; r(49)=.29, q=.036). Reduced connectivity between the brainstem and left superior temporal gyrus was associated with higher positive mood (POMS; r(49)=.36, q=.036) and lower negative mood (POMS; r(49)=−.32, q=.042). Decreased connectivity between the right anterior INS and right superior temporal gyrus was associated with lower unpleasantness rating of abdominal pain (Gracely; r(49)=−.33, q=.036).

In responders, CBT-associated decreases in FA values in the inferior longitudinal fasciculus were significantly associated with increases in positive affect (PANAS, positive, q=.040), and higher ADC in the brainstem was associated with higher positive mood scores (POMS positive, q=.040).

Alterations in neuroimaging parameters following CBT were correlated with microbiome shifts in subjects who underwent fecal sampling. In responders, the increases in the abundance of two taxa (Bacteroides, r(27)=−.63, q =.022; unclassified S24-7, r(27)=−.55, q=.041) were negatively associated with reduced resting-state connectivity between the brainstem and a region in the temporal network (Table
3).

No statistically significant correlations were observed between the microbiome and white matter integrity in responders.

We demonstrate that a positive clinical response in CBT-treated IBS patients is associated with changes in functional and structural connectivity of brain networks, as well as changes in gut microbiota, compared to CBT-treated patients who did not achieve clinical response. Additionally, we found that a classifier including 11 microbial genera was able to predict treatment outcome with high accuracy. To our knowledge, this is the first demonstration of an association between treatment outcomes and changes in brain and gut microbiota for any IBS therapy (e.g., pharmacological, dietary). These findings support the concept that even though CBT is considered a psychological treatment that teaches cognitive skills for remediating perceptual biases, the symptom changes it induces may occur via modulation of brain-gut-microbiome interactions which influence IBS pathophysiology and visceral symptom generation.

The strengths of this study are its prospective, longitudinal design and incorporation of both multimodal neuroimaging and multi-omics microbiome assessment to evaluate the BGM axis. Although the sample size of this study was sufficient to identify robust changes in symptoms, brain parameters, and gut microbial abundances, it limited our ability to identify statistically significant differences between responders and non-responders in microbial metabolites. Other limitations include the lack of a reference healthy control population, validation cohort, or long-term follow-up to evaluate the durability of the microbiome and neuroanatomical changes in CBT responders.

This study demonstrates for the first time that a brief non-drug, non-dietary intervention that teaches information processing skills can modulate key components of the brain-gut-microbiome axis in IBS patients. Moreover, their likelihood of treatment response could be predicted from baseline microbiota composition, raising the possibility that CBT-responsive IBS patients can be identified in clinical practice using microbial biomarkers. The observed changes in brain, gut microbes and symptoms in patients who responded to this brain directed therapy supports the role of alterations in the brain-gut-microbiome axis in IBS, and is most consistent with an important influence of the brain on the gut microbiome. Larger studies are needed to characterize the functional correlates of gut microbial changes and to identify distinct subtypes of IBS patients for whom brain- and gut-directed therapies are most effective.



Publisher’s Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

$CJonathan P. Jacobs and Arpana Gupta are Co-first authors

$CJeffrey M. Lackner and Emeran A. Mayer are Co-senior authors

