Trans-ethnic gut microbial signatures of prediabetic subjects from India and Denmark

Recent studies have indicated an association of gut microbiota and microbial metabolites with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D). However, large-scale investigation of the gut microbiota of “prediabetic” (PD) subjects has not been reported. Identifying robust gut microbiome signatures of prediabetes and characterizing early prediabetic stages is important for the understanding of disease development and could be crucial in early diagnosis and prevention.

The current study performed amplification and sequencing on the variable regions (V1–V5) of the 16S rRNA genes to profile and compare gut microbiota of prediabetic individuals (N = 262) with normoglycemic individuals (N = 275) from two cohorts in India and Denmark. Similarly, fasting serum inflammatory biomarkers were profiled from the study participants.

After correcting for strong country-specific cohort effect, 16 operational taxonomic units (OTUs) including members from the genera Prevotella9, Phascolarctobacterium, Barnesiella, Flavonifractor, Tyzzerella_4, Bacteroides, Faecalibacterium, and Agathobacter were identified as enriched in normoglycaemic subjects with respect to the subjects with prediabetes using a negative binomial Wald test. We also identified 144 OTUs enriched in the prediabetic subjects, which included members from the genera Megasphaera, Streptococcus, Prevotella9, Alistipes, Mitsuokella, Escherichia/Shigella, Prevotella2, Vibrio, Lactobacillus, Alloprevotella, Rhodococcus, and Klebsiella. Comparative analyses of relative abundance of bacterial taxa revealed that the Streptococcus, Escherichia/Shigella, Prevotella2, Vibrio, and Alloprevotella OTUs exhibited more than fourfold enrichment in the gut microbiota of prediabetic subjects. When considering subjects from the two geographies separately, we were able to identify additional gut microbiome signatures of prediabetes. The study reports a probable association of Megasphaera OTU(s) with impaired glucose tolerance, which is significantly pronounced in Indian subjects. While the overall results confirm a state of proinflammation as early as in prediabetes, the Indian cohort exhibited a characteristic pattern of abundance of inflammatory markers indicating low-grade intestinal inflammation at an overall population level, irrespective of glycemic status.

The results present trans-ethnic gut microbiome and inflammation signatures associated with prediabetes, in Indian and Danish populations. The identified associations may be explored further as potential early indicators for individuals at risk of dysglycemia.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s13073-021-00851-9.

Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D) is a prevalent disease characterized by imbalances in regulation of blood glucose, and in the levels of blood lipids, blood platelet aggregation, and blood pressure [1–3]. Multiple gene variants associated with T2D have been identified, partly explaining the heritability of the disorder [4]. Apparently, the genetic susceptibility conferring risk of overt diabetes is triggered by numerous environmental risk factors including unhealthy diet, sedentary lifestyle, and smoking. Several of the diabetes-related environmental risk factors may mediate part of their diabetogenic impact through changes of the intestinal microbiota [5]. As such, aberrant composition and function of the intestinal microbiota have recently been implicated in the pathogenesis of T2D as well as several other metabolic disorders [6–11].

The natural history of T2D includes a stage of prediabetes (PD) where blood glucose levels are higher than normal, but not high enough to warrant the diagnosis of diabetes [24]. Prevention of disease progression is possible at this stage [25–28]. A few studies with limited sample size have reported a possible association between the gut microbiome composition and prediabetes [10, 29–33]. However, there have been no studies comparing different ethnicities, looking for a prediabetes signature in the gut microbiota. The current study aims to investigate the gut microbiota in Indian and Danish adults with normoglycemia and compare it with the microbiota of individuals with prediabetes in the two countries. Besides genetic differences between the Indian and Danish individuals, Denmark and India have entirely different cultural, climatic, socio-demographic and dietary patterns. This study is intended to serve as a unique resource in the quest to obtain specific microbiome signatures of prediabetes which can help in better understanding of the disease pathophysiology and may be explored further for identifying potential early indicators/ biomarkers for individuals with risk of dysglycemia, across populations of different ethnicities.

A total of 259 Danish volunteers [138 normoglycemic (NG) controls and 121 with prediabetes (PD)] were recruited from the DanFund [34] and ADDITION-PRO cohorts [35] and by advertisement in local newspapers. All Danish subjects were of White European ethnicity, aged 35 to 74 years, with a body mass index (BMI) from 20 to 40 kg/m2. Individuals with known diabetes of any kind, who were treated with antibiotics within 4 months, were pregnant or lactating, or unable to give informed consent were ineligible for inclusion.

Fecal samples were collected by the participants following standardized procedures, including home sampling with immediate freezing at − 18 °C and transfer in an insulating polystyrene container with dry ice or cooling elements for final storage at − 80 °C within 48 h.

The Indian cohort comprised of 278 individuals [137 with normal glucose tolerance (NG) and 141with prediabetes (PD)] attending a tertiary care center for diabetes between April 2014 and April 2016. Diagnosis of normal glucose tolerance and impaired glucose tolerance was based on the results of a standard oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT), performed using a 82.5 g oral glucose load (equivalent to 75 g of anhydrous glucose). Study subjects were adults of either sex aged between 35 and 65 years. Individuals suffering from chronic and severe ailments (such as cancer and tuberculosis) and those who had used medications such as dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors, acarbose, glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists, and orlistat were excluded from the study. A special kit containing the collection tubes, bed-pan liner, and dry ice required for collection of fecal samples were given to the study subjects. The fecal samples were frozen at − 20 °C within 1 h and then transferred to the − 80 °C freezer.

It may be noted here that although the current report pertains to microbial signatures associated with prediabetes (PD), the cohort recruitment in India and Denmark was done as part of a bigger research project “MicrobDiab - Studies of interactions between the gut Microbiome and the human host biology to elucidate novel aspects of the pathophysiology and pathogenesis of type 2 Diabetes”. The NG samples from India and Denmark reported in this work also forms the basis of a related study of the MicrobDiab project, aimed at deciphering the trans-ethnic microbial signatures associated with T2D.

Phenotyping of the study participants from both India and Denmark included recording basic physical variables, viz. height, weight, waist circumference, BMI, and blood pressure, along with a wide variety of biochemical tests and serum levels of 11 inflammation biomarkers (details in Additional file 1). In addition, a structured questionnaire was used to obtain information on age, gender, duration of prediabetes, family history of diabetes, food habits, physical activity patterns, smoking, allergic conditions, disease related to the gastrointestinal tract, etc.

It may be noted here that to minimize confounding effects of the technical procedures, the standard operating procedures for recruitment of study participants, biological sample processing, and microbial DNA extraction of stools were synchronized. Furthermore, DNA sequencing of all samples were performed collectively in one sequencing center at the Translational Health Science and Technology Institute, India. Similarly, profiling of inflammation biomarkers from all samples were also performed in the same laboratory (details of protocols in Additional file 1).

Extraction of DNA was performed from 200 mg stool sample from each participant using a standard INRA protocol [36]. The variable regions (V1–V5) of the 16S rRNA genes were amplified using 27F(C1) and 926R(C5) primers followed by sequencing of the equimolar libraries performed on a 454 GS FLX+ pyrosequencer platform (Details in Supplementary Methods in Additional file 1). In addition to the samples collected from volunteers recruited in this study, 16S rRNA gene sequencing was also performed for additional microbiome samples collected from Indian and Danish volunteers with T2D for an allied study, using the same protocols and multiplexed sequencing runs mentioned above. Sequence data for all microbiome samples have been submitted to NCBI SRA and are available with SRA accession PRJNA517829 [37].

The sequenced reads were demultiplexed using sequencing barcode information (Additional file 2: Table S1) and subsequently quality filtered (average PHRED score > 20). Considering a minimum sequencing coverage of 5000 high-quality reads per sample, a total of 18,380,379 sequences encompassing the V1–V5 region of the 16S rRNA gene were obtained from 864 microbiome samples. V3–V5 regions from all the sequenced reads (having variable read-lengths) were subsequently extracted using V-Xtractor 2.0 [38], and any read which did not encompass the complete V3–V5 region was not considered for further analysis. A total of 17,030,870 quality-checked and trimmed reads pertaining to 864 samples were considered for the downstream OTU picking step (average sequencing depth of 19,712 ± 7774 SD reads/sample). While many contemporary studies have preferred exact sequence variant-based analysis [39, 40] of amplicon sequencing data over OTU picking, these methods are mostly designed for processing of sequencing data generated on an Illumina platform, and to the best of our knowledge, there has been no validation of the utility of exact sequence variants vs OTUs on 454 single-end sequencing data. Further, resorting to identifying exact variants with 100% sequence identity may be construed as an attempt to go beyond what the accuracy of the sequencing technologies allows, and a more conservative OTU-based approach in context of noise arising from sequencing error, intra-genomic heterogeneity, etc., was preferred for the current study. OTU picking was performed using an “open reference OTU picking” approach as implemented in the QIIME pipeline v1.9.1 [41]. For the process, Greengenes OTUs clustered at 97% identity (Greengenes version 13_8) was used as the reference OTU database [42], while UCLUST v1.2.22q [43] was chosen as the preferred OTU picking method (“uclust_ref” run with default parameters for clustering sequences with 97% identity). Representative sequences from each of the OTUs were used for annotating corresponding taxonomic lineages (using the tool dada2 [39] considering SILVA database version 132 [44] as a reference). Sparse OTUs containing < 0.002% of the total number of high-quality reads sequenced were removed. A final OTU abundance table with a total of 1897 OTUs, including 1471 OTUs bearing correspondence to OTUs already cataloged in the Greengenes database, as well as 426 de novo OTUs identified from 864 samples was created. A subset of 537 microbiome samples pertaining to normoglycemic and prediabetic individuals from India and Denmark, corresponding to 10,647,149 quality-checked and trimmed reads, was considered for downstream taxonomic analyses in this study. Functional potential of the gut microbiomes were estimated from the taxonomic distribution using the tools PiCrust v1.1.0 [45] and Vikodak [46]. Although estimating functional potential of microbiomes should ideally be performed with appropriate shotgun metagenomics data, the current amplicon sequencing-based study has its limitation in this respect, and therefore used the above mentioned tools which are reported to provide reliable estimates from taxonomic abundance data.

Alpha diversity metrics (viz. Shannon diversity, Simpson index and OTU richness) were calculated using R Vegan packagev2.5.2 [47]. Given that uneven sequencing depth of different samples may influence calculation of alpha diversity measures like OTU richness, this step was performed on rarefied abundance data (equivalent to the sample having minimum sequencing depth, i.e., ~ 4500 reads/sample). T-tests were performed to assess any significant differences between the alpha diversity parameters of samples belonging to different geographies or health status. Differences between the measured phenotypic traits of subjects belonging to different countries/health status were evaluated using Wilcoxon test(s). P values were corrected for multiple testing using Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) correction. PCoA plots based on taxonomic profiles (relative OTU abundance) of microbiome samples were generated the R Phyloseq package v1.22.3 [48], wherein weighted UniFrac was used as the distance metric. Similar PCoA plot was also generated using imputed functional profile of the microbiome samples (KEGG functional modules) wherein Jensen-Shannon divergence (JSD) was used as the distance metric. The extent of variation explained by geography and disease status was tested with permutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA), using adonis2 function available in the R Vegan package v2.5.2. Dispersion of the country and disease status-specific clusters was evaluated using the betadisper function available in the R Vegan package v2.5.2. A negative binomial Wald test using the R package DESeq2v1.10.1 [49] was performed to identify the taxonomic groups (at all different levels of taxonomic hierarchy), which were differentially abundant in NG and PD samples (BH corrected p ≤ 0.05) for Indian and Danish cohorts separately. PD-specific microbiome abundance signatures were also evaluated after pooling together Indian and Danish cohorts, while correcting the negative binomial Wald test results for the anticipated geography-specific cohort effect. Further a forest-plot-based meta-analysis of the differentially abundant factors identified in the pooled analysis was also performed to put in context the effect sizes (log2 fold enrichment of mean abundances in PD with respect to NG) and directions in individual geographies. Additional negative binomial Wald tests were performed (using DESeq2) separately on Indian and Danish subjects to identify discriminating OTUs, while correcting for certain observed covariates of glycemic status, viz., waist-to-hip ratio, systolic BP, IL6, TNFα, LBP, and IAP, which might also influence the microbiome structure. Corrections were also performed for age and gender of the subjects, given that the age and gender distribution of normoglycemic and prediabetic cohorts from the two countries had some variations. Spearman correlations between abundances of differentially abundant microbial OTUs (between NG and PD subjects) and measured phenotypic traits of the subjects were calculated. It is relevant to mention here that HbA1c levels were used to define the NG and PD groups, and one might expect that correlations identified might be artifacts of the partitioning process. However, HbA1c levels for all subjects taken together were observed to follow a normal distribution (in both geographies), and therefore, partitioning of the subjects (NG/PD) based on clinically prescribed HbA1c thresholds is not expected to have any confounding effects on the computed correlations. Heatmaps depicting identified significant correlations were generated using the R “gplots” package v3.0.1. The correlations were evaluated separately for the Indian and Danish cohorts. Random forest (RF) classifier(s) were constructed for classifying PD samples based on gut microbiome composition using R Random forest package (v4.6–12). Detailed methods are provided in Additional file 1.

Table 1 (and Additional file 3: Table S2) shows the clinical and biochemical characteristics of the Danish individuals (normoglycemic = 138, prediabetic = 121) and Indian (normoglycemic = 137, prediabetic = 141) individuals participating in the study. Among Danish participants, individuals with prediabetes were significantly (Wilcoxon test, padj < 0.05) older, had higher waist to hip ratios, and higher systolic blood pressure compared to normoglycemic participants. While the clinical differences seen between the normoglycemic individuals and individuals with prediabetes in Denmark are as expected [50, 51], no significant differences in these respects could be observed in Indian participants with prediabetes when compared to the normoglycemic volunteers. When comparing countries, the Danish subjects with prediabetes were significantly older, taller, heavier, and had higher systolic blood pressure compared to their Indian counterparts. Similar differences in height, weight, and systolic blood pressure were also observed when normoglycemic individuals from both countries were compared. Another intriguing observation pertained to the magnitude of difference in HbA1c levels between the prediabetic and normoglycemic individuals from two countries. The normoglycemic individuals from India had an overall higher level of HbA1c (median = 37 mmol/mol) compared to the Danish normoglycemic participants (median = 33 mmol/mol). In effect, the difference between HbA1c levels of normoglycemic and prediabetic individuals appeared to be much higher in case of Danes, when compared to Indians.

Results on a panel of 11 fasting serum inflammatory biomarkers are also presented in Table 1. Among Danes, individuals with prediabetes had significantly (Wilcoxon test, padj < 0.05) higher levels of interleukin 6 (IL6), tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα), lipopolysaccharide-binding protein (LBP), and intestinal alkaline phosphatase (IAP) compared to normoglycemic individuals. In the Indian cohort, there were no significant differences in any of the circulating inflammatory markers in individuals with prediabetes when compared to those with normoglycemia. Interestingly, irrespective of the glycemic status, the overall levels of high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hsCRP), TNFα, and LBP were significantly higher among Indians compared to Danes (Additional file 4: Table S3). On the other hand, the overall levels of interleukin 13 (IL13) and monocyte-chemoattractant protein 1 (MCP1) were higher among Danes. Considering the inter-individual variations in the biomarkers, we also reanalyzed the data from normoglycemic and prediabetic subjects while dividing into tertiles and found some interesting insights (Additional file 5: Table S4). Among Danes, while considering the tertile-based data analysis (particularly the tertile 2 and/or tertile 3 levels of biomarkers), most of the inflammatory markers were significantly higher in individuals with prediabetes compared to normoglycemic individuals. The only exceptions were interleukin 10 (IL10) and interleukin 17A (IL17A) levels, which were significantly lower in individuals with prediabetes. Similar analysis in Indians showed significantly higher levels of inflammatory biomarkers like high-sensitive C-reactive protein (hsCRP), IL1β, IL13, IL17A, IL6, TNFα, and IAP in individuals with prediabetes compared to normoglycemic individuals.

While the gut microbiota of Danish participants were significantly (t-test, p < 0.05) more diverse when compared to the Indian volunteers (Additional file 6: Figure S1), no significant differences in alpha diversity were observed between microbiota belonging to the normoglycemic and prediabetic groups in the respective cohorts. Firmicutes, followed by Bacteroidetes, were the dominant phyla across all samples in both populations (Additional file 6: Figure S2, Additional file 7: Table S5A). While Actinobacteria, Proteobacteria, and Elusimicrobia were seen to be present in significantly (negative binomial Wald test; Benjamini-Hochberg-corrected padj < 0.05) higher proportions in the Indian cohort, Bacteroidetes, Tenericutes, Verrucomicrobia, and Synergistetes were observed to be significantly enriched in the Danish subjects. When resolved at a family level (Additional file 6: Figure S3, Additional file 7: Table S5B), Ruminococcaceae, Bacteroidaceae, Rikenellaceae, and Christensenellaceae were among the major families which exhibited more than twofold enrichment in Danes compared to Indians (negative binomial Wald test; Benjamini-Hochberg-corrected padj < 0.05). In contrast, Prevotellaceae, Veillonellaceae, Erysipelotrichaceae, Lactobacillaceae, Coriobacteriaceae, Streptococcaceae, and Atopobiaceae were seen to be significantly enriched (over twofold) in the Indian cohort.

A search for core genera (present in at least 80% of the subjects with minimum 0.1% abundance) in the gut microbiota of normoglycemic and prediabetic individuals showed Dorea, Agathobacter, Collinsella, Lachnoclostridium, Lachnospira, Blautia, Faecalibacterium, Roseburia, and Subdoligranulum to be present ubiquitously in subjects from both ethnic groups (Fig. 1). Although Megasphaera and Lactobacillus could be identified as a core microbiota in the gut of Indian subjects, their prevalence was very low in the Danish population. On the other hand, Parabacteroides and Alistipes were only present in a small fraction of the Indian samples, but could be identified as core genera in the Danish population. Strong geography-specific patterns were identified in the distribution of core OTUs (Additional file 8: Table S6). While a total of 32 OTUs were observed to be ubiquitously present across samples from both the geographies with normalized abundance> 0.01%, OTUs specific to the Danish (29 OTUs) and Indian (16 OTUs) participants could also be identified. Out of the 29 core OTUs specific to the Danish samples, 17 were Firmicutes, while 11 belonged to the phylum Bacteroidetes, including 6 from the genus Bacteroides. In contrast, the Indian cohort had only 3 Bacteroidetes OTUs, all from the genus Prevotella9, along with 12 Firmicutes OTUs and a single OTU belonging to the genus Senegalimassilia (phylum Actinobacteria).

Principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) based on OTU abundance using weighted UniFrac distance (see Supplementary Methods in Additional file 1) did not reveal any prediabetes-specific patterns when the Danish and Indian samples were combined (Fig. 2a). Instead, a strong country-specific effect on gut microbiota was apparent from the distinct clustering of Indian and Danish samples. The strong effect of geography on the gut microbiome was also confirmed by a PERMANOVA test (R2 = 11.2%; p = 0.001). A negative binomial Wald test, after correcting for the country-specific cohort effect, identified 160 OTUs, which were differentially abundant (padj < 0.05) in the samples based on glycemic status (Additional file 9: Table S7). OTUs belonging to Prevotella9, Phascolarctobacteriumfaecium, Barnesiellaintestinihominis, Flavonifractorplautii, Tyzzerellanexilis, Bacteroidesnordii, Faecalibacterium, and Agathobacter were among the OTUs that were enriched in normoglycemic subjects by two folds or more (Table 2). In addition, three OTUs from the family Ruminococcaceae, and one OTU each from the families Muribaculaceae and Christensenellaceae had more than twofold enriched abundance in normoglycemic subjects. In contrast, OTUs enriched by two folds or more in the subjects with prediabetes included those belonging to Megasphaera, Streptococcus, Prevotella9, Alistipes, Mitsuokella, Escherichia/Shigella, Prevotella2, Vibrio cholerae, Lactobacillus, Alloprevotella, Rhodococcus, Klebsiella and two more belonging to the family Ruminococcaceae. A meta-analysis of the differentially abundant factors presented in Table 2 is provided in Additional file 6: Figure S4. The forest plot depicts the effect sizes and directions of the factors in individual geographies, as well as the combined effect size. For almost all the OTUs identified through negative binomial Wald test on the pooled data (after correcting for the country-specific cohort effect), the effect direction of microbial association with dysglycemia was observed to be same in both geographies. However, effect sizes showed geography-specific trends and in many cases did not attain statistically significant values in one of the geographies. OTUs which showed different effect directions included those belonging to Phascolarctobacteriumfecium, Tyzerella_4 nexiilis, Eschirichia/Shigella, Prevotella2, Alloprevotella, and one de novo OTU belonging to Lactobacillus. In most of these cases, the effect was significantly strong in one of the geographies, which influenced the combined effect during pooled analysis. Further, for one of the OTUs belonging to Falvonifractor plautii, contrasting effects were observed during pooled (cohort-effect corrected) and meta-analyses, which can probably be attributed to differences in fitting its taxonomic abundance data to negative binomial distributions, once for the pooled data and subsequently for the geography-specific abundance data.

Differences in gut microbiomes pertaining to normoglycemic and prediabetic individuals were also apparent at higher taxonomic ranks (Additional file 12: Table S10). A negative binomial Wald test, after correcting for country-specific cohort effect, indicated that the families Enterobacteriaceae, Enterococcaceae, Vibrionaceae, and Burkholderiaceae, all from the phylum Proteobacteria; Streptococcaceae from phylum Firmicutes; and Nocardiaceae from phylum Actinobacteria had relatively higher abundances (Benjamini-Hochberg-corrected padj < 0.05) in the PD samples. However, at the phylum level, no significant variations could be observed.

Principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) of predicted functional profiles (KEGG functional modules) based on Jensen-Shannon distances (see Supplementary Methods in Additional file 1) did not reveal any prediabetes-specific signatures (Fig. 2b), which was in line with the results obtained using taxonomic profiles (Fig. 2a). Intriguingly, and in contrast with the taxonomy-based PCoA analysis, no country-specific separation was apparent. However, dispersion of predicted functional profiles pertaining to Indian gut microbiomes was significantly higher than that of the Danish functional profiles (Additional file 6: Figure S5). Such dispersion was not observed when taxonomic compositions of Danish and Indian gut microbiota were tested.

Investigating the predicted functional profile at the module level led to further insights (Additional file 14: Table S12, Additional file 15: Table S13). Multiple modules pertaining to transport of sugars and phosphotransferase system (PTS) were enriched in the gut microbiome of individuals with prediabetes, which is in line with previous observations [6, 53]. In addition, several predicted functional modules pertaining to drug resistance and efflux pumps were observed to be enriched in the microbiome of prediabetic subjects, suggesting increased exposure to antibiotics or other xenobiotics. One of the interesting observations pertains to the metabolism of the neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA shunt and GABA biosynthesis functions), which was predicted to be enriched in prediabetic subjects after correcting for country-specific cohort effect. The enrichment was more prominent in the Indian cohort and assumes importance in context of previous studies indicating effects of GABA on the islet beta cells [54].

For both Indian and Danish cohorts, a relatively small proportion of OTUs enriched in the normoglycemic subjects exhibited correlations with clinical variables and inflammatory biomarkers (Additional file 6: Figure S6, Additional file 16: Table S14). In the Indian subjects, these OTUs were predominantly from the genus Prevotella9 (4 OTUs), along with one OTU each from the genera Faecalibacterium, Agathobacter, Alloprevotella, and one OTU belonging to the family Muribaculaceae. All other OTUs exhibiting significant correlation(s) with one or more phenotypic variables were enriched in prediabetic samples. It was interesting to note that a considerable fraction of these OTUs (7 de novo OTUs out of 10) belonged to the genus Megasphaera, most of which exhibited significant positive correlations with fasting plasma glucose and HbA1c levels, and weak negative correlations with HDL cholesterol and inflammation markers like TNFα and LBP. Another intriguing observation pertains to two OTUs belonging to the family Burkholderiaceae including the one from the lymphoid tissue-resident commensal bacterial (LRC) genus Achromobacter and another from the GKS98 freshwater group, which showed significant positive correlations with inflammatory biomarkers like IL10 and IL17A. An OTU belonging to Faecalibacterium (OTU 319275) was also observed to be positively correlated with IL10 and IL6 levels in the Indian cohort, which is in line with previous reports suggesting anti-inflammatory and IL10 inducing roles of some Faecalibacterium strains [55, 56]. The heatmap corresponding to Danish subjects showed a small but coherent grouping of OTUs enriched in normoglycemic participants, which included four OTUs from the family Ruminococcaceae (including one OTU each from the genus Ruminococcus1 and Oscillibacter), an OTU belonging to the genus Phascolarctobacterium faecium and another two OTUs belonging to the order MollicutesRF39 and family XIII AD3011 group from the order Clostridiales. Almost all OTUs depicted in this heatmap, which were associated with Danish prediabetic subjects, belonged to the order Clostridiales. A considerable number of these were from the family Lachnospiraceae followed by those from the family Ruminococcaceae, both these families being ubiquitously present in Danish gut microbiota. A couple of Prevotella2 OTUs exhibiting modest negative correlations with HDL cholesterol also pertained to this prediabetes-associated group of OTUs identified in the Danish population.

Random forest (RF) classifiers were constructed to assess the ability of the abovementioned microbiome signatures in segregating the normoglycemic and prediabetic subjects (see Supplementary Methods in Additional file 1). When trained with taxonomic data (1897 OTUs as features) for all Indian and Danish gut microbiota samples, a RF model with area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) of 62.7% and out-of-bag (OOB) error rate of 40.04% could be obtained. However, the anticipated effect of extraneous predictors on a predictive model [57] and earlier reports of RF classifiers built on microbiome data [58], prompted adoption of an additional feature selection step. For feature selection, the whole dataset was randomly split (stratified considering proportions of NG and PD samples) into a training set and an independent test set in the ratio 66:34. Post feature selection step described in Additional file 1, a bagged RF model with 76 selected features (Additional file 17: Table S15) could be obtained with an improved AUC of 77.54%, and a decent test AUC of 66.86% (Fig. 3). While the clinical relevance of these RF models might be limited, results of this exercise reiterate the distinct gut microbiome signatures in prediabetic subjects from India and Denmark. Further, the set of selected OTUs (obtained through the feature selection step) used in the model holds relevance for future studies in this direction.

Recent evidences of causal or consequential relationship of the gut microbiota with metabolic phenotypes suggest the need of studying these aspects in each other’s context. The Danish and Indian cohorts were significantly different in multiple phenotypic aspects, and intriguingly the signs of metabolic syndrome like higher waist-to-hip ratios and systolic blood pressure were more apparent in the Danish prediabetic subjects. Similar patterns were also observed in levels of inflammatory biomarkers. While the Danish prediabetic subjects exhibited higher levels of several inflammatory biomarkers like IL6, TNFα, LBP, and IAP compared to normoglycemic individuals, there were no such differences between the Indian prediabetic and normoglycemic subjects. Notably, the fasting serum levels of a majority of inflammatory markers in Indian participants were higher than in the Danish participants. The only inflammatory markers having higher levels in the Danish participants included IL13 and MCP1, which have roles in allergic inflammation [59–61]. While several inflammatory markers have known association with T2D and the metabolic syndrome [62–66], an earlier study by Cappuccio and Miller [67] has also indicated ethnic differences in the level of circulating inflammatory markers which may be partially related to demographic, lifestyle, or genetic or gut microbiome factors. On the one hand, our observations suggest a state of proinflammation as early as in prediabetes. On the other hand, the observed characteristic pattern of inflammatory markers in the Indian cohort probably indicates prevalence of systemic and chronic intestinal inflammation at an overall population level. Higher levels of IL23, TNFα, and LBP have been reported to be associated with intestinal inflammation as well as systemic inflammation triggered by LPS and other bacterial products [68–70]. Recent studies also imply a role of IL-23/IL-17 pathway alterations in several disease states including T2D [71, 72] and our study supports the existence of these alterations as early as in prediabetes. In this context, the higher IAP values in Danish prediabetic subjects were in a subtle contrast with earlier reports on the role of IAP deficiency in metabolic syndrome [73], but this could reflect a mounting adaptive response to inflammation.

The above observations, coupled with the results pertaining to phenotypic data as well as levels of inflammatory biomarkers, indicate that the role of gut microbiome in the pathophysiology of prediabetes in Indian subjects is different compared to that in Europeans. While chronic systemic inflammation appears to be characteristic of the Indian population in general, the observed anti-inflammatory and protective effects induced by various factors in the Indian gut microbiome appear to play key roles in defining gut-health status and modulating the onset and progression of diabetes.

In complex metabolic disorders, identifying biological signatures at the onset of disease is crucial to reduce or prevent the rapid progression of disease. The compositional and functional potential alterations of gut microbiota and proinflammation observed in prediabetic subjects in the present study is an important and significant advancement. In fact, the importance of sub-clinical detection of gut microbial biomarkers of obesity and T2D has recently been emphasized by several others [94]. Microbial abundance patterns and distinct levels of inflammatory markers identified in this study appear as robust sub-clinical signatures of prediabetes and may be explored further as potential early indicators for individuals at risk of dysglycemia.



Publisher’s Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Nishal Kumar Pinna, Ranjit Mohan Anjana, Shruti Saxena and Anirban Dutta contributed equally to this work.

