The Gut Microbiome May Help Address Mental Health Disparities in Hispanics: A Narrative Review

The gut–brain axis is the biological connection between the enteric and the central nervous systems. Given the expansion of the microbial sciences with the new human microbiome field facilitated by the decrease in sequencing costs, we now know more about the role of gut microbiota in human health. In this short review, particular focus is given to the gut–brain axis and its role in psychiatric diseases such as anxiety and depression. Additionally, factors that contribute to changes in the gut–brain axis, including the gut microbiome, nutrition, the host’s genome, and ethnic difference, are highlighted. Emphasis is given to the lack of studies on Hispanic populations, despite the fact this ethnic group has a higher prevalence of anxiety and depression in the US.

Our gut feels different when we are nervous, sad, or have a busy day. The gut–brain axis or brain-gut axis (sometimes used interchangeably) is the biological link between the physiology and these emotions. It is described as a bidirectional communication system between the central nervous system (the brain and spinal cord) and the enteric nervous system [1]. In other words, it is the link between the brain’s emotional and rational parts and our intestines’ physiology and metabolism. Abnormal gut–brain axis activity has shown an association with physical and psychological illnesses. In the last decade, seminal work has demonstrated the importance of the gut microbiome and its influence on the system’s functionality [1,2,3,4,5].

This review discusses supporting data about the association between the gut–brain-axis, gut microbiome, nutrition, and psychological illnesses. Lastly, we address why Hispanic populations are largely neglected and remain an essential focal point to be included in these multi-omic studies.

The enteric nervous system (ENS) is the gut’s autonomous outlying nervous system, also called the “second brain” [39]. It has two significant networks embedded in the digestive tract wall that extends from the esophagus to the anus. Both communicate and can influence each other [3]. ENS is a complex system with millions of neurons, glia cells, and interactions with different kinds of enteroendocrine cells [39]. Exchanges between these two systems include complex interactions involving nervous, endocrine, and immune signaling mechanisms [40]. Enteroendocrine cells are located in the bowel epithelium. They play an essential role in digestion. They produce hormones and neuropeptides, which regulate serotonin levels, gastric acid secretion, insulin secretion, appetite control, peristalsis, supporting vasodilatation, among other functions [39,41]. Research has indicated that there are possibly five communication routes between the brain and the gut: (1) the brain’s neural complex, (2) neuroendocrine–hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis, (3) gut immune system, (4) neurotransmitters and neural regulators produced by gut bacteria, and (5) barrier pathways such as the blood–brain barrier [42]. In this review, we highlight the blood–brain barrier.

Additionally, conventionalized mice—which are germ-free adult mice inoculated with microbiota from pathogen-free mice–showed a lower BBB permeability than germ-free mice [44]. Researchers use specific pathogen-free mice under psychological stress fed regularly to evaluate the connection of the gut microbiota with the intestinal and BBB integrity. The results showed that stress led to weaker and lower expression of four tight junction proteins (i.e., claudin5, occludin, α-actin, and ZO-1) with broken membranes of the intestine barriers and BBB. Moreover, both groups showed differences in their microbiota composition [5]. Furthermore, the co-occurrence of psychiatric disorders and gastrointestinal conditions have been linked to perturbations of the gut–brain axis systems [1]. For example, irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) are typically presented with signs of psychiatric disorders such as anxiety, depression, somatization disorder, and/or bipolar disorder [46,47,48]. There is an increased interest in evaluating how the gut microbiota could impact health [49].

The microbiota refers to all microbial cells associated with living organisms and are mostly studies sequencing 16S rRNA genes identifying bacterial taxa, their relative abundance, and community structure. On the other hand, the microbiome includes the genetic information of the microbiota, its genes, and genomes—a term first coined by Handelsman [50]. Therefore, the microbiome is studied mainly through shotgun metagenomics, unveiling also the functional and gene capacity of the microbiota. As most studies do not clearly differentiate the terms microbiota and microbiome, and some consider 16S rRNA profiles as microbiome, in this article, the gut microbiota and microbiome will be used interchangeably. The “holobiont” consists of the host and its symbionts (prokaryotes and eukaryotes) a complex unit that has been transmitted during birth between generations through the matrilineal line since early human evolution [7,9]. The microbiome has many vital functions like producing energy and vitamins that are inaccessible to the host, helping to metabolize xenobiotics, preventing the colonization of different pathogens, and it is essential in developing the immune system [51,52]. The gut microbiome are all the microorganisms that reside in our intestines, and its gene makeup of the gut–brain axis has resulted in the term gut–microbiota–brain axis [1]. In the human microbiome, pathogenic and symbiotic bacteria, archaea, and fungi coexist in a healthy body. Dysbiosis occurs when that equilibrium is disrupted and beneficial bacteria disappear, which can be caused by infectious diseases, particular diets, or long-term use of antibiotics or other bacteria-killing drugs. Diseases, such as IBS, IBD, or colorectal cancer, can result from microbial dysbiosis induced by alterations in the microbial population composition, relative abundance, and metabolic profiles. As a result, the body’s susceptibility to disease increases. Multiple studies through the years have unveiled inter-individual differences of the gut microbiome [53], indicating that there is not one single definition of a healthy microbiome, highlighting that an appropriate anti-inflammatory fiber-rich diet and lifestyle are essential in maintaining the balance of gut probiotic taxa.

In humans, fecal matter transplants (FMTs) have been used successfully to treat psychiatric patients in different situations. A study in China followed a woman with severe depression and unresponsive to pharmacological treatment, who received and FMT from a healthy donor and became symptom-free after six months [64]. Similar successful results were obtained in a man with depression, suffering from alopecia and daily diarrhea. After fecal transplantation, all the symptoms improved including alopecia [65]. However, more research is needed, including joint dietary strategies to maintain the balance of healthy gut microbiota.

Neurotransmitters play an important role in the communication between endothelial cells and the central nervous system. Glutamate is the main excitatory neurotransmitter in the brain, but also it is present in the gastrointestinal tract through dietary sources [66] and produced by bacteria such as Lactobacillus plantarum, Bacteroides vulgatus, and Campylobacter jejuni [67]. When secreted by bacteria, neuropod—enteroendocrine cells—known as neuropod cells, use glutamate as a neurotransmitter to transmit sensory signals to the brain through the vagus nerve [68].

Other important pathways in the microbiota-gut–brain axis include the tryptophan-kynurenine metabolism. The microbiota can metabolize tryptophan to kynurenine, reducing the amount of tryptophan available [79]. An in silico study found that different gut phyla can produce other tryptophan metabolites, with Bacteroidetes, Actinobacteria, and Proteobacteria, producing more kynurenine [81]. A meta-analysis showed associated elevated levels of kynurenine to tryptophan in patients with psychiatric conditions such as depression and bipolar disorder. These data suggest that lower production of serotonin is not only due to the fact of a low pool of tryptophan but is also related to kynurenine conversion [82]. Supplementation with probiotics and prebiotics might decrease kynurenine concentration and the kynurenine:tryptophan ratio [83]; this suggests that probiotics and prebiotics could have clinical relevance as a treatment to regulate the tryptophan–kynurenine pathway [84]. Many other neurotransmitters have similar pathways enabling the communication between the brain and the gut microbiota. There is still much to be comprehended as for the relationship between neurotransmitters and the microbiota, leaving enormous opportunities for research in animal models, including non-human primates, which are phylogenetically, anatomically, and genetically close to humans.

The food and respective nutrients that our body ingests are environmental factors that play a significant role in the gut microbiome’s diversity, composition, richness, and function [85]. Evaluating the diet and the gut microbiota in African and European children revealed a relevant difference in the gut composition. Data showed that rural African children had a higher amount of Bacteroidetes and lower Firmicutes than European children. In addition, rural African children showed an abundance of two genera, Prevotella and Xylanibacter, which were not present in European children [86]. Additionally, rural African populations are colonized by gut parasites, such as Entamoeba, as part of their gut microbiota [29].

A balanced diet should contain the correct proportions of carbohydrates, protein, probiotics, and others to help keep the gut microbiome healthy and functioning correctly. The use of probiotics can help to balance and increase gut microbiome diversity. Probiotics are microorganisms that contribute positively to the host’s health, mainly by modulating the gut microbiome [109]. Foods such as yogurt, sauerkraut, and kombucha are rich in probiotics, essential for the gut microbiome. In animal models fed with probiotics, they found that the animals had fewer physiological and behavioral changes [110]. The bi-directional communication by the gut–brain axis could explain how the gut microbiota can affect mood disorders. It is clinically adequate to have two doses of 109–1010 colony-forming units (CFU) of probiotics in consumer products [111,112]. A Systematic review, conducted in 2016, concluded that probiotics, such as Lactobacillus and Bifidobacteria, could positively affect patients with anxiety and depression by decreasing the symptoms associated with the condition [113]. It is still unknown which probiotics could be more effective in different populations. However, the recommendation is to include probiotic meals in our diet to provide good composition and diversity in our gut microbiome. Clinical research with patients of anorexia nervosa—an eating disorder in which people are dangerously underweight—showed lower bacterial diversity and depressive and anxious behavior [114].

The genome is our total genetic material (DNA), and it has a role in gene regulation, phenotype, and in the microbiome. However, there is a bi-directional relationship between the host phenotype and microbiome. External factors, such as the environment, diet, and medication, can also alter it [115].

A study in mice found that antidepressants reduce gut bacterial richness such as Ruminococcus, Adlercreutzia, and Alphaproteobacteria. Furthermore, they observed that mice supplemented with Ruminococcus flavefaciens had decreased depressive-like behavior compared with mice supplemented with Adlercreutzia equolifaciens [133]. The gut microbiome can affect the SSRI effectiveness in the body [134], and SSRIs can affect the gut’s bacterial composition. Some SSRIs, such as citalopram, alprazolam sertraline, fluoxetine, and paroxetine, can act as antimicrobials in the intestines [135]. Future research expects to find the effect of antidepressants in different racial and ethnic groups’ gut microbiome.

Hispanic and Latinos are the second largest ethnic group in most US states, and among the first in California, New Mexico, and Texas, with nearly the same proportion as Caucasians (39.7% Whites vs. 39.3% Latinos) [55]. Worldwide, Latinos represent 8.42% of the total world population [136], with admixture typically inherited through a mix of European, Native American, and African ancestry. Adding these already unique genomic variations, they represent a diversity of lifestyles, environments, and even dietary patterns. This makes them a complex group to study, added to the fact that they have been found to be at higher risk for chronic diseases [137,138]. Hispanics have higher rates of obesity than non-Hispanic Whites [139], and there are also many disparities among Hispanic subgroup such as a lower birth weight rate for Hispanic infants in comparison to non-Hispanic Whites [140]. The literature has shown that depressive symptoms in Hispanics are associated with financial stress, low education, and chronic medical conditions as well as their religious beliefs [141,142].

Several programs are currently sequencing the microbiomes of populations from multiple races, but there is a shortage of Latin American people being studied with a slight rise each year [35]. The main reasons why microbiome studies in Latino communities are lacking resides in the fact that there are still many challenges for scientists in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) to pursue these studies, reflecting the lack of equity in the field. Additionally, there is not enough training for faculty and graduate students due to the language and communication barriers to create inclusive microbiome training programs to engage new generations of scientists to develop them [36]. Data analyses and bioinformatics applied to microbiology are still courses that are not part of most graduate programs and the traditional workshops clearly do not suffice. Studies conducted on specific Hispanic populations could broaden our understanding of the gut–brain axis. Furthermore, the limited research on these ethnicities generates a wide gap of information needed to understand the factors that affect the human microbiome and disease.

This review summarizes studies that have established an association between the gut microbiome and anxiety–depressive behavior through the gut–brain axis. The gut microbiota can modulate neurotransmitter production, thus being linked with the severity of depressive symptoms. Environmental factors, diet, nutrient intake, medication, and lifestyle can also alter the microbiota composition and diversity, leading to psychological disorders. Different racial and ethnic groups have a unique gut microbiome composition, because they have different environments and lifestyles. That could be one of the reasons why some populations exhibit more prevalence in psychological disorders and have different responses to treatments. This article shows the importance of studying the gut microbiome and its effect on patients with anxiety and depressive symptoms.

At present, there have not been many studies on the Hispanic population to understand the gut–brain axis. Understanding the relationship between the gut–brain axis in the Hispanic population would help develop advanced treatments for these patients in pharmaceutical studies and expand the knowledge of the human body’s physiology. This work must serve as a call out for funding studies on gut microbiota, pharmacogenetics, depression, and anxiety behavior among Hispanic populations. Low-income countries have a vast geographical diversity of the microbial biosphere, yet they lack funding to pursue this specific research focus.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

