Population Genetic Divergence and Environment Influence the Gut Microbiome in Oregon Threespine Stickleback

Much of animal-associated microbiome research has been conducted in species for which little is known of their natural ecology and evolution. Microbiome studies that combine population genetic, environment, and geographic data for wild organisms can be very informative, especially in situations where host genetic variation and the environment both influence microbiome variation. The few studies that have related population genetic and microbiome variation in wild populations have been constrained by observation-based kinship data or incomplete genomic information. Here we integrate population genomic and microbiome analyses in wild threespine stickleback fish distributed throughout western Oregon, USA. We found that gut microbiome diversity and composition partitioned more among than within wild host populations and was better explained by host population genetic divergence than by environment and geography. We also identified gut microbial taxa that were most differentially abundant across environments and across genetically divergent populations. Our findings highlight the benefits of studies that investigate host-associated microbiomes in wild organisms.

Microbiome research is now a major area of research in ecology and evolution [1], which is partly due to an increased understanding of the importance of the microbiome to animal fitness [2]. Recent microbiome research has frequently focused on the vertebrate gut, for several reasons. The densely colonized and metabolically diverse gut microbiome can influence host nutrition [3] and development [4], including the onset of host immunity [5]. Furthermore, a normal gut microbiome is important in preventing pathogen infection and many host disorders, such as inflammatory bowel disease and colorectal cancer in humans [6,7,8].

Here we expand upon this work by incorporating host whole-genome data and populations from multiple geographically and environmentally diverse watersheds. We build upon years of foundational work on stickleback in the wild by deeply sequencing both the host genome and the gut bacterial communities associated with genetically divergent wild populations of stickleback drawn from two differing natural environments (estuary and freshwater). We found that microbiome composition was better predicted by fish population genetic divergence than by geographic distance and environment. Furthermore, we found evidence that these differences among populations could be the result of differences in the relative abundance of a subset of the gut microbiome in these fish.

We collected six wild threespine stickleback populations for the diversity of the environments that they inhabit, known population structure, and geographic distribution in Oregon. One hundred and twenty-six fish of assumed mixed sex were collected between June and August in 2015 and 2017 in western Oregon, USA. Collections included ≥ 20 fish from each of six sites varying in distance apart from one another among three major watersheds (Figure 1 and Table 1). We collected pairs of estuarine and freshwater populations found in two separate coastal watersheds. One pair, from the Siuslaw watershed, were collected from Cushman Slough and Lily Lake, and the other, from the Umpqua watershed, were collected from Dean Creek and Eel Creek (Table 1). We also collected stickleback at two inland freshwater sites, Green Island and Lynx Hollow, located ~ 300 river miles inland in the Willamette Basin. These populations are from the main stem and Coast Fork of the Willamette River watershed, respectively. All collections were carried out as in our previous work according to approved University of Oregon, institutional animal care and use committee (IACUC) protocols, and under Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife scientific taking permit numbers 19122 and 20770 [30,37].

Fish were euthanized with an IACUC-approved lethal dose of MS222. Guts were dissected in the field and flash frozen immediately in liquid nitrogen, and then stored −80 °C. Somas for each fish were preserved in 95% ethanol. Salinity (via refractometer) and temperature at each site were measured at the time of sampling. DNA was extracted from fin clips (~20 mg) from ethanol-stored whole fish using a Blood and Tissue Kit (Qiagen, Venlo, Netherlands). Quantification of DNA concentration was performed on a Qubit fluorometer (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA) using the double strand DNA (dsDNA) broad range assay kit. DNA dilution plates for each population were created by diluting to a concentration of 25 ng/ul using EB in 96 deep-well plates.

RAD-seq libraries were created as in previous work [27,30]. Briefly, for each population sequenced, the endonuclease SbfI-HF (New England Biolabs, Waltham, MA, USA) was used to cut DNA at specific locations spread throughout the genome. P1 adaptors with unique barcodes were ligated to the digested DNA of each individual fish within each population so that libraries for each fish could be pooled and sequenced together and sequences from each fish could be bioinformatically recovered. Individual samples were then pooled and sheared. Sheared fragments of 300–500 bp in length were size selected and a second adapter, P2, was ligated to the fragments. Primers specific to sequences located on the P1 and P2 adaptors were used to perform a PCR reaction to enrich only for fragments with both a P1 and P2 adaptor in 12 cycles of amplification. The resulting amplified library was cleaned with 0.6x Omega Mag-Bind Total Pure beads to remove DNA fragments <100 bp in length. The resulting library was then sequenced using a HiSeq4000 (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) at the University of Oregon Genomics Core Facility.

Genome-wide estimates of divergence (FST) were calculated for each SNP and then averaged using the populations program within the Stacks software framework [38]. To reduce the data to a computationally manageable size, 1000 randomly sampled SNPs were generated using a Perl script as described in the Stacks. These were further reduced to 391 after filtering.

In order to confirm and quantify the previously observed genetic structure and substructure of the six Oregon stickleback populations, we used principal component analyses (PCA) in R version 3.4.2 [41] with the subset of 391 SNPs. This dataset included RAD-seq data generated from three populations that were previously analyzed [30,37], and three for which collections were made and new data generated in the present study (Dean Creek, Lily Lake, and Eel Creek).

Frozen guts were weighed, rapidly thawed, and samples were immediately processed for DNA extraction using a modified Dneasy Blood and Tissue Kit protocol [42]. Guts were transferred to preheated Qiagen PowerBead Solution in QIAmp PowerFecal DNA Kit garnet bead lysis tubes and homogenized on a FastPrep120. A volume of each homogenate equivalent to 20 mg of frozen gut was transferred to preheated Qiagen ATL Buffer in 1.5 mL RINO screw-cap tubes containing 100 μL ZrOB015 beads (Next Advance, Troy, NY, USA) and homogenized again. Tissues were digested using proteinase K and incubating at 56 °C for 30 min. Four microliters of Rnase A were added, and samples were incubated at 37 °C for 30 min. The remaining steps followed Dneasy Blood and Tissue Kit protocol (Qiagen #69504), except that 800 µL of AL buffer and 800 µL of 100% ETOH were used followed with passing the supernatant through the spin column in 600 µL increments. DNA was quantified using Invitrogen Qubit Broad Range Assay and stored at −20 °C until prepped for sequencing. Total yields of gDNA were ~2 ng on average consistent with other fish gut microbiome reports (sample average = 176.88 ng/µL gDNA).

Gut microbial DNA libraries were fully processed and sequenced in the Genomics and Cell Characterization Core Facility (GC3F) at the University of Oregon. PCR was performed with barcoded V4 bacterial 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) primers (515F GTGCCAGCMGCCGCGGTAA, 806R GGACTACHVGGGTWTCTAAT) with an annealing temperature of 61 °C using Q5 Hot Start HiFi PCR master mix (NEB, Ipswich, MA, USA) for 27 cycles. Abundant genomic template and primers that remained in the PCR product after PCR were reduced using standard magnetic bead PCR cleanup methods. Sequencing and adonis multiplexing followed default Illumina paired-end 150 library protocols (Illumina HiSeq4000).

Illumina sequencing from two independent processing times (2015 and 2017) resulted in a total of 38,290,364 high quality raw sequence reads. These reads were imported into R version 3.4.2 and processed using DADA2 version 1.6 [43] with default parameters except paired-end 150 bp reads were trimmed (f = 145 and r = 140). This resulted in 21,962,537 non-chimeric merged reads, or 198,835 reads per gut on average (process reads detailed in Table 2). In general, this process involved trimming, denoising, merging, truncating reads (reads between 250 bp and 257 bp were kept), and removing chimeras as described in DADA2 package literature [43]. We constructed a table of 100% unique 16S ribosomal DNA amplicon sequences variants (ASVs) from these processed reads and assigned taxonomy to the resulting 26,506 ASVs using the Ribosomal Database Project classifier [44].

We removed sequences from our ASV table that classified either as Archaea or chloroplast DNA, as well as sequences found in our negative controls (8097 and 688 of 26,506 ASVs, respectively). Using supervised filtering we also removed the Synergistetes and Chlorobi phyla that we suspected might be the result of sequencing error based on their extremely poor representation in our dataset. ASVs without taxonomic assignment were also filtered out. We lastly executed prevalence threshold filtering at a level of 1% of the total samples. We made a random tree using the “rtree” function in the ape package [45] in R. A phyloseq dataset was made using the “phlyoseq” function in the phyloseq R package v1.22.3 [46]. We merged the ASV table, sample data, and rtree into a phyloseq dataset object for downstream analyses.

We found that variance grew with mean ASV abundance across gut samples, and thus we corrected this lack of homoscedasticity by square root transforming our ASV abundance data. We were concerned that differences in the number of samples and low sequencing depth in a few of the samples would influence diversity measurements. To correct any potential related errors, samples with <1000 reads were removed from the dataset (which resulted in the loss of one sample from the dataset) and then sixteen samples from each population were randomly selected without replacement to generate a new dataset (resulted in a subset of 16,397 ASVs). Random resampling at a variety of depths (15–100 samples) did not change the interpretation of linear mixed model (LMM) statistical testing results, allowing us to select a reduced subset of samples in order to improve the efficiency of our computational analyses downstream. Using this subset of these data, we assessed gut microbiome alpha diversity in terms of Simpson and Shannon diversity indices using the diversity function in the vegan v2.4.2 R package [47]. We transformed the Shannon index (1/D) to calculate the effective species number. Using the default rtree we created in phyloseq, beta diversity was calculated using both weighted and unweighted UniFrac phylogenetic distances among fish gut microbiome using the distance function in the phyloseq v1.22.3 [45] R package. These matrices were transformed into distance to centroid values for each gut community using the “betadisper” function in the vegan v2.4.2 [47] R package.

In order to determine the relative ability of genetic divergence (FST), environment (estuary or fresh water), and sample period (time) to predict gut bacterial community diversity, we chose LMM approach. This method was selected in order to integrate predictive variables that are both binary and continuous into a single model. We included the sample period in order to account for potential effects caused by collecting samples at different times; in this case, two years apart. To test how relatively well these factors predicted gut ASV diversity among fish populations, we used inverse Simpson and effective Shannon diversities (alpha), as well as both weighted and unweighted UniFrac distance-to-centroid metrics (beta), as response variables in this LMM.

Models were fit using restricted maximum likelihood methodology using the “lmer” function in the lme4 package [48] in R. Using the step function in the lmerTest [49] R package, non-significant effects in LMMs were eliminated in a backward manner starting with random predictor variables, followed by fixed variables. Population and difference of means were calculated for the fixed part of the model and a final model provided. For hypothesis tests, the p-values for the fixed effect (estuary or freshwater) were calculated from an F test based on Sattethwaite’s approximation, rather than the pooled standard error formula, in order to deal with differences in standard deviation among samples. The p-values for random effects (population genetic structure, sample period, and starting DNA concentration) in our models were based on likelihood ratio tests (χ2). Distance among sites in terms of both river miles and land were tested for collinearity with host genetic distance using a Pearson’s product-moment correlation. Distance was strongly colinear with population distance, thus distance was not included in LMMs to avoid inflation of model estimates.

We transformed ASV counts to relative abundances in order to reduce the strong effects of potentially over-sampled taxa. Principal Coordinate Analysis (PCoA) ordination was performed with these relative abundances and square root transformed Bray–Curtis dissimilarity metrics using the function ordinate in R package phyloseq v1.22.3 [46]. We did this to determine if ASVs covaried among fish gut communities in order to choose the appropriate statistical approach. A permutational multivariate analysis of variance was used instead of a linear mixed model approach. We made this decision based on a lack of collinearity structure among ASVs observed along any given axis plotted in multivariate spatial models (Figures S1, S2, and S3). We included fish population average genetic distance (FST), geographic distance (river miles), and population genetic heterozygosity, as well as sample period (2015 or 2017) and environment (estuary or freshwater), as fixed binary variables in our full model. We tested the relative degree to which these variables explained gut microbiome composition in terms of Bray–Curtis dissimilarity among fish guts using the “adonis” function in vegan v2.4.2 R package [47].

In order to determine how gut microbiome compositional variation among threespine stickleback in Oregon was influenced by host population genetic structure and environment, we first looked broadly at what bacterial groups were present in our gut samples. Successively, we quantified AVS abundance differentiation across the major geographic partitions. We did this by converting the phyloseq to a DESeq dataset using the phyloseq_to_deseq2 function in the DESeq2 v1.18.1 R package [50]. The function “estimateSizeFactors” does not handle ASV count values = 0. In order to handle zero values, we applied: gm_mean = function (x, na.rm = TRUE)Σ(log(x[x > 0]), na.rm = na.rm/length(x), where x is ASV counts. The “estimateDispersions” function was used to estimate dispersions. We tested gut ASVs for significant differential abundance both between inland and coastal freshwater populations and between estuary and freshwater populations using the DESeq function with the default Benjamin–Hochberg multiple-inference correction and with the fitType parameter set to ‘local’. Only ASV differential abundances that were statistically significant (p ≤ 0.05) were considered in our biological interpretation of these results.

Using PCA, we found genetic variation in the populations that we sampled was mainly partitioned between geographic regions and to a lesser extent between environments, confirming previous findings [30,37]. The first PC (PC1), accounted for 46.33% of the overall genetic variation partitioned genetic variation between populations collected along the coast and those collected inland in the Willamette Basin. PC2 accounted for 8.56% of overall genetic variation grouped coastal populations separately by environment (estuary vs. freshwater) (Figure 2). In congruence with these PCA results, average population genetic divergence, as measured by FST in pairwise comparisons between coastal and inland fish populations, was on average two-fold greater (~0.242) than between inland (~0.125) and four-fold greater than that among coastal populations (~0.063) (Table 3).

We found that gut communities varied in terms of both alpha and beta diversity among individual fish, as well among populations on average (Figure 3 and Figure 4). Coastal populations tended to have greater inter-individual and lower individual gut community diversity on average.

Permutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) showed that population genetic divergence (FST: R2 = 0.080, p < 0.001) explained the most variation relative to the other factors (Table 5). Furthermore, sample period (R2 = 0.053, p < 0.001), population genetic heterozygosity (R2 = 0.050, p < 0.001), environment (R2 = 0.058, p < 0.001), and river mile (R2 = 0.053, p < 0.001) explained similar portions of variation in gut microbiome in terms of Bray–Curtis dissimilarity among fish gut communities. FST strongly covaried with both geographic distance (Pearson’s product-moment correlation = 0.97, t = 39.31, df = 94, p < 1 × 10−16) and river miles (Pearson’s product-moment correlation = 0.94, t = 26.0, df = 94, p < 1 × 10−16), as well as population heterozygosity (Pearson’s product-moment correlation = 0.97, t = 41.0, df = 94, p < 2.2 × 10−16). The remaining majority of gut microbiome variation among these six wild fish populations remained unexplained by the factors we accounted for in this study (~71%).

PERMANOVA: Permutational multivariate analysis of variance.

We found that the stickleback microbiome in Oregon consisted of predominately bacteria in the phyla Proteobacteria, Fermicutes, Bacteroides, Actinobacteria, Acidobacteria, Planctomycetes, Verrucomicrobia, Chloroflexi, Tenericutes, and Fusobacteria (ordered by most to least abundant) based on relative abundance in the metacommunity (Figure S4). These groups are found in the gut in other wild fish surveys [36,51,52,53].

Comparing differential abundance between environments, we found significant differences in a subset of 404 ASVs comprising 11 phyla (Figure 5b). More than half (53%) of these enrichments comprised genera in the phylum Proteobacteria. There were eight ASVs that were exceptionally enriched (log2fold > 20) in estuary fish (one Spirochaetes) and freshwater (five Proteobacteria, one Bacteroides, and one Firmicutes). Seven phyla were enriched in gut microbiomes in both environments. In contrast, the Spirochaetes were enriched in only estuary fish, and the Fusobacteria, Gemmatimonadetes, and Verrucomicrobia were enriched in only freshwater fish (Figure 5b). The Spirochaetes enrichment in estuary fish comprised a single ASV that did not closely match any known species but classified to the Brevinema, a genus which consists of bacteria detected in fish guts in other studies [56,57]. Similar to what we found in inland freshwater fish, the phyla that were enriched in only freshwater fish comprised two ASVs that matched most closely with bacteria species associated with host pathogenicity (Fusobacterium varium and Treponema spps.), and the remainder were not well matched with bacteria that had known origins.

We have come to appreciate the importance of the host-associated microbiome in vertebrate health and disease. This current understanding is due to recent rapid advances in this field, primarily using experimental vertebrate models (e.g., mice and fish). However, despite our awareness and efforts, we still lack a complete understanding of the relative roles of environment and host genetic variation in host microbiome assembly. Studies of microbiomes of hosts in the wild can help fill this knowledge gap. Wild hosts can possess incredible genetic variation and are found among diverse environments, and we often know much about their natural evolution and ecology, yet little work in this field has taken advantage of this. In addition, studies that have been done using wild populations have not broadly considered the host genome. Rather, they have focused narrowly on specific genes or small regions of the host genome deemed important by experimental work. This is an important issue to address in order to understand how experimental research should be interpreted and to advance the field.

Even though host population genetic divergence best predicted gut diversity, environment also explained a portion of the overall variation in the gut microbiome. This was corroborated by our finding that environment best predicted gut beta diversity (weighted UniFrac distance). In addition, stickleback populations found in estuaries had on average higher beta diversity and lower alpha diversity than freshwater populations. This greater inter-individual variation in estuary fish could have been due to the exposure of estuarian fish to a more diverse pool of microbes. Stickleback acquire their microbes in part through diet, sediment, and water sources [33,36]. These inputs all vary among freshwater, marine, and estuary environments. Furthermore, estuarian environments can be a unique blend of both freshwater and marine inputs both in terms of microbiota and nutrients important in microbial growth [16]. Stickleback fish can traverse and have varying residency times among these environments in Oregon. Therefore, we speculate that this diverse exposure of the host among marine, estuary, and freshwater environments might have contributed to gut microbiome diversity among individual stickleback. Future studies in wild populations could focus on microbiomes associated with host food sources, food types and nutritional content of the varying food types found among the different environments, and how these factors and those studied here shape the gut microbiota in other species that inhabit a variety of environments (e.g., salmonids).

Given that population genetic divergence explained a portion of gut metacommunity variation, we wanted to know which microbial taxa contributed to significant differential abundance between inland and coastal freshwater fish. We found that a small subset of the gut metacommunity was significantly differentiated in terms of abundance across the main divergence in host population genetic structure in Oregon. These ASVs represent a group of bacteria that could strongly interact with the host in terms of genome-wide allele variation by being heritable and important in host fitness. This notion seemed plausible considering the history of threespine stickleback. These ASVs, if isolated, could be used to address the question of differential colonization in lab fish raised free of microbes, a benefit of work in a system that exhibits both natural variation and that can be manipulated in the laboratory.

We also observed that estuary and freshwater fish had different gut communities in terms of the relative abundance of major phyla present in the gut, as was the case in another study in Canada [36]. The Firmicutes in estuary fish and the Proteobacteria in freshwater fish were the most prevalent phyla. Differences in prevalent taxa found in the gut microbiome among environments could in part be due to variation in factors that differentiate the microbial pool available among environments. Variation in the microbial pool across space can lead to differential colonization among hosts occupying different environments. For example, salinity is an important variable that globally sorts microbial communities in the environment [59].

Using comparative studies to document patterns of microbiome variation in natural populations of organisms that vary in terms of host genetics and environments is very important in providing foundational knowledge of potential mechanisms affecting host-microbe relationships in the wild. However, we acknowledge that the design of this study is limited by the periodicity of the collections and that the observed effect of genetic divergence could be explained by the combination of environment, sampling period, and geographical location. Therefore, as is the case with many comparative studies, these results are preliminary and further validation is needed through manipulative experiments. Such studies should include an expansion of populations collected during the same time frame and studies that bring wild populations into the lab and grown under common conditions to reduce the influence of environment.

We studied stickleback gut microbiomes in the wild and found that host population genetic divergence (based on 391 randomly selected genome-wide SNPs) explained gut microbiome partitioning, in terms of both diversity and composition, better than geography, environment, sample period, and population genetic heterozygosity. In addition, geography, environment, sample period, and population genetic heterozygosity equally influenced the gut microbiome. Lastly, we found that relatively small subsets of the gut microbiome in wild stickleback in Oregon uniquely differentiated in terms abundance across different factors.

