The Gut-Skin Microbiota Axis and Its Role in Diabetic Wound Healing—A Review Based on Current Literature

Diabetic foot ulcers (DFU) are a growing concern worldwide as they pose complications in routine clinical practices such as diagnosis and management. Bacterial interactions on the skin surface are vital to the pathophysiology of DFU and may control delayed wound healing. The microbiota from our skin directly regulates cutaneous health and disease by interacting with the numerous cells involved in the wound healing mechanism. Commensal microbiota, in particular, interact with wound-repairing skin cells to enhance barrier regeneration. The observed microbes in DFU include Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, Corynebacterium, Pseudomonas, and several anaerobes. Skin commensal microbes, namely S. epidermidis, can regulate the gamma delta T cells and induce Perforin-2 expression. The increased expression of Perforin-2 by skin cells destroyed S. aureus within the cells, facilitating wound healing. Possible crosstalk between the human commensal microbiome and different cell types involved in cutaneous wound healing promotes the immune response and helps to maintain the barrier function in humans. Wound healing is a highly well-coordinated, complex mechanism; it can be devastating if interrupted. Skin microbiomes are being studied in relation to the gut-skin axis along with their effects on dermatologic conditions. The gut-skin axis illustrates the connection wherein the gut can impact skin health due to its immunological and metabolic properties. The precise mechanism underlying gut-skin microbial interactions is still unidentified, but the immune and endocrine systems are likely to be involved. Next-generation sequencing and the development of bioinformatics pipelines may considerably improve the understanding of the microbiome-skin axis involved in diabetic wound healing in a much more sophisticated way. We endeavor to shed light on the importance of these pathways in the pathomechanisms of the most prevalent inflammatory conditions including the diabetes wound healing, as well as how probiotics may intervene in the gut-skin axis.

We dwell in a microbiome cosmos, comprising thousands of bacteria thriving both in and out of our bodies [1]. Bacteria, viruses, fungi, protozoans, and many other life-forms are now all categorized as microbes. Remarkably, these various microorganisms have survived on Earth for hundreds of thousands of years, a precursor to humans [1]. Bacteria, viruses, fungus, arthropods, and protozoa all reside in our digestive tract, which harbors approximately 100 trillion microorganisms. The microbiome, which has now been deemed a virtual organ, controls human systems [2]. Incredibly, these microorganisms reside within our bodies before we are born, live in a symbiotic association with us until we die, and safeguard us all from the spectrum of ailments. In addition to metabolizing nutrients, the intestinal microbiota serves another important role in health [3].

Derived from empirical breakthroughs concerning diabetic foot ulcers (DFUs), it is indeed straightforward that all these wounds have a polymicrobial nature which ends up going far beyond identification capabilities of bacteria previously used by culture methods for chronic wounds [32]. As a matter of fact, there is a need to better understand existing therapeutic strategies to cure or prevent wounds, not just to safeguard patients and family members, but rather to protect the economic systems of healthcare systems around the world. The main objective of the review is and see if there are any variations in the skin microbiome of diabetics, as well as any representatives of a skin microbiome linked to diabetes-related chronic wounds. Probiotics are considered to be safe, but much more investigation is necessary to demonstrate safety precautions in immune-compromised individuals. Recent research on the gut-skin axis emphasized the significance of probiotics in gut microbiota, skin homeostasis, as well as wound healing [27]. Clinicians will face additional problems understanding, describing, and characterizing the wound microbiota from beginning to end. By holistically assessing the literature, this could contribute to the development of more effective and strategic therapies of microbial administration in existing medical therapeutics for diabetic wound healing in clinics and hospitals, such as probiotic topical creams and bacteriophage therapies for diabetic wound healing in upcoming years. This review attempts to provide a qualitative summary of how this field has nudged the boundaries of our understanding of the gut-skin axis and the influence of microbiota on health and disease, as well as what remains to be acknowledged in order to fully realize the prospects of microbiota-based therapies useful for treating diabetes foot ulcers.

Many studies mainly address the one primary condition in diabetic people that requires a significant amount of attention, called Diabetic Foot Ulcers (DFUs), which are common and one of the most severe complications of this disease. Diabetics are more likely to experience this problem due to its high frequency and impairment of the wound healing process; the lifetime risk of developing a foot ulcer for diabetics is estimated at 25% on average [33]. Nevertheless, peripheral neuropathy, peripheral arterial disease (PAD), and trauma are the most common factors associated with the development of foot ulceration. Furthermore, the appearance of impaired wound healing is the primary complication that results in the development of chronic wounds, which often lead to amputations. Diabetes is one of the most common causes of non-traumatic lower limb amputation, and 15–20% of all foot ulcers will ultimately require amputation [34]. Defects in microcirculation, which are often accompanied by peripheral neuropathy and peripheral arterial disease, contribute to the development of diabetic foot problems. In addition, several anatomical foot deformities, which impair loading across the plantar surface, have also been clinically associated with impaired wound healing of diabetic patients.

Regarding the pathogenic role of bacteria observed in patients with DFU, there are currently two main hypotheses [37]. The specific bacterial hypothesis proposed that only a few species of bacteria within the heterogeneous polymicrobial biofilm are involved in the overall infectious process. Conversely, the nonspecific bacteria hypothesis (or community hypothesis) that concludes the composition of bacteria observed in a biofilm as a whole to constitute a functional unit and does not examine the role of individual pathogenic bacteria alone. This concept has led to using the term ‘‘functionally equivalent pathogroups’’ (FEP) [38]. Finally, it proposes that certain bacterial species, which are usually non-pathogenic, or at best, are not capable of maintaining a chronic infection when present alone, may co-aggregate symbiotically in a pathogenic biofilm and act synergistically to exacerbate chronic infections [39].

Multiple research findings revealed that the gut microbiome performs a prominent role in several skin disorders. Not only is the skin microbiome altered, but also surprisingly many skin diseases are accompanied by an altered gut microbiome [21]. Several reports described the gut-skin axis, which shows the relationship between the gut microbiota and the skin. It is one of the most promising research areas currently targeting the microbiome of the skin, which plays a critical role in controlling the cutaneous processes critical to human health and disease [40]. Additionally, the overall constitution of various microbial communities observed on the skin primarily depends on the physiology of the different sites of our skin, with alteration in the relative abundance of bacterial taxa associated with moist, dry, and sebaceous microenvironments. It is profound that some of the lipophilic Propionibacterium species mainly influenced the sebaceous sites. Microbes that prefer moist, humid environments, such as Staphylococcus and Corynebacterium species, were more prevalent in areas that had a high moisture content, such as elbow bends and feet [41].

The theories underpinning how well the gut-skin axis functions are still being explored, though there are some concepts that have been recommended: (1) bacterial products as well as diet might very well modify the physiology of the intestinal epithelium, causing numerous secretory products which may circulate systemically to reach the skin; (2) neurotransmitters, hormones, and other biologically active chemicals derived from intestinal flora, including SCFAs, could function on receptor sites within the skin and it may effectively change the skin or alter the skin’s commensal microbes; and (3) ingested substances and chemicals, at first when absorbed, might indeed change the skin or alter the function [50].

The formation of an individual’s skin microbiota during the intrapartum period is now widely recognized. As a result, the mother’s mode of birth influences the skin’s overall microbial structure [51]. The microbiome is determined by that of the host genes, according to a recent metagenomic cross-talk study. The microbes construct a “holobiont” with the infant, which would be a combination of a host and microbial populations that imparts capacities to the hosts. This could represent an important role in the early life health [52]. In other words, some intestinal microbiota shapes and behaviors may be genetically linked in babies, and the microbiota, in turn, regulates host gene expression. The combination and association of the growing intestinal microbiota with host genetics could therefore play a significant role in newborn early stages of development in customized intervention of vulnerable infants. The microbiome shapes host genes, and indeed the microbiota, in turn, influences host gene expression, as per recent research [53].

The possible framework for this outcome is that a gut imbalance provokes T-cell stimulation while also interrupting immunosuppressive cytokines as well as regulatory T cells (T reg cells), which seem to be responsible for ensuring microbiota tolerance [67]. As a result, there really is a pattern of chronic inflammation in the gut and on the skin, which cannot be self-regulated by the standard immune reaction. The gut is identified as one of the most important immune organs, with one of the most complex immune compartments, gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT). Peyer’s patches that are made up of structured lymphocytes and thus are known as the primary inductive sites of mucosal immunity are also an important component of the GALT. Dendritic cells in Peyer’s patches synthesize and induce IL-10, causing T helper cells to divide and proliferate. Cytokines and primed immune cells may be transported from Peyer’s patches to the skin via circulation, where they modulate immunity and enhance the defense mechanism, potentially providing a link in the gut-skin communications [46,67].

The hunt to understand the mechanism involved in wound healing has been ongoing in recent years, and it is now well hypothesized that the wound healing, a very complex development process, is physiologic and observed in a state when the integrity of the skin is almost damaged. Consequently, the barrier function of the skin is also damaged. This phenomenon may appear quite often because the skin is frequently exposed to specific external insults. There is a need to avoid systemic infections that drive a rapid defense mechanism [68]. The normal status of the skin can fully recover through physiological healing. However, it is claimed that only about a maximum of 70% of previous tensile strength is usually achieved [69]. The patient with diabetes does not follow a typical pattern for wound healing like an average individual, which is the major problem. Usually, in non-diabetic status, the dynamic process of wound healing comprises four different phases: hemostasis, inflammation, proliferation, and remodeling [70]. In the initial stage of wound healing, there is the involvement of cell repair that consists of the platelet activation, aggregation, and adhesion to the damaged endothelium-this overall helps maintain the hemostasis. Upon initializing this mechanism, the fibrinogen becomes the fibrin that forms the thrombus and a temporary extracellular matrix (ECM). A few other cells, including activated platelets, neutrophils, and monocytes, release some proteins and various growth factors, such as platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) and transforming growth factor β (TGF-β), also participate [70]. In diabetes, hypercoagulability and a decrease in fibrinolysis are some of the observed changes in the hemostasis phase compared to normal subjects [71]. When an injury to the tissue occurs, initiation of the inflammatory process begins; neutrophils, macrophages, and mast produce various inflammatory cytokines, such as interleukin 1 (IL-1), interleukin 6 (IL-6), tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), and interferon-gamma (IFN-γ). Several growth factors, including platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), epidermal growth factor (EGF), and insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1), the primary fundamental in the wound repair process, are also produced during this sequential mechanism of wound healing [72,73]. However, in patients with diabetes, a disequilibrium of these cytokines leads to a modification of wound repair mechanism [74] and pattern of altered cytokine release shows a decrease in their functionality, contributing to the susceptibility to wound infection in diabetes patient [75]. During the phase of proliferation and migration, the level of inflammation is reduced. Various processes begin at the lesion site causing the wound contraction; angiogenesis restores the supply of oxygen; extracellular protein (ECM) proteins form, including the collagens, fibronectin, and vitronectin. All these components are essential for cell movement further in addition to keratinocytes migration-this sequential phenomenon is very important for the tissue to restore its integrity and functionality [76]. In hyperglycemic patients, migration of fibroblasts and keratinocytes and their proliferative capacity is diminished. Thus, overall, abnormal cell migration leading to a deficient re-epithelialization of the diabetic wound, which affects the healing process [72,77]. Moreover, it was reported that in diabetes patients, a decrease in angiogenesis causes a decrease in blood flow [78]. The last phase of wound healing is called the remodeling phase, where synthesis of more significant than degrading collagen occur and replacing the provisional extracellular matrix (ECM)-which was initially formed by fibrin and fibronectin. This granulation tissue becomes more mature scar tissue that increased the wound resistance and ended in the formation of a scar [79]. What happens in diabetes patients is the altered function of fibroblasts, which is responsible for contributing to the defective closure of the wound. Although the entire mechanism has not been deeply investigated, it is believed that they do not respond to the action of TGF-β, as well as the aberrant production of the ECM [80]. The overall mechanism of wound healing is depicted in Figure 1 [81].

Normal wound healing takes place as a basic biological system inside the human body through four precise and highly programmed stages, hemostasis, inflammation, proliferation, and remodeling. For any wound to recover fully, only those four phases should happen, and in the right order and time scale. Normal skin wounds heal in approximately one to two months. It is indeed a natural, biological, and sophisticated process that occurs after a tissue injury and tends to involve blood cells, connective tissue, parenchymal cells, ECM, as well as soluble mediators such as cytokines and growth factors communicating each other during the wound healing mechanism [82]. Microbial colonization occurs in any and all types of wounds e.g., acute well as chronic, and there is a break in epithelial barrier which characterizes a wound impairs the factors that influence and constrain the microbial community at that site. A wound is be associated with the physical interruption in the integrity of the epithelium as well as the subsequent host immune response to fix this break. Any breach in the epithelial barrier impedes the events that shaped and confine the intestinal microbiota at around that site. Destabilization of the epithelium diminishes mucus or lipid production, distorts anti-microbial peptide representation and stimulates inflammatory cascades. Because mucosal surfaces are exposed to the environment, wounds allow non-indigenous microbes to colonize the site while also changing the forces that stabilize indigenous microbial colonization [83]. Over the last few years, considerable evidence on the human microbiome already reinforced the hypothesis that the ecological microbial community in/on humans is crucial in the host for maintaining the homeostasis, and also any internally or externally factors that cause dysbiosis of the skin commensal microbiome in diabetes patients also may prompt the shambles of immunologic stabilization inside the skin and therefore would empower the onset of varying skin diseases [41]. Furthermore, under various physiological conditions in a healthy individual, the observed mechanism of cutaneous epidermal repair is highly efficient; however, when this process stalls due to various external and internal factors in the host, the function of tissue deteriorates to reclaim structural and functional integrity, resulting in the formation of chronic wounds [84]. It is preferable to stabilize signaling factors, which include growth for effective wound healing; however, down-regulation of such factors contributes to the pathophysiology of DFUs. Additional factors known to promote wound healing delay in diabetes involve macro- and microvascular, neuropathic, immune function, and microbiome disturbances [85].

Microbes can also have an adverse effect on the wound healing process. Specific bacteria, such as Staphylococcus aureus, have been linked to wound infections and complications. More specifically, known microbes such as Staphylococcus, Anaerococcus, Corynebacterium, Porphyromonas, and Streptococcus are abundant in the chronic wound microbiota. [93,94]. In addition to cutaneous microflora, intestinal microflora influences wound healing by directly or indirectly attempting to influence a variety of healing factors including tissue oxygenation levels, blood pressure, inflammation, and the immune system [93]. Despite the high oxygen levels in chronic wounds, anaerobes such as Fingelodia, Prevotella, Peptonipihlus, Peptostreptococcus, and Anaerococcus have emerged as major threats [95].

Amputations of lower limbs due to diabetic foot ulcers accounted for 40–70% of all non-traumatic amputations, according to research findings. Foot ulcers occur prior in approximately 85 percent of all amputations in diabetics. When the ulcer progresses to its most complicated form, treatment becomes more difficult; in many cases, diabetic patients must be admitted to hospital [96]. Surprisingly, one of the findings looked at a significant difference in the abundance of microbial communities in the healthy skin of the foot and forearm of 30 diabetic patients versus 30 healthy people. The results revealed a statistically significant change in the microbial community as well as skin diversity in diabetic forearms but not in non-diabetic’s forearms. The phylum Firmicutes is more prevalent in non-diabetic foot skin, whereas Actinobacteria, specifically the species Corynebacterium, is more abundant in diabetic foot skin and has been linked to higher Staphylococcus aureus carriage rates [97].

The Shotgun metagenomics analysis from the DFU patients showed S. aureus as the major Staphylococcus species and was dominated by a single strain, S. aureus 7372, from Staphylococcal species present in lesser abundance included the coagulase-negative species such as S. pettenkoferi, S. epidermidis, S. simulans, and S. lugdunensis. Corynebacterium striatum, a bacterium that has been associated with infection and multi-drug resistance [112], was the most prevalent Corynebacterium spp. classified in DFU and showed a positive correlation with ulcer duration, while C. jeikeium, C. amycolatum, C. pseudogenitalium, C. tuberculostearicum, and C. resistens were present in lesser abundances. Pseudomonas spp. were the third most abundant genera detected, with the most abundant species identified as P. aeruginosa followed by P. alcaliphila. P. aeruginosa that is a commonly known pathogen associated with DFU as it is frequently isolated by culture-based methods. Streptococcus was the fourth most abundant genera, with S. agalactiae, S. dysgalactiae, and S. anginosus present in patients with DFU [111]. Many experiments have been conducted in recent years by various groups of scientists to better understand the role of microbiota in the wounds of DFU patients. According to some studies, when biofilm occurs in DFU patients, the most abundant components observed are various species of Staphylococcus as well as some diverse anaerobes; some groups of scientists also reported the presence of Pseudomonas aeruginosa as prevalent in DFU patients. We summarized the observed microbes in the gut, skin, wounds, and DFU mentioned in the manuscript, in Table 1. Based on existing knowledge of wound microbiota in DFU patients, the higher or lower abundance of microbes such as various strains of Staphylococcus spp. with some other anaerobes mentioned above may enable clinicians and scientists to make a thorough diagnosis of individual wounds, which may lead to improved patient prognoses through the selection of optimal treatment strategies that could be used in hospitals. Figure 2 describes the altered microbiota in diabetic wound healing [111,113] and Figure 3 describes the observed microbiota involved in skin, wounds, and DFU.

Because probiotics are live microorganisms, they are non-pathogenic bacterial strains that have many beneficial effects, such as improvement of normal gastrointestinal microbiota in the host, particularly when consumed in required proportions [24]. Increased evidence that is associated with the use of probiotics in wound healing and infection in various diseases, including DFU, has emerged in recent years [24].

In this review, we discussed how probiotics, both orally and topically delivered, influence wound healing in DFU. Probiotics are known to aid in wound healing by stimulating the production of immune cells, and they also have antagonistic effects against pathogens via competitive exclusion of pathogens [124]. According to a recent publication [27], the skin and gut have different morphologies but share some physiological characteristics. Interactions between the gut and skin are centered on microbiota and metabolites secreted by them, which can interfere with biological processes regulating metabolism, immunity, inflammation, oxidative stress, and neuroendocrine function. The mechanism of action by which gut health affects skin health (from the inside out) is critical for defining cross-communication between the two compartments. The finding presented an essential aspect of gut microbiota, skin homeostasis, and skin wound healing with probiotics during the gut-skin axis.This discovery revealed an important aspect of gut microbiota, skin homeostasis, and skin wound healing with probiotics within the gut-skin axis. Based on the aforementioned studies, this review also supports the role of the gut-skin axis in wound healing in DFU. Therefore, based on the currently available literature, well-designed clinical trials, systematic review results, and various experimental findings, it would be ideal for clinical doctors and researchers to focus on clinical trials specifically targeting DFU patients to investigate the influence of probiotics on wound healing. It also necessitates understanding the role of beneficial bacterial strains in wound healing mechanisms, identifying the strain, determining the optimal dose, and determining the duration of perioperative supplementation. As a result, the use of these bacterial strain mixtures found in probiotics can be regarded as a challenging therapeutic approach for the treatment of diabetic wounds. Table 2 presents a summary of probiotics used in DFU treatment in last 10 years.

As the global population of diabetics expands, so does the incidence of chronic nonhealing wounds, putting a significant strain on physicians, the healthcare system, and society. The whole wound healing mechanism is intricate and well-coordinated, and if it is disturbed, it can be disastrous. The bacteria in a wound bed, when combined with many host variables, can stymie wound healing and result in delayed, chronic wounds. The wound microbiota is thought to remain a biofilm in chronic wounds, resistant to antibiotics and mechanical treatments.

Even with significant advances in microbiome research, it remains difficult; we need more and more studies to determine how the microbiome influences wound healing and vice versa. Ultimately, the goal is to use the knowledge gained of the skin microbiome to promote the healing of acute and chronic wounds in diabetes patients. Finally, the modifiable effects of the human gut microbiota on the development of metabolic syndrome make its manipulation a promising therapeutic approach. Furthermore, more detailed insights using a complementary method for bacterial identification and well-defined populations with diabetic foot ulcers in conjunction with standardized sampling methods may be a better option to understand bacterial diversity, which may provide new insights to redirect treatments in clinical practice to improve potential outcomes in the future. Furthermore, the microbiome is a therapeutic target that can be modified; a fundamental understanding of its components will reveal novel targets for managing and treating diabetic wounds. Based on the discussion in this review, additional clinical trials to confirm the potential benefits of probiotic treatment for managing chronic wound healing in diabetes should be conducted. The addition of probiotics to current therapeutics may improve wound healing, aid in recovery, and help suppress pathogen invasion by accelerating a higher volume of Pseudomonas spp. and Staphylococcus spp. in the skin microbiome, as any change in the skin commensal exhibited a significant impact on the cutaneous wound healing process. Furthermore, with its central role for microbiota, the gut-skin axis represents an exciting field of research with a wide range of therapeutic applications, including diabetes wound healing. Moreover, an in-depth understanding of the complex mechanism for the gut–skin axis is required, as well as a unified methodological approach to resolve wound healing in DFU patients. In addition, a recent study published by Tembhre et al., 2022 supported the idea that probiotics are beneficial in the mechanism of wound healing.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

