The Gut Microbiome, Aging, and Longevity: A Systematic Review

Aging is determined by complex interactions among genetic and environmental factors. Increasing evidence suggests that the gut microbiome lies at the core of many age-associated changes, including immune system dysregulation and susceptibility to diseases. The gut microbiota undergoes extensive changes across the lifespan, and age-related processes may influence the gut microbiota and its related metabolic alterations. The aim of this systematic review was to summarize the current literature on aging-associated alterations in diversity, composition, and functional features of the gut microbiota. We identified 27 empirical human studies of normal and successful aging suitable for inclusion. Alpha diversity of microbial taxa, functional pathways, and metabolites was higher in older adults, particularly among the oldest-old adults, compared to younger individuals. Beta diversity distances significantly differed across various developmental stages and were different even between oldest-old and younger-old adults. Differences in taxonomic composition and functional potential varied across studies, but Akkermansia was most consistently reported to be relatively more abundant with aging, whereas Faecalibacterium, Bacteroidaceae, and Lachnospiraceae were relatively reduced. Older adults have reduced pathways related to carbohydrate metabolism and amino acid synthesis; however, oldest-old adults exhibited functional differences that distinguished their microbiota from that of young-old adults, such as greater potential for short-chain fatty acid production and increased butyrate derivatives. Although a definitive interpretation is limited by the cross-sectional design of published reports, we integrated findings of microbial composition and downstream functional pathways and metabolites, offering possible explanations regarding age-related processes.

Aging refers to the process of becoming older, a process that is genetically determined and environmentally modulated [1]. It involves changes in dynamics of biological, environmental, behavioral, and social processes. Primary cellular and molecular hallmarks of aging include genomic instability, telomere attrition, epigenetic alterations, and loss of proteostasis, which lead to compensatory mechanisms such as deregulated nutrient sensing, mitochondrial dysfunction, and cellular senescence; ultimately, these lead to stem cell exhaustion and altered intercellular communication that are responsible for functional decline associated with aging [2]. The rapid development of next-generation sequencing technologies can help unravel the biological and genetic mechanisms of aging and age-related diseases. There is increasing evidence that the gut microbiome lies at the core of many age-associated changes and plays a role in longevity across species [3,4]. Aging has physiological effects on both the host and the microbiome, and host–microbiota interactions may impact aging as a unit [4]. The microbiome is a principal factor in determining the immune system response and its dysregulation may sustain pro-inflammatory states [5]. The progression of aging involves a gradual weakening of the immune system, resulting in an imbalance between pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory activity [6]. Age-related changes in pro-inflammatory status result in low-level systemic inflammation (“inflammaging”) that increases the propensity for chronic diseases and disabilities, including cardiovascular disease, cognitive decline, metabolic disease, frailty, and mortality [7,8]. Furthermore, gut microbes can communicate with the brain and modulate behavior, including higher-order cognitive functions, via the “gut–brain axis” through neural, immune, and hormonal mediators [9]. Together, the microbiome offers an exciting perspective to understanding both physical and cognitive aspects of aging.

Unlike numerous published reviews of the microbiome in aging-associated conditions and diseases [12,13,14,15], this investigation focused on aging per se. Additionally, while a number of narrative reviews have been written on the role of the microbiome in aging, including centenarians [16,17,18], no article to our knowledge has systematically reviewed all the available studies of the gut microbiome, including the metabolome, in human normal and successful aging populations. The issue of gut microbiome changes in aging is most aptly addressed through longitudinal studies. However, in our search of the literature, we did not find any longitudinal investigations of the gut microbiome in aging, which is a major limitation of the current literature. Of concern, it is difficult to separate cohort from within-subject effects. Nevertheless, we summarize the current knowledge of the gut microbiome in aging—not only in terms of understanding the composition, function, and metabolic products of the microbiota of older adults and extremely long-lived individuals, but also from the perspective of aging across the lifespan—while acknowledging the limitations of the current literature. Additionally, this study is unique in that we synthesized associations between the gut microbiota and clinical factors, including cognition and living environment, and included studies of interventions targeting the gut microbiome in aging populations.

We performed a search of PubMed, PsycINFO, and Embase for articles published before 13 December 2019 using the following search string: (microbiome OR metabolome) AND (gut OR fecal OR intestinal OR gastrointestinal) AND (“older adults” OR aging OR lifespan) AND (“healthy” OR “no disease”) AND (“humans” OR “clinical population”). See Appendix A for specific search queries. We examined titles and abstracts of all returned citations and reviewed selected full-text articles based upon our inclusion/exclusion criteria.

Studies were selected if they met the following criteria: (1) utilized high-throughput sequencing methods to quantify microorganisms and/or their functional pathways in the gut or distal large intestine, (2) included a human aging sample, (3) reported results of age analyses (e.g., compared findings between an older group with a younger comparison group; examined an age relationship between the microbiota and other clinical factors within an older adult group), and (4) were published in English. Studies using liquid chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis to identify gut metabolites were also considered. Aging samples were defined as those that included subjects older than age 65 and were not focused on a specific disease. While the inclusion criteria for participants across individual studies varied, a majority of investigations excluded subjects with major medical co-morbidities (18 out of 27) and recent antibiotic use (15 out of 27). We excluded review papers, meta-analyses, abstracts or conference proceedings, articles with duplicate data, case reports, and studies exclusively using animal models or other non-gut microbiome biomarkers (e.g., saliva, blood).

Figure 1 depicts the PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses) flow chart for inclusion of studies in this systematic review. Our database search yielded a total of 205 articles, after duplicates and non-English reports were removed. The titles and abstracts of the remaining articles were screened based on inclusion/exclusion criteria, and 29 full-text studies were further reviewed for eligibility. Of these, 24 met the above-mentioned criteria, in addition to three articles found through review of the references cited. In total, 27 studies were included in this review.

We assessed the relevance of gut microbiota composition to the phenomenon of aging and found the studies fell into four categories with broad focus on: (A) the gut microbiota composition of extremely long-lived individuals (e.g., nonagenarians and centenarians), (B) changes and transition in gut microbiota that accompany aging across the lifespan, (C) relationship of the gut microbiota to cognition in older adults, and (D) changes to the gut microbiota following interventions targeting the microbiome in older adults. A summary of relevant data from reviewed studies is presented in Table 1. Detailed sample and methodology characteristics for each study are provided in supplementary Table S1 and S2, and detailed results are provided in supplementary Table S3A–D.

Abbreviations used: ADT: adult; BCFA: branched chain fatty acids; CK: control group; CFA: cellular fatty acids; CHD: children; CTN: centenarian group; GF: gene family; KO: Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) orthology; LC-MS: liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry analysis; LL: long-living, oldest-old adults; N/A: not available or applicable; NHYO: non-healthy younger-old adult; OTU: operational taxonomic unit; PCR: polymerase chain reaction; PCR-DGGE: polymerase chain reaction- denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis; PD: phylogenetic diversity; R: rural; rDNA: ribosomal deoxyribonucleic acid; rRNA: ribosomal ribonucleic acid; SCTN: semi-supercentenarians; SCFA: short-chain fatty acid; U: urban; V: variable region of 16S rRNA; qPCR: quantitative polymerase chain; YO: young-old adult.

The microbiota can be quantified using different metrics. Below, we report findings for global community diversity, including alpha diversity and beta diversity. A summary of age-related findings for each gut microbiota metric across different categories of studies is presented in Table 2. Alpha diversity is a measure of the within-sample diversity of a community, often described in terms of the number (i.e., richness) or distribution (i.e., evenness) of organisms in a sample. It is commonly observed that low alpha diversity is suggestive of a dysbiotic gut microbiome [46,47,48,49,50]. Beta diversity is a measure of the between-sample differences of pairs of communities. It is worth noting that different measures of alpha and beta diversity may yield different results, and we have detailed the measures used in each study and summarized specific results in supplementary Tables S2 and S3. Next, we discuss findings of differentially abundant taxa and specific taxonomic compositions associated with aging. Finally, we present data on functional elements, such as genes, associated pathways, and inferred functional potential, and metabolomic signatures.

Data reported as: number of studies that reported results related to age or aging/number of studies that reported any results on the specific metric. Abbreviations used: ADT: adult; BCFA: branched chain fatty acids; KEGG: Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes; LL: long-living, oldest-old adults; OTU: operational taxonomic unit; PD: phylogenetic diversity; SCFA: short-chain fatty acids; YO: young-old adults.

Thirteen studies reported findings of alpha diversity for microbial taxa.

There were no differences in alpha diversity following probiotic or prebiotic supplementation in older adults [42,44].

Thirteen studies analyzed beta diversity.

Two studies examined beta diversity, and neither observed differences as a result of probiotic or prebiotic supplementation [42,44].

Twenty-five studies examined taxonomic composition of the gut microbiota.

Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus were the most commonly administered bacteria in studies of probiotic and synbiotic supplementation in older adults [43,44,45]. Older adults who received supplementation of these strains showed resultant increases in Bifidobacterium, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, Lactobacillus spp., and Lactobacillus acidophilus, and a decrease in Escherichia coli, compared to the placebo group. With regard to dietary intervention, abundances of Clostridium cluster IV and Bifidobacterium were not altered following 8 weeks on the RISTOMED optimized diet intervention either alone or in combination with a probiotic supplement [45]. However, subgroup analysis revealed that individuals with low-grade inflammation showed an increase in Bifidobacterium following the dietary intervention with adjunctive probiotics. Prebiotic supplementation with pectin did not significantly change gut microbial taxa in either young or older adults [42].

Twelve studies examined functional pathways and metabolites of the gut microbiota.

Prebiotic supplementation with pectin did not alter fecal metabolite levels of SCFA or branched chain fatty acids [42]. Change in Bifidobacterium was positively associated with changes in plasma folate and vitamin B12 concentration among older adults with low-grade inflammation, following intervention of both diet only and diet with a probiotic, but not in those without inflammation [45].

To our knowledge, this is the first systematic review of the gut microbiome and metabolome in human aging and longevity. Our study is unique in that we compiled data from across a wide range of studies: studies of long-lived individuals, cross-sectional lifespan studies, and studies focused on cognition and interventions in older adults. Results of the present review found that alpha diversity is higher with aging among normal and successfully aging older adults. No study reported a negative association of alpha diversity with age. Beta diversity distances were significantly different between older adults and younger adults, even between the oldest-old and younger-old adults. Although differences in taxonomic composition and functional potential varied across studies, Akkermansia was most consistently reported to be relatively more abundant with aging, whereas Faecalibacterium, Bacteroidaceae, and Lachnospiraceae were relatively reduced, particularly among oldest-old adults. Older adults have reduced pathways related to carbohydrate metabolism and amino acid synthesis, compared to younger adults. However, oldest-old adults showed some functional differences that distinguished their microbiota from that of young-old adults, such as increased SCFA production and pathways related to central metabolism, cellular respiration, and vitamin synthesis.

The dynamic and modifiable nature of the gut microbiome presents exciting opportunities for therapeutic interventions to address health challenges related to aging. Probiotics (live microorganisms) and prebiotics (nondigestible food components that are selectively fermented by intestinal bacteria) have been shown to confer benefits for a variety of health conditions [86]. This review identified several studies investigating changes in the gut diversity and composition following treatment or intervention targeting the microbiome. None of the studies reported significant differences in alpha or beta diversity following probiotic, prebiotic, or synbiotic (probiotic–prebiotic combination) treatments in older adults. Despite a lack of broad-scale compositional changes, supplementation did lead to increases in health-promoting lactic acid bacteria (e.g., Bifidobacterium, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, Lactobacillus spp.). One study investigated the effect of treatments on SCFA metabolites, and did not observe any significant changes following prebiotic supplementation. It is possible that combining prebiotics and probiotics [43] or diet and probiotics [45] may bring about more robust changes than either treatment alone [42,45]. One study investigated the gut microbial effects of a dietary intervention with adjunctive probiotic treatment and found increased levels of Bifidobacterium among individuals with higher levels of systemic inflammation [45]. It is worth noting that the Mediterranean diet (e.g., high consumption of vegetables, legumes, fruits, nuts, olive oil, and fish; low consumption of red meat, dairy products, saturated fats, and processed foods) has been associated with improved health status, including reduced risk of mortality and occurrence of diseases of aging such as cardiovascular disease, cancer, and neurodegenerative disorders [87]. Prior studies have shown that intervention of and adherence to the Mediterranean diet is associated with lower Firmicutes–Bacteroidetes ratio, increased abundances of Christensenellaceae and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, increased gene richness (particularly in those with low inflammatory status), and higher levels of gut SCFA in the general adult population [88,89]. Future studies should investigate the effects of the Mediterranean diet in older adults.

Overall, these findings suggest that longevity may be characterized by increased flexibility and stability of the gut microbiota. Moreover, a particular hallmark of successful aging may be a balance amongst core microbiota as well as a balance between pro- and anti-inflammatory activity. Indeed, what might make the oldest-old adults unique is the ability to maintain (or possibly upregulate) anti-inflammatory activity despite a concomitant uptick of pro-inflammatory activity that occurs in all older adults. The hypothesis is supported by the observed increases in health-promoting taxa and SCFA production. Lastly, a combination of genetic and environmental factors, such as dietary habits, may shape the gut microbiota of older adults. Future prospective longitudinal studies are needed to understand causal relationships between the gut microbiome and aging and longevity. Given the variability among samples and power needed for high-throughput sequencing analyses, investigations involving larger sample sizes are needed. Larger samples will also allow for more complex models that can account for important demographic, lifestyle, and biological factors that might impact microbial composition and health in older adults. Finally, there is an important need for closer collaborations among researchers in the microbiome and aging fields to design innovative studies that leverage knowledge in cutting-edge analytical and computational technologies, in addition to clinical expertise, in understanding the nuances of aging.

((“microbiota”[MeSH Terms] OR “microbiota”[All Fields] OR “microbiome”[All Fields]) OR (“metabolome”[MeSH Terms] OR “metabolome”[All Fields])) AND ((“Gut”[Journal] OR “gut”[All Fields]) OR (“feces”[MeSH Terms] OR “feces”[All Fields] OR “fecal”[All Fields]) OR (“intestines”[MeSH Terms] OR “intestines”[All Fields] OR “intestinal”[All Fields]) OR gastrointestinal[All Fields]) AND (“older adults”[All Fields] OR (“aging”[MeSH Terms] OR “aging”[All Fields]) OR (“longevity”[MeSH Terms] OR “longevity”[All Fields] OR “lifespan”[All Fields])) AND (“healthy”[All Fields] OR “no disease”[All Fields]) AND (“humans”[All Fields] OR “clinical population”[All Fields])

(Microbiome OR Metabolome) AND (gut OR fecal OR intestinal OR gastrointestinal) AND (“older adults” OR aging OR lifespan) AND (“healthy” OR “no disease”) AND (“humans” OR “clinical population”)

(′microbiome′/exp OR microbiome OR ′metabolome′/exp OR metabolome) AND (′gut′/exp OR gut OR fecal OR intestinal OR gastrointestinal) AND (′older adults′/exp OR ′older adults′ OR ′aging′/exp OR aging OR ′lifespan′/exp OR lifespan) AND (′healthy′ OR ′no disease′) AND (′humans′/exp OR ′humans′ OR ′clinical population′).

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

