Human Gut Microbiome and Liver Diseases: From Correlation to Causation

The important role of human gut microbiota in liver diseases has long been recognized as dysbiosis and the translocation of certain microbes from the gut to liver. With the development of high-throughput DNA sequencing, the complexity and integrity of the gut microbiome in the whole spectrum of liver diseases is emerging. Specific patterns of gut microbiota have been identified in liver diseases with different causes, including alcoholic, non-alcoholic, and virus induced liver diseases, or even at different stages, ranging from steatohepatitis, fibrosis, cirrhosis, to hepatocellular carcinoma. At the same time, the mechanism of how microbiota contributes to liver diseases goes beyond the traditional function of the gut–liver axis which could lead to liver injury and inflammation. With the application of proteomics, metabolomics, and modern molecular technologies, more microbial metabolites and the complicated interaction of microbiota with host immunity come into our understanding in the liver pathogenesis. Germ-free animal models serve as a workhorse to test the function of microbiota and their derivatives in liver disease models. Here, we review the current evidence on the relationship between gut microbiota and liver diseases, and the mechanisms underlying this phenotype. In addition to original liver diseases, gut microbiota might also affect liver injury in systemic disorders involving multiple organs, as in the case of COVID-19 at a severe state. A better understanding of the gut microbial contribution to liver diseases might help us better benefit from this guest–host relationship and pave the way for novel therapies.

Human gut microbiota contains trillions of microbes, contributing to human health and diseases through various routes of mechanism. Recent studies have discovered a myriad of novel functions of gut microbiota linking gut to liver [1,2,3]. With the advancement of high-throughput sequencing, including metagenomics, metatranscriptomics, metabolomics, proteomics, and culturomics, such ever-changing technologies usher the revelation of the tremendously diverse microbiome in humans, in both the intestines and extra-intestinal organs communicating with the gut (Figure 1). Human studies have demonstrated compositional alterations of microbiota in diseases versus health, including those intensively studied in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), colon cancer, diabetes, and relatively less in liver diseases [4]. However, substantial efforts have been made to unravel the association versus causal relationship between microbiota and disease pathogenesis. In this review, we center on the recent advance in our perception of how gut microbiota contributes to chronic liver disease.

Remarkable advances in the understanding of microbiota and liver diseases have been made over the past decades. Building on cutting-edge technologies, we anticipate that our understanding of host-microbial interaction will continue to increase within the coming years. Meanwhile, the advancement in microbial-related diagnostics and therapeutics is envisioned for probing and treating liver diseases [15,16,17]. Herein, we firstly review major clinical and pre-clinical studies to tease the relation between the gut microbiota and various liver diseases. We then explore the evidence for the underlying mechanism of action of the gut microbiota on hepatic function, from two major perspectives, immune calibration and metabolic regulation.

NAFLD consists of a wide spectrum of liver diseases, ranging from steatosis to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), liver fibrosis, and cirrhosis. The pathological process of NASH has been firstly proposed to be the result of “two hits”, which are represented by hepatic steatosis and lipid peroxidation [18]. This theory later evolved into “multiple hits”, comprising signals derived from the gut or the adipose tissue, such as endotoxin, adiponectin, IL-6, and TNFα [19]. Besides dietary and genetic factors, the gut microbiota has been demonstrated as an important novel factor in disease pathogenesis, involving in all aspects of the “multiple hits” [19,20].

Harnessing germ-free (GF) animal models, evidence is accumulating to show a causal effect of microbiota in the pathogenesis of metabolic diseases. Germ-free mice were protected against high fat diet (HFD) induced obesity, and conventionalization of GF mice leads to an increase in body-fat content and insulin resistance [35,36]. Later analysis found obese microbiome could increase energy harvest from the diet. This trait is transmissible through the colonization of germ-free mice with gut microbiota from obese mice (ob/ob mice) [37,38]. Moreover, gut microbiome composition can affect mouse response to HFD, manifested by changes in blood glucose levels and plasma concentrations of pro-inflammatory cytokines. Transplantation of microbiota from HFD mice who have hyperglycemia and higher levels of systemic inflammation can induce the same phenotype in recipient mice [39]. Fecal microbiome from patients with hepatic steatosis could also trigger steatosis in recipient mice [10], which further reinforces the significance of microbiota in the pathogenesis of NAFLD.

Alcohol has been well demonstrated to be a hepatotoxin, and alcoholic liver disease remains the most prevalent type of chronic liver disease worldwide [45]. The pathogenesis of ALD includes the toxicity of acetaldehyde, hepatic steatosis, and inflammation. Other factors, both genetic and non-genetic, contribute to interindividual variations in disease development. Among them, the gut microbiota plays a critical role in alcohol-induced liver damage. Alcohol abuse leads to bacterial overgrowth, dysbiosis, and gut barrier dysfunction. The subsequent translocation of bacterial products through portal vein stimulates inflammation and metabolic disorders in the liver [46].

Further analysis discovered a negative association between alcohol feeding and the expression of certain bactericidal protein in the host, which can be partially reversed by prebiotics treatment. Other manipulations, such as pectin treatment, and fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT), have been shown to be able to prevent alcohol-induced liver injury in mouse models [15]. A similar protective function of microbiota has been observed in ALD patients treated with probiotics and fecal transplantation, which leads to improved liver enzyme levels and better clinical outcomes [58,59]. Oral supplementation of Akkermansia muciniphila, which was found to be diminished by ethanol exposure both in mice and humans, can ameliorate experimental ALD and promote intestinal barrier integrity [60]. However, larger clinical studies across different populations with complete evaluation of benefits versus risks are needed before fecal transplantation or other therapeutic regimes built upon manipulation of the gut microbiota can be considered a routine clinical practice in the treatment of ALD.

Cirrhosis is the end stage of chronic liver disease, which is characterized by the formation of nodules of regenerative parenchyma, often accompanied by portosystemic shunts. Cirrhosis results from different etiologies, covering all the chronic liver diseases mentioned above, with significant differences between regions, genders, and socioeconomic status [5].

Commonly used liver cirrhosis/fibrosis mouse models include chemical-based models, which is induced by carbon tetrachloride, thioacetamide or ethanol, diet-based models, mostly methionine-deficient and choline-deficient diet, and surgery-based models, as the common bile duct ligation [62]. Although differences exist between the cause of liver cirrhosis in human and in mouse models, significant change in the gut microbiome were observed in nearly each model [63]. The underlying mechanism of how microbiota effect liver cirrhosis has also been explored by using animal models, which include regulation of gut permeability to release bacterial products and regulation of liver metabolism [64]. However, with the large differences between intestinal microbiota in mice and humans [65], to translate the knowledge gained from mouse studies to human should be very careful [66].

The development of liver cancer is a multi-step process, involving factors including genetics, environmental factors, metabolism, and the immune system. Alterations in the microbiota have been reported to contribute to the development of cancer and modulate the efficacy of cancer therapy [67].

In addition to the accumulating evidence suggestive of the relation between microbiota and cancer development, the potential role of microbiota in anticancer therapy has been studied [71,72]. In melanoma patients, higher gut microbiome diversity and a relative higher abundance of Ruminococcaceae are related with better response to anti-PD-1 immunotherapy [71]. Further study by transplantation (FMT) of stool from responders to anti-PD-1 therapy to germ-free mice showed reduced tumor growth and more importantly, improved responses to anti-PD-1 therapy [71]. In tumor-bearing mice, gut microbiota has been shown to shape the antitumor immune response through translocation into secondary lymphoid organs and thereby stimulating T helper cells [72]. However, no study directly tested the effect of modulating gut microbiota in the treatment of HCC. Targeting the gut–microbiota–liver axis represents an attractive therapeutic option for HCC treatment [73].

Besides fecal microbiota, microbiota from other origins have also been implicated in liver disease, including those from the saliva [74], colonic mucosa [75], sigmoid mucosa [76], and the small intestine [77]. Moreover, evidence suggests that other components of the gut microbiota, including fungi, archaea, and viruses, might play a role in the disease process [78]. Fungal dysbiosis has been illustrated in patients with liver cirrhosis [79]. After antibiotics treatment, fungal diversity was decreased, concomitant with higher prevalence of Candida [79]. A decrease of fungal diversity was also found in alcoholic patients. Overgrowth of Candida was discovered in different stages of alcoholic liver disease, including alcoholic hepatitis and cirrhosis patients [80]. Viruses represent another important collection of microorganisms residing in the gut of humans. Histological severity of NAFLD was associated with a decrease in gut virome diversity [81]. Although high inter-individual variations were found in gut virome composition, several Lactococcus phages were found to be decreased in patients with more severe NAFLD [81]. However, an increased fecal virome diversity accompanied by a decreased bacteria diversity was found in patients with alcohol-associated liver disease compared with controls [82]. Others reported only a modest link between fecal phages and liver cirrhosis characteristics [83]. The difference in the change of virome diversity across studies might result from the different types of liver diseases or from different analytical methods. In addition, the gut virome can influence host through interactions with bacteria. When interrogating the phage-bacterial correlations in patients with liver cirrhosis, a higher network complexity was found in controls in contrast to a lower one in cirrhotic patients [83]. Furthermore, a potential therapeutic effect of bacteriophages was shown in ALD [84]. The study showed a correlation between the presence of cytolytic E. faecalis and clinical severity of ALD. Then, a therapeutic effect of bacteriophages specifically targeting this bacterium was found in humanized mice colonized with bacteria from ALD patients [84]. However, the involvement and mechanism of gut virome in conjunction with bacteriome in liver disease warrant further investigation.

In addition to live microorganisms, fractions and extracts from bacteria, which are recently recognized as ‘postbiotics’, have been reported to profoundly affect host health [85]. The newest member of the biotics family, postbiotics, refers to bioactive compounds produced by food-grade microorganisms. Although the mechanisms involved in postbiotics bioactivity have not been fully understood, studies have reported various functions of postbiotics, including anti-inflammatory, antihypertensive and antioxidant activity [86,87,88]. For example, Benjamin at al found that whole-cell lysates of the non-commensal bacterium Methylococcus capsulatus Bath could improve glucose regulation, diminish hepatic immune infiltration, and change the gut microbiome composition in diet-induced obese mice [89]. Several properties of postbiotics, including their clear chemical structures, stability, and safety dose parameters grant them the potential to become the new generation of health products [90,91]. Although postbiotics is an attractive strategy in the therapeutics of liver diseases, further studies into its mechanism and efficacy are still needed.

The relationship between dysbiosis of gut microbiome and various liver diseases has been demonstrated in both clinical and preclinical studies. Understanding the mechanism underlying how gut-liver axis functions in relation to liver disease has also been the focus of numerous research studies [1]. Such studies highlight therapeutic approaches of modulating microbiota to treat liver diseases. Although different microbes may contribute to certain types or stages of liver diseases, several common pathways had been discovered. Nutrients and metabolites derived from commensal gut bacterial reach the liver through the portal vein, which can affect hepatocytes metabolism and cause liver damage [1,2,92]. Bacterial and bacterial-derived products, such as lipopolysaccharides, have been implicated in the development of local and systemic immunity, and contribute to liver diseases by interrupting the gut barrier and stimulating liver inflammation [93,94,95,96]. Here we summarize the current knowledge of how gut microbiome affect liver diseases in two aspects, metabolism and immunity (Figure 2). More importantly, bacterial derived metabolites act as crucial modulators of both innate and adaptive immunity [11,97,98]. The microbial metabolites or components implicated in liver diseases are summarized in Table 2.

Gut microbiota are closely associated with bile acids synthesis and metabolism in the host, contributing to liver diseases by modulating the pool and functionality of bile acids (BAs), while the microbial composition could also be modulated by bile acids.

Bile acids can affect host metabolism through acting as ligands for a variety of transcription factors, the alteration of which involves in metabolic and hepatic disease, including the FXR, LXR, the TGR5, and the vitamin D receptor [92]. Also, these functions of bile acids are closely related with gut microbiota functionality [92]. The gut microbiota promotes FXR signaling in mice through deconjugating TβMCA [99], a natural antagonist of FXR. The gut microbiota is also necessary for producing secondary bile acids which are ligands for TGR5 [119]. Both FXR and TGR5 act as modulators of various components in glucose, lipid and energy metabolisms. Intrahepatic retention of hydrophobic BAs was increased in a NASH-HCC mouse model, which were closely associated with gut microbiota alterations [120]. Obesity related alterations of gut microbiota increased the levels of DCA in mice. The enterohepatic circulation of DCA was implicated in the development of obesity-associated hepatocellular carcinoma, through provoking senescence-associated secretory phenotype in hepatic stellate cells in mice [70]. DCA and LCA have also been demonstrated as a carcinogen in colon cancer both in mouse models and cell lines [121,122,123]. In contrast, ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) protects against colon cancer [124]. Moreover, bile acid could largely affect the composition of gut microbiota. Biliary obstruction leads to bacterial overgrowth and translocation of Gram-negative aerobic population, which may perpetuate systemic sepsis [125]. Data also suggest that dysbiosis in cirrhotic patients might be partially due to low bile acid input [126]. In summary, change in microbiota can affect liver disease through the regulation of bile acid metabolism.

Short Chain Fatty Acids (SCFAs), including acetic, propionic, and butyric acid, are produced by intestinal microbiota through fermentation of undigested carbohydrates. These SCFAs affect host immunity and metabolism in various ways [127]. Gut microbiome, which consume dietary carbohydrate, affect synthesis of SCFAs and contribute to liver homeostasis [128].

Butyrate is an energy source for enterocytes and plays central metabolic roles in maintaining the function of the intestinal barrier [129,130]. A reduction in butyrate is associated with decrease of intestinal tight junction and increased permeability [131]. Supplementation of tributyrin, a glycerol ester of butyrate, reduced intestinal permeability and ameliorated liver injury in an alcohol-induced liver disease mouse model [131]. Besides, studies found that SCFAs can regulate energy harvest and expenditure in the liver, peripheral adipose tissue and muscle [103,132,133]. Previous data found an association between obesity and enrichment of genes involved in carbohydrate fermentation [134]. In contrast, several animal studies found that oral administration of SCFAs reduced body weight in obese mice, mainly through increasing energy expenditure [103,135]. In humans, an increased content of butyrate-producing bacteria was found in recipients with metabolic syndrome receiving intestinal microbiota transplantation from lean donors [136]. And this increase of butyrate-producing bacteria is associated with an improve in insulin sensitivity. The mechanism of how SCFAs regulate energy harvest could be related to the G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) of gut enteroendocrine L cells. Activation of these receptors could contribute to the secretion of satiety hormones PYY and GLP-1 [137]. However, the delay in gut transit might also enable increased nutrient absorption. Thus, further human studies on the metabolic function of SCFA producing bacteria should be performed.

Alcohol is absorbed by stomach and small intestine and reaches the liver via the portal vein. Alcohol and its metabolites cause damage to hepatocytes through generation of free radicals, especially reactive oxygen species (ROS). Besides the direct effect on the liver, ethanol and its metabolites also destroy tight junction of intestine cell wall [138]. Intestinal microbiome has been discovered to mediate the increase in intestinal permeability and liver damage induced by ethanol.

In addition to oral consumption, ethanol can also be derived from carbohydrates fermentation by gut microbiota [144]. Similarities of histological features exists between alcoholic and non-alcoholic fatty liver diseases, which suggest that certain common pathogenic processes underpin these two liver disease types. Patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease are discovered to have increased luminal and circulation levels of ethanol, with an increase in proteobacteria, which produce alcohol [29]. This provides evidence for non-dietary ethanol produced by intestinal bacteria in the pathogenesis of NASH. Similarly, modest increase in breath ethanol were detected in obese patients compared with lean controls with biopsy proven NASH, who have not drunk alcohol recently [145]. Ob/ob mice that have developed NASH was discovered to have higher early-morning breath alcohol content compared with lean mice [146].

Choline is an essential nutrient, which is important for cell structure and neurotransmitter synthesis [147]. Mice feed a choline-deficient diet for 4 weeks can induce a NASH-like syndrome and thus be used to model human NASH [148,149]. Choline deficiency has also been correlated with fatty liver in human studies [33,108]. In the liver, choline is metabolized into phosphatidylcholine. Phosphatidylcholine assist the synthesis and excretion of VLDL, and its deficiency leads to hepatic accumulation of triglycerides [107]. In addition, choline can also be processed to trimethylamine (TMA) by intestinal bacteria, which are absorbed through the microvilli and circulated via the portal vein to the liver [150]. In the absence of microbiota, as in germ-free mice and antibiotic-pretreated animals, the amount of urinary TMA was greatly reduced, suggesting an important role for the gut microbiota in choline metabolism [151]. TMA is then converted to trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO) [152]. An adverse association was found between the plasma TMAO level and the severity of NAFLD in hospital and community-based adults [108]. Besides, increased TMAO was correlated with cardiovascular events both in human and mice [24,153]. Altered intestinal microbiota could stimulate hepatic fat deposition and contribute to liver injury through modulation of dietary choline metabolism [154].

In 129S6 mice, which is susceptible to metabolic diseases, choline metabolism was found as a cause for its disease susceptibility [155]. The bioavailability of choline was reduced in this murine strain as a result of the conversion of choline into methylamines by microbiota. The decrease of circulating plasma choline levels created a phenotype similar to that caused by choline-deficient diets, suggesting an active role of choline metabolism by microbiota in the development of NAFLD [155]. On the other hand, gut microbiota also changed in response to choline deficiency. In individuals fed a choline depletion diet, higher levels of fat accumulation in the liver were associated with the increased levels of Gammaproteobacteria and Erysipelotrichi in the gut, underscoring the role of microbiota in metabolic disorders [33].

Commensal microorganism intestinal colonization is influenced by maternal transfer, mode of delivery, contact and diet [96]. An adult-like intestinal microbiota is established by three years of age and maintained a relatively stable state [156]. However, microbiome can be disturbed in disease states or with administration of antibiotics and medications [157,158,159]. The gut microbiota is involved in the development of local mucosal immunity and regulation of systemic immunity [95,160,161].

Lack of commensal bacteria also increase host susceptibility to allergic disease through increasing serum IgE and circulating basophil populations [160]. In addition, a single commensal bacterial species, segmented filamentous bacteria, can drive autoimmune arthritis in germ free animals partially through inducing autoantibodies production [176]. These evidence show the ability of microbiota to shape the global immune system and modulate the host susceptibility to inflammation and infection.

Microorganisms and their metabolic products are implicated in the homeostasis of the innate immune system and can also be regulated by the host responses [177].

In addition to epithelial cells, microbiota and their metabolites also interact with innate lymphoid cells and other non-classical lymphocytes. First, innate lymphoid cells are a newly discovered arm of the innate immune system, which play critical roles in mucosal immunity [183]. Genome-wide chromatin and transcriptional profiling combined with single-cell transcriptomic analysis described a comprehensive map of ILCs subsets in the intestine and found a critical impact of microbiota on the gene expression of ILCs, which is involved in the cell fate determination [183]. Again, metabolites from the microbiota have been found to regulate ILCs function. Zelante et al. discovered that tryptophan metabolites can induce IL-22 production of ILCs, which in turn regulates the survival of microbial communities, providing resistance to fungus infection [98]. Next, liver-resident γδT cells were identified and demonstrated to be a connection between microbiota and hepatic immune response. Hepatic γδT cells can be activated by microbiota lipid antigens and produce proinflammatory cytokine IL-17A [184]. Finally, NKT cells are enriched in the liver and lies in the middle of the interactions between microbiota and hepatic immunosurveillance. Primary bile acid can increase CXCL16 expression in liver sinusoidal endothelial cells, which induce NKT cell accumulation and decrease liver tumor growth. Colonization of bile acid-metabolizing bacteria reversed both the NKT cell accumulation and its effect on tumor inhibition [11].

Microbiota can influence the adaptive immune system in the gut mucosa, such as differentiation of CD4+ T cells and IgA-producing B cells in Peyer’s patches and lamina propria. Imbalances in the gut microbiota triggers immune disorders, which can result in systemic outcomes distant from the site of colonization [185].

CD4+T cells mainly locate in the lamina propria, which differentiate into Tregs and various T helper cells upon activation by microbiota. Th17 cells and Treg cells are the most extensively studied subsets of T cells in the interaction of microbiota and host diseases [96]. Intestinal microbes, especially SFB, can induce intestinal Th17 cells response [195]. Th17 cells have been found enriched in the intestine of human IBD patients [194]. The transplantation of IBD microbiota into germ-free mice increased the amount of intestinal Th17 cells and Th2 cells, while decreased the number of a specific Treg cells, the ROR γt+ Treg cells [196]. The imbalance between Th17 cells and RORγt+ Treg cells also accounted for disease severity in the colitis mouse model [196]. Next, the number and function of Treg cells can be affected by gut microbiota [197]. For instance, species of 73 genus [198], Bacteroides fragilis and its polysaccharide A (PSA) [199], promoted Treg cell accumulation and differentiation. What is more, inoculation of Clostridium and oral treatment of PSA can lead to resistance or even reversing of experimental colitis in mice [198,199]. Finally, microbiota metabolites, SCFA, have been discovered to regulate the size and function of Treg cell pool and protect against colitis in mouse models [200]. Later, SCFAs was also found to directly promote T cell differentiation into both effector and regulatory T cells [201]. These evidence reveal that microbiota and its metabolites underlie adaptive immune regulation and promote colonic homeostasis and health.

Microbial components translocate through the portal vein into the liver and directly modulate the immune response in liver, thus affecting its pathogenesis, progression, and development. The immune system recognizes pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) through pattern recognition receptors (PRRs). LPS is the cell component of gram-negative bacteria, which can increase inflammation, metabolic syndrome, and fibrosis in the liver [202,203]. NASH patients had higher levels of LPS in peripheral circulation and in the liver compared with controls [204]. In high fat diet fed mice, the level of LPS increases by 2–3 folds [202], with an increase of LPS-containing microbiota. On the other hand, LPS infusion alone can increase visceral and subcutaneous fat deposition in mice which is similar to the effect induced by high-fat diet [202]. The number of macrophages in adipose tissue and levels of inflammatory markers were also increased due to LPS infusion [202]. Most of these features, both in LPS and high-fat diet-induced metabolic diseases, were abolished or attenuated in the CD14 mutant mice, which is a main LPS receptor [202].

Other microbial components, flagellin, formyl peptides, and nucleic acid can also regulate immune response and impact liver pathophysiology. Flagellin, the primary structural component of flagella, is a typical pathogen-associated molecular pattern. It can be sensed by TLR5 on the cell surface and signals through MyD88, resulting in the production of inflammatory cytokines and chemokines [206]. Flagellin administration can induce liver injury, which is associated with neutrophils and macrophages accumulation in the liver [207]. Next, human Formyl-peptide receptors FPRs is considered as an PRR, which recognize the peptides cleaved of bacterial [208]. Fprs deficiency exacerbated the severity of infection in mice, which is related with impaired neutrophil recruitment to the liver [209]. This suggests a role of formyl-peptide in the induction of immune response in liver in the early stage of infection. Finally, nucleic acids from bacteria also play a major role in intestinal immune homeostasis. Unmethylated cytosine phosphate guanosine (CpG) dinucleotides limit Treg cell’s suppressive function [210], and DNA derived from conventional gut flora DNA (gfNDA) could also inhibit Treg cell conversion and modulate the Treg/Teff equilibrium [169]. TLR-9 recognizes the CpG containing DNA from bacteria and virus. TLR-9 deficient mice showed reduced liver injury, with dampened hepatic neutrophil infiltration [211]. Through these different mechanisms, bacteria and its components modulate the immune balance of the liver against pathogens and antigens.

Based on the important roles of dysbiosis in the development of liver diseases, various approaches to restructuring the gut microbiota have been tried in the treatment and prevention of liver diseases. (Figure 3).

In addition to bacteria, dysbiosis of microorganisms from other kingdoms, including fungi, archaea and viruses, and postbiotics were found to be associated with liver diseases [78,79,80]. An antifungal drug has been found to prevent ethanol-induced steatohepatitis in mice [79]. However, whether manipulating the intestinal mycobiome can be an effective strategy for alcohol-related liver disease still need to be tested in patients. Bacteriophages are viruses which can infect and kill bacteria and play a role in preserving the microbiome equilibrium. A recent study found that bacteriophages specifically targeting cytolytic E. faecalis can abolish ethanol-induced liver disease in humanized mice [84]. Still, clinical trials are warranted to validate the therapeutic potential of such phage-oriented strategy.

In December 2019, an outbreak of a novel coronavirus disease, COVID-19, was first reported in China, and then caused a pandemic worldwide. COVID-19 is mainly a respiratory disease, but could also lead to cardiac, kidney, and liver injuries [224]. Although elevations in transaminases are often mild, COVID-19 patients with abnormal liver biochemistries show higher percentages of severe cases [14,225]. In addition, patients with severe COVID-19 are more likely to have liver injury [226]. The mechanism by which the disease-causing agent SARS-CoV-2 affects the liver could be ascribed to direct viral cytotoxicity or immune mediated inflammatory damage [227]. Other factors such as drug-induced liver injury, sepsis, and thrombosis also contribute to the liver damage [227].

As of now, limited data is available on the relation between COVID-19 and microbial dysbiosis. Further studies with larger population should be conducted and more affected organs should be taken into account in exploring the effect of microbiota on this worldwide health crisis.

Based on the large amount of evidence showing the relationship between microbiota and liver diseases, specific and accurate gut microbial contributions to the pathogenesis and therapeutics of liver diseases has become the centerpiece of present studies [233]. With improved computational techniques and experimental designs, a combination of gut microbiota analysis with other clinical examinations will serve as the standard to define liver disease state and to predict disease sensitivity in the near future. In addition to gut microbiota, an intrahepatic bacterial metataxonomic signature has been identified in NAFLD patients, which provide further evidence for the interaction of microbiota in disease manifestation and mechanisms.

Animal models play an indispensable role in mechanistic studies to dissect the causations between microbiota and liver diseases. With more humanized animal models becoming available [234,235], the gap between animal disease models and human patients will be further narrowed down in many respects, including the genetic, immunological, and microbiome features. Nevertheless, well-designed and large-scale clinical trials are needed to effectively translate and apply the findings from bench to bedside.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

