Gut microbiome structure and metabolic activity in inflammatory bowel disease



The inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD), which include Crohn’s disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC), are multifactorial, chronic conditions of the gastrointestinal tract. While IBD has been associated with dramatic changes in the gut microbiota, changes in the gut metabolome -- the molecular interface between host and microbiota -- are less-well understood. To address this gap, we performed untargeted LC-MS metabolomic and shotgun metagenomic profiling of cross-sectional stool samples from discovery (n=155) and validation (n=65) cohorts of CD, UC, and non-IBD control subjects. Metabolomic and metagenomic profiles were broadly correlated with fecal calprotectin levels (a measure of gut inflammation). Across >8,000 measured metabolite features, we identified chemicals and chemical classes that were differentially abundant (DA) in IBD, including enrichments for sphingolipids and bile acids, and depletions for triacylglycerols and tetrapyrroles. While >50% of DA metabolite features were uncharacterized, many could be assigned putative roles through metabolomic “guilt-by-association” (covariation with known metabolites). DA species and functions from the metagenomic profiles reflected adaptation to oxidative stress in the IBD gut, and were individually consistent with previous findings. Integrating these data, however, we identified 122 robust associations between DA species and well-characterized DA metabolites, indicating possible mechanistic relationships that are perturbed in IBD. Finally, we found that metabolome- and metagenome-based classifiers of IBD status were highly accurate and, like the vast majority of individual trends, generalized well to the independent validation cohort. Our findings thus provide an improved understanding of perturbations of the microbiome-metabolome interface in IBD, including identification of many potential diagnostic and therapeutic targets.

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a chronic inflammatory condition of the gastrointestinal tract that results from altered interactions between gut microbes and the intestinal immune system1, 2. There are two main IBD subtypes, ulcerative colitis (UC) and Crohn’s disease (CD), which localize in the large and small intestines, respectively, and are characterized by unique microbial signatures3. Previous studies have shown major shifts in the gut microbial composition of patients with IBD2, 4–8. Likewise, microbial composition can shape the environment in the colon as metabolites they produce can be involved in signaling, immune system modulation or have antibiotic activity9–11. It is less clear, however, how specific microbes and the small molecules they modulate may interact to cause, sustain, mitigate, or predict inflammatory conditions such as IBD.

In this work, we took an unbiased approach to identify gut metabolites, microbial species, and microbial enzymes that were differentially abundant (DA) in IBD relative to non-IBD controls. To that end, we performed untargeted LC-MS metabolomic profiling and shotgun metagenomic sequencing of stool samples from a 153-member discovery cohort and a 65-member validation cohort, each containing a cross-sectional sampling UC, CD, and control subjects. While metagenomic findings were largely in agreement with previous studies, metabolomic profiles revealed >2,700 DA metabolites in IBD, including 224 that were significantly elevated in both UC and CD. IBD-elevated metabolites were enriched for sphingolipids and bile acids (among other chemical classes), as well as many uncharacterized metabolites of potential microbial origin. Indeed, many DA metabolites participated in robust associations with DA microbial species and enzymes: suggestive of biological mechanisms relating their abundances. Finally, the vast majority of IBD associations from the discovery cohort replicated in the independent validation cohort, thus making our findings a useful resource for the study of microbiome and metabolic perturbations in IBD.

To characterize the gut metabolic profile and microbiome composition in IBD, we collected and analyzed stool samples from a cross-sectional cohort of individuals enrolled in PRISM (the Prospective Registry in IBD Study at MGH). This cohort included 155 subjects: 68 with Crohn’s disease (CD), 53 with ulcerative colitis (UC), and 34 non-IBD controls (Fig. 1A). Each stool sample was subjected to metagenomic sequencing followed by profiling of microbial community taxonomic composition and functional potential. In addition, each sample was analyzed by four liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS) methods measuring polar metabolites, lipids, free fatty acids, and bile acids, respectively. LC-MS metabolomic profiling was carried out using sensitive, high-resolution mass spectrometers in non-targeted modes, thus capturing large numbers of known and uncharacterized metabolites, including those of potential microbial origin.

3,829 metabolite features (43% of total) were assigned to putative molecular classes based on comparisons with HMDB30. 466 features (representing 346 unique compounds) were annotated as standards through comparison with reference data generated from an in-house compound library (see Supplementary Datasets 1 and 2). Shotgun metagenomic and metabolomic data were then analyzed 1) to identify IBD- and disease-subtype specific changes in subject microbial and metabolic profiles, 2) to describe associations between microbial and metabolite features, and 3) to assess the power of these features to classify IBD status and subtype across populations. Relationships discovered in the PRISM cohort were validated against an independent cohort of 20 CD patients, 23 UC patients and 22 population controls from the Netherlands. These analyses are expanded below, with additional technical detail provided in Methods.

The major patterns of variation in the 155 Boston PRISM subjects’ measurements of >8K metabolite features largely separated non-IBD control versus CD subjects, indicative of broad metabolic differences between these two phenotypes (Fig. 1B). Such differences could result from a combination of sources, including the effects of disease activity in host tissues, the activity of an IBD-altered microbiome, and differences in subject diet and medication use. UC subjects’ metabolic profiles were more broadly distributed, with roughly half resembling non-IBD control subjects’, and the remainder more similar to CD subjects’ metabolomes (Supplementary Fig. 1). Similar patterns of variation among disease phenotypes were apparent in microbial taxonomic profiles from the subjects’ corresponding metagenomes (Fig. 1C; see also Supplementary Fig. 2 and Supplementary Dataset 4). Indeed, the first axes of ordination for the two datasets were well correlated (Spearman’s r=0.664, two-tailed p<10−20), consistent with strong coupling of gut metabolic profile, microbial community composition, and disease status.

The 68 CD subjects in the PRISM (discovery) cohort were sub-classified according to disease localization: L1 (ileal, n=14), L2 (colonic, n=22), L3 (ileocolonic, n=29), L1+L4 (ileal + upper GI, n=1), and unknown (n=2). Compared to the strong separations we observed between CD and non-IBD subjects in the metabolomic and metagenomic data, we observed little to no stratification by disease localization among CD subjects (Supplementary Fig. 4). More formally, overall diagnosis (CD/UC/non-IBD) explained statistically significant fractions of the distance variation among subjects’ metabolomic and metagenomic profiles (permutational analysis of variance, p<10−4; Methods), while disease localization did not have a significant effect among CD subjects (p=0.22 and p=0.35), possibly due to the established nature of IBD within the PRISM cohort. As a consequence of this finding, we treated CD as a single diagnosis in subsequent analyses.

To dissect metabolic changes in IBD at greater resolution, we applied a multivariable linear model to each metabolic feature to test association with IBD phenotype while controlling for other covariates (age and medication use; Methods and Supplementary Dataset 3). Nominal p-values for UC- and CD-specific effects were subjected to multiple hypothesis testing correction using the Benjamini-Hochberg32 method with a False Discovery Rate (FDR) threshold of 0.05. Despite this strict filtering procedure, 2,729 metabolite features (31%) were significantly differentially abundant (DA) in IBD, including 200 matched against 151 unique standards. Out of all DA metabolites, the majority (1,931; 71%) were significantly depleted in IBD (CD or UC) relative to non-IBD controls; 224 (8%) were significantly elevated in both CD and UC; 505 (19%) were specifically elevated in CD; and only 69 (3%) were specifically elevated in UC (a possible consequence of UC subjects’ more heterogeneous metabolic profiles). The large number of individually DA metabolites is consistent with the broad changes in metabolite profiles of IBD subjects described above in the context of overview ordination (see Fig. 1B).

While their molecular classes were not generally differentially enriched in IBD, other notable DA metabolites included lactate (up in IBD; Fig. 2G) and pantothenate (down in IBD; Fig. 2H). Lactate has been previously reported as elevated in CD and UC patients40, and is notable for being produced by members of the IBD gut microbiome, including lactobacilli, enterococci, and pediococci. Pantothenate (vitamin B5) is a precursor for coenzyme A, which is notable here for being involved in fatty acid metabolism. Moreover, pantothenate is produced by the healthy gut microbiota, and so (like lactate) its differential abundance in IBD subjects may indicate a perturbation of microbe-metabolite relationships in the gut: a topic we explore in detail in a later section. While not statistically significant in this cohort, the SCFAs butyrate and propionate were decreased in both UC and CD relative to controls (Supplementary Dataset 3).

To further explore biological patterns underlying the 2,729 DA metabolites, we clustered the DA metabolites based on the similarity of their residuals from the above-described linear modeling approach. Metabolites co-clustered by this method will therefore tend to co-vary independently of their relationship with IBD phenotype, age, and medication use. A total of 1,403 such clusters were identified with intra-cluster Spearman correlation of 0.7 (note that these unsupervised clusters, listed in Supplementary Dataset 1, are distinct from the HMBD-defined molecular classes used above during enrichment analysis). Each cluster was assigned a representative metabolite: the cluster centroid, or the standard metabolite closest to the centroid (where applicable). The 50 largest clusters accounted for 780 DA features (29% of total): consistent with a smaller number of biological signals explaining many DA metabolites.

Other clusters of interest included the 3rd-largest cluster (33 members), which was consistently elevated among non-IBD controls, and contained a variety of triacylglycerol metabolites (Supplementary Fig. 5). Cluster 13 (18 members) was uniquely elevated in CD subjects and enriched for organonitrogen compounds, including the standards linoleoyl ethanolamide, palmitoylethanolamide, and N-oleoylethanolamine (Supplementary Fig. 6). Clusters 23 and 25 were elevated in CD and UC subjects and contained a variety of long-chain fatty acids, including the standards arachidonic acid, adrenic acid, docosapentaenoic acid, and eicosatrienoic acid (Supplementary Fig. 7). Notably, the 99 clusters (7%) containing standards were more the exception than the rule: most clusters remain largely uncharacterized, allowing the potential for many previously undescribed, IBD-associated metabolites of microbial origin.

As introduced above, taxonomic profiling of subjects’ gut microbiomes showed that the largest source of variation corresponded with separation of non-IBD control versus CD phenotypes, while UC subjects were more heterogeneous (see Fig. 1B). To further dissect this trend, we applied the linear modeling approach introduced above to the abundances of 195 species-level clades (from 67 genera) that were present in at least five samples at 0.1% relative abundance (Supplementary Dataset 5). A total of 50 species were differentially abundant (DA) in one or more phenotypes, of which 35 were elevated in controls relative to IBD (Supplementary Fig. 2). Roseburia hominis, Dorea formicigenerans, and Ruminococcus obeum were among the species exhibiting the strongest enrichments in non-IBD controls. The fact that these and many other species were significantly depleted in IBD relative to controls is consistent with the general trend toward loss of species diversity in the IBD microbiome2, 3, 27 and with specific previous taxonomic enrichment studies4, 5, 43, 44. Unclassified Roseburia species were significantly elevated in both CD and UC subjects, while Bifidobacterium breve and Clostridium symbiosum were uniquely DA and enriched in UC. Twelve species were uniquely DA and enriched in CD, including Ruminococcus gnavus, Escherichia coli, and Clostridium clostridioforme. Many of these species-specific enrichments and depletions were in line with previous studies as cited here and discussed in the Introduction.

The multi’omic nature of this dataset enables identification of microbial features and metabolites that 1) are mutually differentially abundant in IBD and 2) which covary independently of their mutual covariation with disease. Such relationships are consistent with a mechanism relating the abundance of the species and metabolite which is then perturbed during IBD pathogenesis. For example, a positive association between a metabolite and species could indicate that the metabolite promotes the growth of that species, or that the species produces that metabolite. To identify such relationships, we performed large-scale association discovery between differentially abundant (DA) metabolites and species, focusing on representative DA metabolites and species from the clustering approach described above (notably, most species clustered alone by this approach). More importantly, we performed association discovery on metabolite and species residual abundances from the above-described linear modeling approach, which will tend to de-emphasize associations driven purely by mutual association with disease status. This revealed a total of 15,679 FDR-significant (q<0.05) associations between representative DA metabolites and species. Among these was a positive association between lactic acid and Pediococcus acidilactici (Spearman’s r=0.23): one of the expected microbe-metabolite relationships alluded to above (see Fig. 2G). To further enrich for putatively mechanistic relationships that are perturbed in disease, we specifically focused on the subset of associations that were nominally significant (p<0.05) and in the same direction when considering raw metabolite and species abundances from non-IBD controls only (we refer to these associations as “confirmed in controls”).

To experimentally validate the potential for IBD-associated metabolites to exert growth effects on an IBD-associated species, we cultured R. gnavus in the presence of eight molecules with which it was observed to associate in the preceding analysis (see Methods). Among four predicted negative associations, caprylic acid did indeed inhibit the growth of R. gnavus at high concentrations, as hypothesized above (Supplementary Fig. 9). Among four predicted positive associations, taurine and docosapentaenoic acid were confirmed to enhance growth, while phytosphingosine exhibited a paradoxical inhibitory effect. Given the many factors that could impact the results of growth assays (e.g. strain specificity and molecular concentrations) and the potential for mechanisms of association beyond direct effects on growth (e.g. production as byproduct), these results provide promising initial support for the usefulness of our multi’omic association framework in focusing downstream experiments.

To understand the functional consequences of microbial community changes in IBD, we first functionally profiled gene families in all metagenomes using HUMAnN2, and then summed their abundances according to Enzyme Commission (EC) number annotations (see Methods and Supplementary Dataset 6). We applied the above-described linear modeling approach to this enzyme abundance data, revealing 568 enzymes that were differentially abundant (DA; FDR-corrected q<0.05) in CD, UC, or both (Supplementary Fig. 10 and Supplementary Dataset 7). However, examining species-level functional attribution data, it was clear that many of these DA enzymes could be explained by a single IBD-associated species dominating contributions of the enzyme to the community. More specifically, when defining “dominating” as “explaining >50% of enzyme copies in >50% of samples,” then E. coli alone dominated 220 DA enzymes, owing in part to that species’ strong enrichment in IBD and exceptionally thorough functional annotations. While some enzymes in this category may indeed have mechanistic connections to IBD, others may simply expand (or shrink) in copy number alongside their source genomes (whose abundance is changing for reasons unrelated to encoding of that particular enzyme).

To more formally evaluate potential mechanistic links between DA enzymes and metabolites, we repeated the clustering and association procedures described above in the context of metabolite-species associations. Metabolite-enzyme associations followed many of the same patterns observed for species and enzymes: association density was low (3%), suggesting that most metabolites associated with only a few enzymes (and vice-versa), and the vast majority of interactions (95%) were concordant with IBD pathogenesis (Supplementary Fig. 11). Several associations occurred between standard metabolites and the enzymes discussed above. For example, magnesium-importing ATPase was strongly negatively associated with 2-hydroxymyristic acid (a control-enriched compound; Spearman’s r=−0.492; Fig. 5F). Conversely, precorrin-2 dehydrogenase was positively associated with caproic acid (another control-enriched compound; r=0.507). While such relationships are consistent with compounds acting as enzyme substrates and products (respectively), this does not appear to be the case for these specific enzyme:compound pairs, suggesting that other factors likely mediate their associations (e.g. encoding by/interaction with subsets of IBD-associated species).

We evaluated the generality of the differentially abundant (DA) metabolite features and microbial species identified above in an independent cohort of 20 CD, 23 UC, and 22 non-IBD control subjects from the Netherlands (see Methods). Of 2,456 metabolite features that were DA in CD (up or down) in the PRISM cohort, 2,300 (94%) trended in the same direction in the Netherlands cohorts, of which 959 (39%) were also FDR-significant (Supplementary Fig. 12). Of 1,049 metabolite features that were DA in UC (most of which were also DA in CD), 865 (82%) trended in the same direction, of which 117 (11%) were FDR-significant. Similar patterns were observed for DA microbial species: 36 of 38 species that were DA in CD among Boston PRISM subjects trended in the sample direction among Netherlands subjects, with 13 achieving statistical significance. All 15 UC-significant species from the Boston PRISM subjects trended in the same direction among Netherlands subjects, with 3 achieved statistical significance. Hence, the majority of IBD-associated changes identified in the PRISM cohort generalized in sign to the Netherlands cohorts. Statistical significance was not as consistently replicated, which we can attribute in part to loss of power in the Netherlands cohorts from smaller sample size (total n=65 versus 155 for PRISM).

To evaluate if differences in metabolite or microbial composition could be used to classify subjects according to IBD phenotype, we trained random forest (RF) classifiers on subjects’ metabolic and microbial species profiles (separately and combined). Classification performance was evaluated within the PRISM cohort (using five-fold cross-validation) and between cohorts by training on the entire PRISM cohort and validating on the independent Netherlands cohort. In both of these approaches, classifiers are trained on one set of samples and then tested on another (non-overlapping) set, meaning that testing performance does not benefit from potential overfitting of classifiers to their training data.

Predicting IBD subtype (summarized simply as CD and UC) was comparatively more challenging. Within the PRISM cohort, metabolites, species, and their combination predicted UC, CD, or non-IBD control labels correctly 64–65% of the time: less successful than case/control predictions, but still considerably greater than random (i.e. 33% correct; Fig. 5B). The most common source of classification error was labeling UC subjects as non-IBD or CD. This is not surprising, given that the distribution of UC subjects overlapped with the (largely distinct) CD and non-IBD populations (see Fig. 1B). Comparatively, Non-IBD subjects were rarely classified into one of the two IBD subtypes, while CD subjects were sometimes erroneously classified as UC. More distinction among the input data types was observed when applying the PRISM-trained IBD subtype classifier to the Netherlands cohorts (Fig. 5C). While the metabolite-incorporating classifiers performed reasonably well (77% correct classification), the species-based classifier performed considerably worse (48% correct classification), largely due to marked misclassification of CD subjects as UC. This suggests that, although many IBD-varying species trended similarly in the Netherlands cohort, subtype-informative details of their abundance distributions (as learned from the PRISM cohort) were less conserved.

This study represents one of the first efforts to discover and validate IBD-associated changes in the human gut metabolome and microbiome in an integrated multi’omic framework. Many of the individually differentially abundant species and metabolic classes identified and validated here (e.g. bile acids and sphingolipids) are in agreement with previous findings, while others (e.g. dicarboxylic acids) are, to the best of our knowledge, unique to this study. More generally, we observed that metabolites and metabolite classes were frequently depleted in IBD patients relative to non-IBD controls. This pattern is suggestive of a loss of “metabolic diversity” among IBD subjects that is analogous to the loss of taxonomic (ecological) diversity observed in the IBD microbiome. This diversity is likely to be inclusive of a large number of previously undescribed, microbially-derived metabolites that were unclassified or putatively classified in our comparisons with reference databases.

A number of future directions are possible for expanding this work to improve our understanding of metagenomic and metabolomic perturbations in IBD. To better differentiate UC, for example, it is possible that the metabolomic methods employed here missed classes of molecules that specifically vary with UC status. Alternatively, the stool metabolome may be imperfect for capturing UC-specific signals. In such cases, profiles of serum metabolites might augment serum antibodies50 as diagnostic biomarkers for IBD/UC, while remaining less-invasive than biopsy but still associable with the microbiome. While this study employed cross-sectional sampling of a larger number of subjects, dense longitudinal sampling of a subset of individuals would further aid in the dissection of putative microbe-metabolite associations (by intrinsically controlling for within-specific properties), and would further illuminate whether the observed population substructure was stable over time, or correlated with changes in metabolomic or microbiome composition. This would, critically, also help disentangle causality—which metabolite shifts precede microbial or host phenotypes, and vice versa—as well as provide a potential predictive target for interception of disease activity. However, even without these additional studies, the multi’omic screens and associations uncovered here provide many actionable hypotheses regarding the role of specific known and yet-to-be characterized metabolites and their microbial partners in IBD pathogenesis. While many of these changes likely result from physiological changes on the host-side, the subset that can be confirmed to result from microbial activity will provide promising targets for microbiome-based IBD diagnostics and therapies.

We performed untargeted metabolomic and metagenomic profiling on two IBD cohorts containing subjects with Crohn’s disease (CD), ulcerative colitis (UC), and non-IBD controls. One cohort consisted of patients seen at the Massachusetts General Hospital (Boston, MA), and formed the basis of most analyses. A second (more heterogeneous) group of subjects from the Netherlands was used to validate findings. Microbial species, microbial enzymes, and >8K metabolites were tested for differential abundance (DA) in IBD. DA metabolites were clustered to identify groups of functionally related compounds that were similarly perturbed in IBD. DA metabolites and microbial features were compared via multi’omic correlation to identify putative mechanistic associations. Finally, all features were applied to build and validate multi’omic classifiers for IBD status and subtype.

The Prospective Registry in IBD Study at MGH (PRISM) is a referral center-based, prospective cohort of IBD patients. 161 adult patients (>18 y.o.) enrolled in PRISM and diagnosed with CD, UC, and non-IBD (control) conditions were selected for this study, with diagnoses based on standard endoscopic, radiographic, and histologic criteria. PRISM research protocols were reviewed and approved by the Partners Human Research Committee (#2004-P-001067), and all experiments adhered to the regulations of this review board. PRISM subject stool samples were collected at the MGH gastroenterology clinic and stored at −80°C prior to DNA extraction.

Human subjects research in the discovery (PRISM) cohort was reviewed and approved by the Partners Human Research Committee (#2004-P-001067), and all experiments adhered to the regulations of this review board. Human subjects research in the validation cohorts (LLDeep and NLIBD) was approved by the University Medical Center Groningen review board (ref. M12.113965 and IRB number 2008.338, respectively). All study procedures were performed in compliance with all relevant ethical regulations for the validation cohorts. Each participant signed an informed consent form prior to participation for PRISM and both validation cohorts.

The validation cohort consisted of 65 subjects enrolled in two distinct studies from the Netherlands. 22 control subjects were enrolled in the LifeLines-DEEP general population study51. 43 subjects with IBD were enrolled in a study at the Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology at University Medical Center Groningen (UMCG). Subjects enrolled in both studies collected stool via the same protocol: a single stool sample was collected at home and then frozen within 15 min in a conventional freezer. A research nurse visited all participants at home to collect home-frozen stool samples, which were then transported and stored at −80°C. The stool samples were kept frozen prior to DNA extraction or metabolomic profiling as described below.

Metagenomic data generation and processing were performed at the Broad Institute (Cambridge, MA, USA). Stool DNA extractions were carried out using the QIAamp DNA Stool Mini Kit (QIAGEN, Inc.). Whole genome shotgun (WGS) libraries were prepared by quantifying metagenomic DNA samples by Quant-iT PicoGreen dsDNA Assay (Life Technologies) and normalized to a concentration of 50 pg/μL. Illumina sequencing libraries were prepared from 100–250 pg of DNA using the Nextera XT DNA Library Preparation kit (Illumina) according to the manufacturer’s recommended protocol, with reaction volumes scaled accordingly. Batches of 24, 48, or 96 libraries were pooled by transferring equal volumes of each library using a Labcyte Echo 550 liquid handler. Insert sizes and concentrations for each pooled library were determined using an Agilent Bioanalyzer DNA 1000 kit (Agilent Technologies). Metagenomic libraries were sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq 2500 platform, targeting ~2.5 Gb of sequence per sample with 101 bp, paired-end reads.

Raw sequencing reads were quality-controlled using KneadData v0.5.1 (available via http://huttenhower.sph.harvard.edu/kneaddata). Briefly, this involved trimming low-quality bases from the 3’ end of reads with Trimmomatic52 and then discarding trimmed reads <60 nt in length. Host (human) reads were identified and removed by mapping against the human genome (hg19 build) with bowtie253.

Quality-filtered metagenomes were taxonomically profiled using MetaPhlAn2 v2.2.054 with default parameters. Only species-level relative abundance data were considered in this study. Species that failed to exceed 0.1% relative abundance in at least 5 samples were excluded. Functional profiling was performed using HUMAnN2 v0.9.4 in UniRef90 mode (available via http://huttenhower.sph.harvard.edu/humann2)55. HUMAnN2 initially maps metagenomic reads to the pangenomes of species identified during taxonomic profiling (using bowtie2). Coding sequences in these pangenomes have been pre-annotated to their respective UniRef90 families56. Reads that did not align to a pangenome are mapped to UniRef90 by translated search with DIAMOND57. Hits to UniRef90-annotated sequences are weighted by alignment quality, sequence length, and sequence coverage. Gene-level outputs are produced in reads per kilobase (RPK) units and stratified according to known/unclassified community contributions. Per-sample gene abundances are sum-normalized to parts (copies) per million units. Gene abundances can be regrouped to other functional annotation systems based on annotations from UniProt58. For this study, gene abundances were regrouped (summed) according to Enzyme Commission (EC) number.

Subjects’ gut metabolomic profiles were measured from stool samples using a combination of four liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS) methods that measure complementary metabolite classes. These range from polar metabolites (e.g. organic acids), lipids (e.g. triglycerides), free fatty acids, and bile acids. In each method, the MS data were acquired using sensitive, high-resolution mass spectrometers (Q Exactive, Thermo Scientific) that enabled non-targeted measurement of 1) metabolites of known identity and 2) heretofore unidentified metabolites (e.g. microbe-derived) in the same run.

Stool samples (weight range 50.5­167.8 mg) were homogenized in 4 μL of water per milligram stool sample weight using a bead mill (TissueLyser II; Qiagen) and the aqueous homogenates were aliquoted for metabolite profiling analyses. Four separate liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC­MS) methods were used to measure polar metabolites and lipids in each sample. Methods 1, 2 and 3 below were conducted using two LC­MS systems comprised of Nexera X2 U­HPLC systems (Shimadzu Scientific Instruments; Marlborough, MA) and Q Exactive hybrid quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometers (Thermo Fisher Scientific; Waltham, MA) and method 4 was conducted using a Nexera X2 U­HPLC (Shimadzu Scientific Instruments; Marlborough, MA) coupled to an Exactive Plus orbitrap MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific; Waltham, MA).

LC­MS samples were prepared from stool homogenates (10 μL) via protein precipitation with the addition of nine volumes of 74.9:24.9:0.2 v/v/v acetonitrile/methanol/formic acid containing stable isotope­labeled internal standards (valine­d8, Isotec; and phenylalanine­d8, Cambridge Isotope Laboratories; Andover, MA). The samples are centrifuged (10 min, 9,000 x g, 4°C), and the supernatants were injected directly onto a 150 × 2 mm Atlantis HILIC column (Waters; Milford, MA). The column was eluted isocratically at a flow rate of 250 μL/min with 5% mobile phase A (10 mM ammonium formate and 0.1% formic acid in water) for 1 minute followed by a linear gradient to 40% mobile phase B (acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) over 10 minutes. MS analyses were carried out using electrospray ionization in the positive ion mode using full scan analysis over m/z 70­800 at 70,000 resolution and 3 Hz data acquisition rate. Additional MS settings were: ion spray voltage, 3.5 kV; capillary temperature, 350°C; probe heater temperature, 300 °C; sheath gas, 40; auxiliary gas, 15; and S­lens RF level 40.

LC­MS samples were prepared from stool homogenates (30 μL) via protein precipitation with the addition of four volumes of 80% methanol containing inosine­15N4, thymine­d4 and glycocholate­d4 internal standards (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories; Andover, MA). The samples were centrifuged (10 min, 9,000 x g, 4°C) and the supernatants were injected directly onto a 150 × 2.0 mm Luna NH2 column (Phenomenex; Torrance, CA). The column was eluted at a flow rate of 400 μL/min with initial conditions of 10% mobile phase A (20 mM ammonium acetate and 20 mM ammonium hydroxide in water) and 90% mobile phase B (10 mM ammonium hydroxide in 75:25 v/v acetonitrile/methanol) followed by a 10 min linear gradient to 100% mobile phase A. MS analyses were carried out using electrospray ionization in the negative ion mode using full scan analysis over m/z 60­750 at 70,000 resolution and 3 Hz data acquisition rate. Additional MS settings were: ion spray voltage, ­3.0 kV; capillary temperature, 350°C; probe heater temperature, 325 °C; sheath gas, 55; auxiliary gas, 10; and S­lens RF level 40.

Stool homogenates (30 μL) were extracted using 90 μL of methanol containing PGE2­d4 as an internal standard (Cayman Chemical Co.; Ann Arbor, MI) and centrifuged (10 min, 9,000 x g, 4°C). The supernatants (10 μL) were injected onto a 150 × 2 mm ACQUITY T3 column (Waters; Milford, MA). The column was eluted isocratically at a flow rate of 400 μL/min with 25% mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in water) for 1 minute followed by a linear gradient to 100% mobile phase B (acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) over 11 minutes. MS analyses were carried out using electrospray ionization in the negative ion mode using full scan analysis over m/z 200­550 at 70,000 resolution and 3 Hz data acquisition rate. Additional MS settings were: ion spray voltage, ­3.5 kV; capillary temperature, 320°C; probe heater temperature, 300 °C; sheath gas, 45; auxiliary gas, 10; and S­lens RF level 60.

Lipids were extracted from stool homogenates (10 μL) using 190 μL of isopropanol containing 1­dodecanoyl­2­tridecanoyl­sn­glycero­3­phosphocholine as an internal standard (Avanti Polar Lipids; Alabaster, AL). After centrifugation (10 min, 9,000 x g, ambient temperature), supernatants (10 μL) were injected directly onto a 100 × 2.1 mm ACQUITY BEH C8 column (1.7 μm; Waters; Milford, MA). The column was eluted at a flow rate of 450 μL/min isocratically for 1 minute at 80% mobile phase A (95:5:0.1 vol/vol/vol 10 mM ammonium acetate/methanol/acetic acid), followed by a linear gradient to 80% mobile­phase B (99.9:0.1 vol/vol methanol/acetic acid) over 2 minutes, a linear gradient to 100% mobile phase B over 7 minutes, and then 3 minutes at 100% mobile­phase B. MS analyses were carried out using electrospray ionization in the positive ion mode using full scan analysis over m/z 200­1100 at 70,000 resolution and 3 Hz data acquisition rate. Additional MS settings were: ion spray voltage, 3.0 kV; capillary temperature, 300°C; probe heater temperature, 300 °C; sheath gas, 50; auxiliary gas, 15; and S­lens RF level 60.

We used Genedata Expressionist (program: “Refiner MS”; software version=“9.0”) to process raw LC-M data for chemical noise removal, to detect chromatographic peaks and isotope clusters, align retention times between samples, and assign putative metabolite identities via database look up. Detailed parameter settings are provided as Supplementary Dataset 8. Across samples, the combination of the four LC-MS methods generated 8,869 clustered features, characterized by chromatographic retention time and exact mass to <5 ppm accuracy. Note that these clustered features, referred to as “metabolites” or “metabolite features” elsewhere in the text, are presumed to represent a single molecular species. Broader clusters of metabolite features, presumed to represent families of related molecular species, were also constructed using the results of linear regression analysis (and are described later). Within each sample and LC-MS method, feature intensities were sum-normalized to parts per million (PPM) units.

A subset of 466 metabolites were identified more precisely using reference data generated from an in-house compound library. 3,829 metabolite features were linked to putative identifiers based on accurate m/z matching against the Human Metabolome Database (HMDB). Analyses of putatively matched features in the text focus on their molecular classes, rather than their identities. More specifically, we assigned HMDB subclasses to these features as a form of broad chemical classification. Subclasses assigned to >100 features (e.g. “fatty acyls”) were further broken down according HMDB’s “direct parent” annotations.

Prior to downstream analysis, metagenomic and metabolomic samples were subjected to profile-level quality control. First, we isolated the set of subjects with complete profiles of both types. All 65 Netherlands subjects passed this filter, while 6 of 161 PRISM subjects were missing one of the two profiles (e.g. due to a failed sequencing run), and were excluded from subsequent analysis. Next, for both profile types, we considered the median Bray-Curtis distance of each PRISM sample to other samples in the PRISM cohort (the same distances form the basis of the ordinations in Fig. 1). If this distance was unusually large (defined as “above the upper inner fence of all values”), the sample was considered an outlier. All PRISM metagenomic and metabolomic profiles passed this filter. Repeating this procedure within-phenotype (CD, UC, Non-IBD control), we identified one potential control outlier among the PRISM metagenomic profiles, and a different control outlier plus one UC outlier among the PRISM metabolomic profiles. Because these profiles were representative of the human gut microbiome as a whole (if not their specific phenotype) they were retained for further analyses.

We carried out ordination analyses (Fig. 1; Supplementary Fig. 3 and Supplementary Fig. 4) using classical multidimensional scaling (CMDS) on matrices of between-sample diversity scores (Bray-Curtis distance). We used the Shannon index to quantify within-sample diversity. Metabolomic diversity scores considered all measured metabolites (sum-normalized first within method, and then within-sample), while taxonomic diversity scores focused on species-level relative abundances. To control for within-sample diversity when comparing ordination axes, we generated best-fit lines between axis values and dataset-specific diversity measures, saved the resulting residual values, and then compared dataset-specific residuals by Spearman correlation. Other comparisons involving between-sample diversity and sample metadata were made using permutational analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) as implemented in the adonis function from R’s vegan package (using 104 permutations). Specifically, we computed the influence of diagnosis (CD/UC/non-IBD) across all subjects’ metabolomic and metagenomic distances, and the influence of disease localization across CD subjects’ metabolomic and metagenomic profiles. These analyses did not consider additional covariates.

We identified molecular classes (as defined above) that were significantly enriched or depleted in IBD using rank-based enrichment analysis. Specifically, each metabolite was ranked according to its above-described t-statistics for CD- or UC-focused comparisons. For each class of molecule, we then evaluated if its members were enriched at the top or bottom of the list by performing a Wilcoxon rank-sum comparison of t-values in the class versus those outside the class. Only classes with at least 10 putative members were evaluated. Enrichment p-values were corrected for multiple hypothesis testing as described above.

We performed clustering of DA features using a custom approach. Features were clustered on their residual abundance values from the above-described linear modeling approach. This procedure enriches for covariation between features that is independent of mutual covariation with disease status (or other subject metadata, such as age or medication use). Features were ranked according to the significance of their association with IBD (the smaller of the two p-values from the CD- and UC-centered comparisons). The highest-ranked feature was seeded into an initial cluster. Each subsequent feature was then compared to each extant cluster: if the feature had a mean similarity to the cluster’s members exceeding a threshold, the feature was added to that cluster. (For all clustering analyses, we applied Spearman correlation as a similarity measure with a threshold of r=0.7.) If the feature was not added to a cluster in this way, it was used to seed a new cluster. After considering all features, clusters were renumbered according to their size (such that cluster 1 had the most members, etc.). Each cluster was characterized by a representative member. For metabolite clusters containing standards, this representative was the standard closest to the cluster centroid; the true centroid was used for clusters without standards. Similarly, characterized (vs. “unclassified”) species-level taxonomic features were preferred as representative features in microbial species clusters.

To evaluate “guilt-by-association” principles across the metabolite clusters, we compared pairs of metabolites present in the same cluster to all pairs of metabolites present in clusters with two or more members (i.e. ignoring singleton clusters). To compare retention times, we evaluated the median difference in retention time for co-clustered vs. all metabolite pairs (1.4 vs 3.8 min, a 2.7-fold reduction). The same procedure was used to compare mass/charge ratios (59 vs. 174 amu, a 3.0-fold reduction). To compare chemical class, we restricted the analysis to annotated metabolites present in clusters with at least two annotated members. 18.8% of co-clustered metabolites were annotated to the same class, compared with 1.2% of all metabolites: a 15-fold enrichment for similarity.

We performed Random Forest (RF) classification using the implementation of this method in Python’s scikit-learn package (http://scikit-learn.org/). We considered separate RF classifiers for predicting 1) IBD/control status and 2) CD/UC/control status. We trained RF classifiers on the PRISM cohort using 1) five-fold cross-validation and 2) treating the entire cohort as a training set for independent validation against the Netherlands cohort. In each case, subject labels were randomly balanced prior to training and 100 trees were considered (other scikit-learn defaults were left unchanged). Features were not filtered in any way prior to RF training (i.e. the classifier could sample from any of the measured metabolites and/or species). Feature importance scores were retained for downstream analysis.

We grew R. gnavus ATCC 29149 in BHI medium (37 g/L) containing: 5% sterile-filtered fetal bovine serum (Sigma-Aldrich), 1% vitamin K1-hemin solution (BD Biosciene), 1% trace mineral supplement (ATCC), 1% vitamin supplement (ATCC), 1 g/L D-(+)-cellobiose (Sigma-Aldrich), 1 g/L D-(+)-maltose (Sigma-Aldrich), 1 g/L D-(+)-fructose (Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.5 g/L L-cysteine (Sigma-Aldrich). Growth occurred under anaerobic conditions (atmosphere 5% H2, 20% CO2, 75% N2) in a soft-sided vinyl chamber (Coy Laboratory Products, Michigan, USA). We sterilized the media using a Corning filter unit (0.22 μm pore diameter). All metabolite standards (Sigma-Aldrich) were brought to 100 mM in DMSO (Sigma-Aldrich, D2438) prior to dilution for dose assays. Overnight bacterial cultures were diluted 100-fold in appropriate media and 40 μL were dispensed per well in 384-well plates (low evaporation lid, Costar 3680) containing metabolites or DMSO control. The plates were shaken to ensure homogeneity and bacterial growth was monitored anaerobically (absorbance at 600 nm) in a microplate reader (PowerWave HT Microplate Spectrophotometer, BioTek) for 24 hours at 37°C without shaking. Values recorded for DMSO controls and metabolite-treated triplicates were averaged.

Competing interests

FI received a speaker’s fee from AbbVie.

Data availability

Metagenomic sequences for the PRISM, LLDeep, and NLIBD cohorts are available via SRA with BioProject number PRJNA400072. Metabolomics data (accession number PR000677) are available at the NIH Common Fund’s Metabolomics Data Repository and Coordinating Center (supported by NIH grant, U01-DK097430): Metabolomics Workbench (http://www.metabolomicsworkbench.org). Tables of processed metabolite, microbial species, and microbial enzyme abundance are available as Supplementary Datasets 2, 4, and 6.

Code availability

With the exception of Genedata Expressionist, the software packages used in this work are free and open source. The bioBakery methods (including kneadData, MetaPhlAn2, and HUMAnN2) are available via http://huttenhower.sph.harvard.edu/biobakery as source code and installable packages. The Python packages scipy, matplotlib (used for all data visualizations), statsmodels, and scikit-learn are available via http://pypi.python.org. The R package vegan is available via http://cran.r-project.org. Analysis scripts employing these packages (and associated usage notes) are available from the authors upon request.

Competing interests

