Contribution of the Commensal Microflora to the Immunological Homeostasis and the Importance of Immune-Related Drug Development for Clinical Applications

Not long ago, self-reactive immune activity was considered as pathological trait. A paradigm shift has now led to the recognition of autoimmune processes as part of natural maintenance of molecular homeostasis. The immune system is assigned further roles beneath the defense against pathogenic organisms. Regarding the humoral immune system, the investigation of natural autoantibodies that are frequently found in healthy individuals has led to further hypotheses involving natural autoimmunity in other processes as the clearing of cellular debris or decrease in inflammatory processes. However, their role and origin have not been entirely clarified, but accumulating evidence links their formation to immune reactions against the gut microbiome. Antibodies targeting highly conserved proteins of the commensal microflora are suggested to show self-reactive properties, following the paradigm of the molecular mimicry. Here, we discuss recent findings, which demonstrate potential links of the commensal microflora to the immunological homeostasis and highlight the possible implications for various diseases. Furthermore, specific components of the immune system, especially antibodies, have become a focus of attention for the medical management of various diseases and provide attractive treatment options in the future. Nevertheless, the development and optimization of such macromolecules still represents a very time-consuming task, shifting the need to more medical agents with simple structural properties and low manufacturing costs. Synthesizing only the biologically active sites of antibodies has become of great interest for the pharmaceutical industry and offers a wide range of therapeutic application areas as it will be discussed in the present review article.

The human gut microbiome (GM) consists of a plethora of different taxa [1]. The intestines are predominantly colonized with bacteria [2], but also several phyla of fungi [3], archaea [4] and viruses [5,6] were reported to be common components of the commensal microflora. The quantity and composition changes with the location within the intestine [7], but is also highly variable with age and geography [1]. A “healthy” or normal composition of GM has not been defined yet, but the Human Microbiome Project works on establishing commonalities that are valid for most parts of the population [8,9]. One of the major challenges in defining universal colonization patterns is that the gut microflora is highly individual, even in subjects living in the same environment [10,11].

In the first part of the present review article, we want to highlight the connections between the GM and the natural antibody repertoire with special focus on systemic IgG, as well as their implications in various diseases. In the second part, we provide a comprehensive overview about current immunomodulatory treatment strategies by the exogenous supplementation of engineered therapeutic antibodies or their synthetic CDR peptides and discuss their highly specific and versatile modes of action.

Immediately after birth, the neonate is exposed to a vast composition of microbes derived from the mother and the environment [36]. However, the prenatal and neonatal organism does not have a fully developed immune system and mainly depends on maternal antibodies to prevent enteric inflammation or other infections, which also can be mediated by the developing GM. Maternal Ig repertoires are delivered via the placenta or the colostrum and provide a first defense line against pathogens for the neonate. The colostrum contains maternal IgA, IgG and IgM antibodies that regulate gut microbiota and prevent bacterial translocation in the newborn [37,38]. The quality of the gut colonization in adults is primarily controlled through secretory IgA antibodies, but also anti-microbial IgG antibodies were shown to protect newborn mice from enteric and systemic Escherichia coli infections [38]. These protective antibodies belong to the maternal natural antibody repertoire [37,38].

The antibody-producing B cell repertoire as such is massively influenced by the GM and exhibits a circle of mutual control [53]. One part of this interaction is comprised by numerous IgA producing B cells in response to commensal bacteria [54]. The mucosal IgA controls the diversity of the GM. IgA-secretory B cells can be activated in a T cell independent way, but the Foxp3(+) T cell mediated activation appears to play a more pivotal role in GM homeostasis by regulating IgA selection at the Peyer’s Patches [55]. The influence of the commensal microflora on B cell diversity is not limited to the direct interaction sites in the gastrointestinal tract, comprising the mucosal immunity, but also effects systemic immunity [23]. Colonization of GF mice with different bacterial species elicited alterations in the B cell repertoire as measured by differentially secreted immunoglobulins. Biggest effects on B cell diversity were induced by systemic exposure of bacteria that could also naturally occur by bacterial translocation mediated by an impaired gut barrier. However, small effects on the IgG-secreting B cell pool were also observed with only mucosal exposure [23]. Other research groups likewise reported examples for the influence of the GM on systemic immunity. An earlier study of Zeng et al. [56] reported that a systemic IgG response can be triggered by gut bacteria under homeostatic conditions. Furthermore, commensal microbiota were shown to induce systemic IgA secretion in the serum of mice [54]. These findings suggest a role for the GM in forming and maintaining the systemic IgG antibody repertoire.

Natural antibodies are antibodies that are present at a physiological state of the organism without prior immunization to the antigen. They are hypothesized to be either spontaneously secreted by B cells or to be stimulated by intrinsic factors. Their existence and function are not undisputed among the immunology community. However, evidence supporting a key role for natural autoantibodies in the homeostasis of a healthy organism is accumulating. Here, we discuss possible connections between the origin of autoantibodies and the GM with special focus on the systemic IgG repertoire (Figure 1).

The human GM is priming the host immune system for the production of polyreactive, low-affinity antibodies as integral component of the natural antibody repertoire that serves as first broad defense line against potential pathogens. It forms a part of the innate immune system before a highly specific adaptive immune response is established. Constant stimulus of the commensal microflora helps to maintain this steady-state antibody repertoire and therefore plays a key role in immune homeostasis. In fact, natural antibodies were shown to bind several microbial and viral antigens without prior immunization, supporting the hypothesis of a function as innate defense mechanism [75,76]. However, natural antibodies frequently show self-binding characteristics. The function of their binding to self-antigens is still mostly unexplored. Natural autoantibodies are discussed to be caused by the highly poly-reactive nature of the general natural antibody repertoire and are redeemed to be a mere side effect. Conversely, alterations in abundance of natural autoantibodies are often associated with different maladies.

Changes in the GM have been linked to a manifold of diverse conditions, not only concerning gut health. These range from autoimmune diseases to neurodegenerative disorders and even show associations with different malignancies. A common cause for systemic diseases in association to the commensal microflora is the occurrence of dysbiosis or translocation of bacteria. Dysbiosis can be caused by changes in diet or usage of antibiotics, but also by pathogenic microorganisms, causing inflammation and alterations of the gut barrier [77]. This can not only cause disorders in the gut but also be a systemic trait by eliciting a systemic immune response. Induction of inflammatory processes in other organs and the favored occurrence of autoimmune disorders are a possible consequence of this. Especially the translocation of gut microbiota via an impaired gut barrier can evoke a strong immune response. A weakened intestinal barrier can be caused by intestinal inflammation [78], but also by extensive exercise [79] or drug abuse [80].

The three disorders PD, AD and POAG share not only the commonality of altered GMs, patients also show alterations in their natural serological (auto)antibody repertoire, which have further been suggested as disease biomarkers [71,105,106]. Beyond the use as diagnostic tools, medical interventions, modulating the functionality of the natural antibody repertoire and exploitation of its properties, opens new treatment options for diseases of diverse spectra. Some natural antibodies, for instance, are found to a lesser extent in the context of some diseases. A suggested causality for this finding is the existence of a protective function of these antibodies. Decrement of potentially protective antibodies is often described in age-related diseases and is linked to an overall reduced quantity of natural antibodies due to declined numbers of B1 cells in the elderly [31,61,107]. This has been investigated in AD, where a loss of neuroprotective natural autoantibodies occurred with increasing age [108]. The supplementation of the decreased protective antibodies can have positive effects on neuron survival [109], and provides new treatment options. The utilization of such therapeutic antibodies is under investigation for the treatment of numerous diseases [110]. Thereby, not only the treatment with substituted antibodies is investigated but also synthetic antibody fragments such as CDR peptides are promising approaches to ameliorate the course of various disorders as will be discussed in more detail in the following chapter.

The development and engineering of synthetic immune-related pharmaceuticals, particularly therapeutic antibodies, is a rapidly growing market and offers great perspectives for the medical management of various diseases. Nevertheless, high manufacturing costs and large time investments are still the limiting factors for the large-scale production of such macromolecules and illustrate the urgent need of alternative strategies in pharmaceutical development. Humanization of antibodies by CDR grafting and phase-display technologies represent the gold standard for designing antibodies with high affinities for specific target molecules [110], but also possess several limitations and disadvantages (as summarized in [111]). Even single amino acid residues within grafted CDRs of humanized antibodies are known to show a certain degree of immunogenicity, which compromises their safety profile for clinical routine applications in humans. However, synthesizing only the biologically active site of antibodies has become of great interest as alternative therapeutic approach for various diseases and already delivered promising results in several study designs as well as clinical trials. Considering the trend towards the development of small drug compounds with enhanced bioactivity, these structural changes also improve the physicochemical properties of these molecules such as tissue penetration characteristics or resistance to enzymatic degradation. In the following sections the current application areas of synthetic CDR peptides and their different modes of action will be discussed in the autoaggressive disease SLE, the neurodegenerative disorders AD, PD and glaucoma as well as in cancer (Figure 2).

SLE is as a chronic autoimmune disease mainly characterized by a systemic dysfunction of B and T cells, increased production of autoantibodies (AAB) and the enhanced formation of immune complexes [112]. Patients suffering from SLE show a wide range of clinical manifestations ranging from mild symptoms such as joint paint or joint swelling to more serious effects such as heart failure or kidney dysfunction at more advanced stages of the disease [112]. Since long time it is already known that AABs with the specific idiotype 16/6 id (first identified in anti-ssDNA antibodies) show a high immunogenic potential and were able to enhance T cell-mediated immune responses in different SLE models [113,114]. AAB molecules containing the specific 16/6 idiotype are also increased in the serum of SLE patients and can induce an SLE-like phenotype by active immunization in BALB/c mice [112,115]. Interestingly, the subcutaneous injection of two synthetic CDR peptides (pCDR1 and pCDR3), encoding important sequence motifs of the pathogenic 16/6 idiotype antibody 5G12, were able to ameliorate the clinical symptoms of SLE in vivo and in vitro by triggering specific immunomodulatory activities [116,117]. Especially, the synthetic pCDR1 induced a lower expression of proinflammatory cytokines (INF-γ, TNF-α and IL2), a decreased T cell proliferation and also a decreased production of pathogenic AAB molecules in different SLE models [118,119,120] and/or in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) of SLE patients [120]. On the other hand, the synthetic pCDR1 stimulated the up-regulation of immunosuppressive cytokine levels (e.g., TGF-β), increased the expansion of Tregs [118,120] and resulted in the decreased expression of MHCII complexes and costimulatory molecules on antigen-presenting cells (APCs) [121]. Furthermore, by creation of a peptide library of pCDR1 with single amino acid substitutions at specific positions (particularly D14 and S16), it was proven that the immunosuppressive properties of synthetic pCDR1 were diminished and failed to inhibit proliferative T cell responses [122]. It is assumed that the targeted amino acid substitutions interfere with the binding properties of pCDR1 to MHCII complexes on APCs, which conversely abrogates the proper recognition process by T cell receptors and fails to trigger immunotolerance against anti-DNA antibodies with the 16/6 idiotype in SLE [122]. Thus, it can be hypothesized that the beneficial immunoregulatory effects of pCDR1 are elicited in a sequence-specific manner by presentation to the host’s adaptive immune system.

Based on the previous preclinical data, the drug compound Edratide (an optimized pCDR1) developed by the company Teva Pharmaceutical Industries was tested in a human clinical trial phase II [123]. Edratide was administered subcutaneously weekly at doses of 0.5, 1.0 or 2.0 mg for 26 weeks in 340 SLE patients (inclusive placebo group). At the end, Edratide failed to pass the primary endpoints of the clinical phase II study, which were mainly defined by significant improvements in the ‘Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Disease Activity Index 2000′ (SLEDAI 2K) between drug and placebo groups. Thereby, the SLEDAI-2K score is comprised of 16 clinical observations and 8 laboratory measurements [124] and represents a gold standard to assess SLE disease activity [125]. Nevertheless, Edratide showed overall a good safety and tolerability profile in all three treated groups. Interestingly, a dose rate of 0.5 mg Edratide per week met at least a secondary outcome in a subgroup of SLE patients receiving low levels of steroids or no steroids at all (compared to placebo group). It should be noted that the secondary outcome was determined by BILAC scoring index [126], which is a questionnaire based on patient’s history, examination findings and laboratory results. However, based on these observations the authors concluded that the immunomodulatory effects of Edratide were potentially masked by steroids and should be revaluated in a clinical trial with longer terms and more strict clinical guidelines regarding the steroid administration to SLE patients. In addition, new findings also revealed beneficial effects of pCDR1 (Edratide) in PBMCs of Sjörgren’s syndrome patients [127], which might be also a target group for further clinical trials in the future.

Abnormal protein deposits are one of the common hallmarks in neurodegenerative disorders such as AD and PD and several new approaches have been developed to prevent the enhanced accumulation of these toxic protein aggregates in neuronal tissues such as the brain [128,129]. One of these new technologies was recently developed by the research group of Tessier, who grafted specific hydrophobic sequence motifs of amyloidogenic protein structures into the hypervariable CDR3 region of a single chain antibody scaffold (VH) [130,131,132]. Thereby, these specific hydrophobic peptides were derived from the Aβ protein (AD) as well as from α-synuclein (PD) and were termed as Grafted AMyloid-Motif AntiBODIES (Gammabodies) [130,131]. For the grafting process, they choose a highly stable and soluble variable antibody domain (VH), whose specific structural folding is insensitive for mutations in the CDR3 loop. Interestingly, the binding of the gammabodies to their misfolded amyloid targets is based on the recognition of the corresponding grafted peptide segments in the aggregates (homotypic interaction) and provides the removal of conformation- and sequence-specific protein deposits. Employing molecular dynamics simulations, a recent study [133] confirmed the importance of grafted CDR3 sequences for these specific homotypic interactions, while the CDR1/CDR2 loops are much lesser needed for the proper contacts. The gammabody Aβ33-42 (CDR3 motif: GLMVGGVVIA), for instance, targets Aβ monomers, soluble Aβ oligomers and Aβ fibrils, whereas the gammabody Aβ15-24 (CDR3 motif: QKLVFFAEDV) targets only insoluble Aβ fibrils and illustrates the importance of the sequence specificity for these interactions [131]. The highlighted parts of both sequences are supposed to be the major binding motif for the specific gammabody-Aβ monomer/oligomer/fibril interactions and are located in the C-terminus and, respectively, in the central region of the original Aβ protein. In addition, the authors also revealed that the amyloidogenic peptides without ’immobilization’ in an antibody scaffold are unable to bind the corresponding Aβ peptide fragments or Aβ conformers [130] and can be possibly traced back to the fact that these peptides preferential self-assemble, even at sub-stoichiometric concentrations [134]. However, also gammabodies are highly susceptible to aggregation within a few days at 25 °C or even a few minutes above 70 °C. Therefore, targeted insertion of negatively charged amino acids at the edges of the CDR3 (N- or C-terminus) can overcome this problem and increase the solubility of the gammabodies without interfering with the affinity and the binding specificities of the molecules [135,136].

However, so far the clinical application of gammabodies as therapeutic agent resulted in the amelioration of Aβ-induced cognitive defects in a high-fat-diet-induced obese rodent model for AD [140]. In conclusion, all previous findings clarify the great advantages and the broad range of application areas of gammabodies in the medical management of neurodegenerative amyloid-associated diseases. In addition, it will serve as innovative engineering platform in the future for the development of unique high-quality and high-affinity antibody molecules in nanomolecular size.

Glaucoma is a slowly progressive neurodegenerative disease characterized by the loss of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) and their axons resulting in irreversible blindness of the patients. In a recent publication of our group it was proven that the synthetic CDR1 peptide (CDR1 motif: ASGYTFTNYGLSWVR) triggers neuroprotective effects on RGCs during glaucomatous-like conditions ex vivo and is caused by direct interaction with the target molecule High temperature requirement protein A2 (HTRA2) [141]. Interestingly, the target protein HTRA2 is reported to have two main contrary biological functions: (1) important key regulator of apoptosis [142]; and/or (2) essential role in neuronal cell survival and mitochondrial homeostasis [143]. In general, the protein HTRA2 acts as mitochondrial serine protease and promotes the degradation of various protein targets such as antiapoptotic components and/or damaged and misfolded protein structures during cellular stress responses. In its native state, the catalytic activity of HTRA2 is blocked by the C-terminal PDZ domain, whereas this suppression effect is abolished by the binding of highly specific peptide ligands to the PDZ domain binding motif [144]. These peptide ligands were identified as short, hydrophobic polypeptides, which were derived most probably from the C-terminus of aggregated protein structures [144]. However, comprehensive structural analysis of these polypeptides revealed the sequence YYF(V) as one high-affinity major binding motif of the PDZ domain [145,146] and can be also recognized as crucial sequence part in the synthetic CDR1 peptide (CDR1 motif: ASGYTFTNYGLSWVR).

In addition, the neuroprotective CDR1 sequence motif was revealed by quantitative mass spectrometry profiling of the highly diverse antibody repertoire in glaucoma patients [148] and is most likely shared between several systemic antibody molecules (or rather their respective B cell clones). Thus, this interesting observation may serve as excellent showcase for the complex interplay between the systemic humoral immune response and various external environmental stimuli such as the gut microbiome. In conclusion, all these new findings highlight the importance of innovative immunoproteomic profiling strategies for biomarker discovery and drug development and offer completely new perspectives for the medical management of various autoimmune-related diseases.

Malignant and metastatic melanoma is one of the most aggressive forms of skin cancer and is responsible for 60–80% of lethal cases worldwide [149]. The malignant tumors derived from transformed melanocytes show a dysfunction in cell proliferation, apoptosis as well as disturbed cell-to-cell interactions [150,151]. This results in uncontrolled cell proliferation, tissue invasion and metastasis [152] and the 5-year survival of patients with metastatic, malignant melanoma is only predicted around 5–20% [149,150]. Additionally, drug resistance becomes an increasing problem in the medical therapy of melanoma [152] and illustrates the urgent need of new, innovative treatment strategies in cancer research. In the last decade, the research group of Polonelli and Travassos extensively proved that synthetic CDR peptides of different IgG and IgM monoclonal antibodies trigger various kinds of antimicrobial, antiviral, antifungal and antitumor activities in vitro/in vivo and are independent of the antigen specificities of the native antibodies [153,154,155,156,157]. One main objective of their current research work is the investigation of the molecular mechanism in metastatic and aggressive melanoma cells and the development of peptide-based immunotherapies to elicit effective and specific immune responses against malignant melanoma tumors. Recently, the research group engineered a series of synthetic CDR peptides, which were derived from several monoclonal antibody molecules, and evaluated their versatile antitumor characteristics in various in vitro and in vivo melanoma model systems. In the following sections, we will describe in detail the different modes of action of two synthetic CDR drug candidates and discuss their potential role for cancer immunotherapy in the future.

Besides that, the research group of Polonelli and Travassos also screened other synthetic CDR derived peptides such as AC-101 H3 [166] and Rb44 [167] for anti-tumorigenic activities with different mechanism of action and might be of interest for readers with special interest in melanoma research. In conclusion, CDR peptide-based immunotherapy provides promising perspectives for the medical treatment of cancer, particularly melanoma, and may form the basis for a synergistic combination therapy in the future.

The studies presented in this review emphasize the importance of the gut microbiome on the host’s immune system. Based on the gathered evidence, the commensal microflora is hypothesized as continuous trigger for the formation and maintenance of the natural antibody repertoire. Disturbances in the complex homeostasis between GM and the natural humoral immunity is associated with various diseases. The explicit connection of commensal microbiota and natural antibodies remains underexplored and this assumption, however, is for the most part based rather on correlation then causality. Therefore, there is an urgent need to address this important topic in future studies. Nonetheless, immunomodulatory features can be exploited for specific therapeutic purposes. The present review further summarizes the great advantages of synthetic CDR peptides and specifically engineered gammabodies for the medical treatment of various diseases ranging from neurodegeneration and autoinflammation to highly aggressive and metastatic cancer types. All listed publications illustrate the versatile medical application areas of these small and highly bioactive drug compounds and will certainly make a huge contribution towards the field of personalized translational medicine in the future.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

