The Cancer Microbiome: Distinguishing Direct and Indirect Effects Requires a Systemic View

The collection of microbes that live in and on the human body - the human microbiome - can impact on cancer initiation, progression, and response to therapy, including cancer immunotherapy. The mechanisms by which microbiomes impact on cancers can yield new diagnostics and treatments, but much remains unknown. The interactions between microbes, diet, host factors, drugs, and cell-cell interactions within the cancer itself likely involve intricate feedbacks, and no single component can explain all the behavior of the system. Understanding the role of host-associated microbial communities in cancer systems will require a multidisciplinary approach combining microbial ecology, immunology, cancer cell biology, and computational biology - a systems biology approach.

A statistic often cited says that infectious agents cause 20% of cancers worldwide [1]. That fact perhaps explains why cancer biology tends to view microbes such as viruses (Box 1) and bacteria (Box 2) as carcinogens to be eliminated. The microbial communities that make up the human microbiome (see Glossary) impact on many aspects of host biology: nutrient uptake, drug metabolism, inflammation [2], and even behavior [3]. They most likely also influence cancer progress-sion and treatment, and in ways that can range from harmful to beneficial. Understanding how microbiomes impact on cancers - directly and indirectly, harmfully and beneficially - could bring new opportunities for cancer prevention, treatment, and management [4].

The International Cancer Microbiome Consortiumi made a frank statement in 2019: ‘there is currently no direct evidence that the human commensal microbiome is a key determinant in the aetiopathogenesis of cancer’ [5]. It will be crucial to distinguish direct microbiome effects on cancer from indirect effects. Direct effects could occur when microbes contact the cancerous tissue directly and impact on their behaviors. Indirect effects could occur when microbiomes impact on tumors at distant sites, such as for example, when the gut microbiome influences host physiology or systemic inflammation, which then impacts on cancer progression elsewhere (Figure 1). Although there are few examples so far of microbiomes that impact on cancers directly, the past decade of microbiome research has showed us that microbiomes influence host physiology in many ways. It is likely that some of those indirect effects determine the etiopathogenesis of cancer.

One aspect of host physiology where the impact of the gut microbiome is well established is the systemic balance of circulating levels of nutrients and metabolites [6]. A seminal study in the microbiome literature showed that, when the gut bacteria of obese mice were transferred into lean germ-free mice, the recipient mice became obese [2]. Importantly, the recipient mice from obese donors gained more fat than control recipient mice from lean donors, even though both groups consumed the same number of calories. The bacteria residing in the gut microbiome catalyze many bioreactions that convert metabolites that reach the intestine - either through the diet or released by the host. The host can absorb or reabsorb some of those microbially converted metabolites which then enter the circulation [7], and from circulation the microbial products can reach distant tissues and impact on cancer progression there. In liver cancer, for example, gut commensals can metabolize bile acids from primary to secondary structures which can recirculate and modulate recruitment of natural killer T cells to cancerous liver cells [8]. Other bacteria in the gut metabolize estrogen, potentially altering the risk of postmenopausal estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer, even though the breast is far from the gut [9,10]. In men, microbes can generate 11-oxyandrogens from host glucocorticoids in the gut and urinary tract, which may contribute to prostate cancer [11–13].

Taking full advantage of the potential of the microbiome against cancer requires a better understanding of how commensals function. Fortunately, the microbiome field is rapidly expanding from taxonomic studies to functional studies (Box 3). Some beneficial functions may be pinned down to specific microbes, such as when a specific commensal belonging to the Bifidobacterium genus promotes antitumor immunity in mice [24]. However, other functions, such as metabolic capabilities, may spread across broad phylogenetic clades. In these cases, several microbes could be used to provide the same function, assuming conservation of function within clades [25]. In addition, studying the composition of microbiomes in large populations can reveal new links between commensal members of the microbiome and cancer incidence (Box 4).

Most studies of direct effects come, perhaps expectedly, from tumors in tissues naturally colonized by commensals: the gut microbiome on colorectal cancer, the lung microbiome on lung cancer, the skin microbiome on melanoma, the vaginal microbiome on cervical and endometrial cancers, etc. However, microbes in unexpected tissues can impact on cancer progression and response to therapy. Pancreatic cancers can have bacteria accidentally introduced by medical intervention [26–28], and colorectal cancers can bring along gut bacteria when they metastasize to other tissues such as the liver [29]. Regardless of whether a tissue is already colonized, the direct interaction between microbes and cancer cells remains poorly understood.

However, bacteria that interact directly with cancer cells could actually help to treat cancers by causing localized inflammation [43]. This serves as additional evidence of the duplicitous role of bacteria (discussed in Box 2). The interaction becomes even more complex when we consider that bacteria can drive drug resistance: some bacteria can metabolize the chemotherapeutic cancer drug gemcitabine (2’,2’-difluorodeoxycytidine) into its inactive form, 2’,2’-difluorodeoxyuridine. The inactivation of the cancer drug requires that bacteria express a long isoform of cytidine deam-inase, an enzyme that is predominantly present in gammaproteobacteria. Experiments in a mouse model with subcutaneous syngeneic tumors showed that gammaproteobacteria living inside the tumor can increase tumor resistance to gemcitabine. A combination therapy of gemcitabine and ciprofloxacin - a broad-spectrum antibiotic that kills gammaproteobacteria - halted resistance to the cancer drug [26], serving as another example of how antibiotics could be used in cancer treatment.

Understanding the intricate feedback between microbes, immunity, and cancer - and their impact on immunotherapy - will likely require multidisciplinary approaches and a systems perspective. Immunotherapy can treat advanced melanoma, and its successes may apply to other cancers. Up to 60% of patients with metastatic melanoma can now achieve durable remissions thanks to the ability to unleash the immune system with checkpoint inhibitors [44]. Three papers published recently suggest that the gut microbiome of a patient can influence their response to immunotherapy [45–47]. These studies found differences in the gut microbiota composition of patients who responded to checkpoint inhibitors and patients who did not respond. Intriguingly, the three studies did not agree on which specific microbes mattered for the success of immunotherapy [48]. In addition to a lack of agreement about which commensal microbes matter the most, the mechanisms by which the gut microbiome influences immunotherapy remain unclear [49]. The microbiomes of responders can induce the production of interferon (IFN)-γ and gran- zyme B by CD4 and CD8 T cells, which would help to recruit antitumor macrophages. Checkpoint inhibitors are less successful against models of melanoma in germ-free and antibiotic-treated mice compared with mice with intact gut microbiota [24]. Some studies even suggest that specific bacteria enriched in responders, such as Bacteroidetes thetaiotaomicron and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii [50], may be used in precision probiotic treatments to augment the efficacy of checkpoint inhibitors.

There are other reasons to investigate the gut microbiome of patients receiving immunotherapy: the therapy has side effects and can itself impact on the gut microbiome, causing more complications. Checkpoint inhibition can cause immune-mediated colitis [52]. A prospective study of patients with metastatic melanoma undergoing ipilimumab treatment identified gut bacteria in the precolitis microbiota of patients that later developed colitis [53]. The patients had fewer bacteria from the Bacteroidetes phylum and also lower expression of genes involved in polyamine transport and B vitamin biosynthesis. If these biomarkers indeed explain why some patients developed colitis, then this finding could lead to interventions that ameliorate the microbiota and reduce the risk of inflammatory complications from cancer immunotherapy. More broadly, the prospective study illustrates that immunotherapy can cause gut inflammation that then alters the composition of the microbiome, causing a feedback loop that can lead to more complications. Remarkably, in a case report serial fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) alleviated programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1)-induced refractory colitis in patients [54].

Cancer treatments such as radiation and chemotherapy can damage the microbiome and lead to complications. Patients with prostate, gynecological, or gastrointestinal cancers, for example, pelvic tumors, often receive pelvic radiotherapy which can be extremely effective (e.g., 90% effective for prostate cancer). However, pelvic radiotherapy causes chronic diarrhea for which there is no effective treatment [55–57]. The composition of the gut microbiome at the time a patient receives the radiation may be responsible for this complication. Specifically, low levels of bacterial richness in the lower gut before radiation is linked to a higher risk of diarrhea after radiation treatment [58]. Understanding how microbiome composition at the time of the treatment may influence post-treatment complications requires more systematic analysis.

Despite the initial successes of auto-FMT to restore the microbiota of cancer patients receiving hematopoietic cell transplantations, the same idea may not work as well for other cancers. If the microbiota has a crucial role in cancer initiation and progression, performing auto-FMT in those patients could increase the odds of recurrence. Given the current state of our knowledge, auto-FMT cannot be deemed a risk-free approach for every cancer without further understanding the role of the microbiome in a particular disease. We should try to understand better how the microbes residing in the gut interact with each other and with the host to improve the success of probiotics and FMT, and – especially – future personalized cancer therapies based on microbiota cocktails [65].

The many microbes living in and on the human body impact on many aspects of human physiology. It seems logical, then, that human microbiomes can impact on cancer prevention, development, treatment, and management, although the specific mechanisms remain unclear. The departure from physiological homeostasis caused by cancer and by cancer therapies can damage microbiomes, which may then increase the risk of more complications. Cancer, cancer treatment, tumor-associated microbes, and the human microbiome may all be linked through intricate feedback networks. Untangling these networks and their plasticity requires a systems biology approach.

Without better ways to prevent, detect, and treat cancer at an early stage, the number of new people diagnosed with cancer will continue to outpace the treatments available - even as new treatments are discovered. That means many of us may need to learn to live with cancer in our lifetime. It is likely that the solution for prolonging quality and fulfilling lives, even when a cancer cure is unavailable, resides in our future ability to leverage the human microbiome to help to provide sustainable, long-term control of the disease. This could help make incurable cancer a chronic but manageable disease. Once better understood, the homeostasis between microbes and cancer systems may ultimately contribute to healthier and longer lives.

