Diet and gut microbiome enterotype are associated at the population level in African buffalo

Studies in humans and laboratory animals link stable gut microbiome “enterotypes” with long-term diet and host health. Understanding how this paradigm manifests in wild herbivores could provide a mechanistic explanation of the relationships between microbiome dynamics, changes in dietary resources, and outcomes for host health. We identify two putative enterotypes in the African buffalo gut microbiome. The enterotype prevalent under resource-abundant dietary regimes, regardless of environmental conditions, has high richness, low between- and within-host beta diversity, and enrichment of genus Ruminococcaceae-UCG-005. The second enterotype, prevalent under restricted dietary conditions, has reduced richness, elevated beta diversity, and enrichment of genus Solibacillus. Population-level gamma diversity is maintained during resource restriction by increased beta diversity between individuals, suggesting a mechanism for population-level microbiome resilience. We identify three pathogens associated with microbiome variation depending on host diet, indicating that nutritional background may impact microbiome-pathogen dynamics. Overall, this study reveals diet-driven enterotype plasticity, illustrates ecological processes that maintain microbiome diversity, and identifies potential associations between diet, enterotype, and disease.

In the past two decades, rapid advances in high-throughput sequencing technologies and improvements in computational systems have facilitated a radical transformation of our understanding of the rich microbial ecosystems that exist in symbiosis with mammalian hosts1–5. Extensive studies in humans and laboratory animals have demonstrated widespread links between the gut microbiome, nutrition, and infectious disease6–9, and the methodologies advanced in these studies now afford us the opportunity to traverse the frontier of wildlife microbiomes5,10. Studying the microbiomes of wild species has the potential to clarify the ecological and evolutionary drivers of host–microbiome dynamics by contextualizing these relationships in natural ecosystems. To our knowledge, all mammals host complex communities of microbial life in and on their bodies, and many of these bacterial relationships provide essential host functions. The importance of microbial symbioses may be amplified in ruminants, as they tend to harbor highly abundant and diverse gut microbiota11,12 and rely heavily on microbes to extract energy from indigestible plant matter13. Although the gastrointestinal microbiomes of domestic ruminants have been studied extensively in the effort to maximize agricultural productivity14,15, the ecological and evolutionary significance of the relationships between wild ruminants and their commensal microbiota are less understood. Understanding the structure and dynamics of microbial communities in wild ruminant populations has the potential to highlight ecological patterns in host–microbiome relationships, and to strengthen theoretical understanding of how these relationships respond under changing environmental conditions.

In this work, we explore microbiome stability and structure within and between individuals over time in a population of African buffalo (Syncerus caffer), a long-lived social ruminant. We analyze longitudinal fecal microbiome data collected from 72 buffaloes between February 2014–February 2017 during which they were exposed to natural and artificial fluctuations in resource availability, parasites, and pathogens. Our investigation is framed around three central hypotheses:

A total of 44,103 unique amplicon sequence variants (ASVs) were identified to the genus level from 426 samples. We removed 36,412 ASVs that were not classified to the genus level, as we were primarily interested in analyzing known bacterial taxa. Of these unclassified ASVs, 10,512 (29%) occurred only once in the entire dataset, and 33,092 (91%) occurred <10 times in the entire dataset. Clustering results were robust to the removal of these ASVs, likely because they were rare (median relative abundance 2.34e−7, maximum 1.6%). After filtering, rarefied samples contained a median of 731 ASVs (minimum 88, maximum 1905, standard deviation 385.1). The median number of bacterial genera identified in each sample was 90 (minimum 30, maximum 154, standard deviation 20.7), and the top 10 most abundant bacterial genera across all samples were Solibacillus, Ruminococcaceae UCG-005, Lysinibacillus, Ruminococcaceae UCG-010, Bacillus, Romboutsia, Rikenellaceae RC9 gut group, Christensenellaceae R-7 group, Bacteroides, and Ruminococcaceae UCG-013.

PAM clustering and Calinski–Harabasz index comparisons demonstrated an optimal number of 2 clusters that were 85% correlated with dietary regime. Within-individual repeatability of cluster membership was estimated to be 0 (p = 0.50), but generalized linear-mixed model (GLMM) results demonstrated a significant relationship between cluster membership and diet regime at the population level (p < 2e−16). PAM clustering results were robust to the removal of unclassified genera, with 98% of samples falling into the same cluster regardless of whether all ASVs or only known genera were used. Variance partitioning showed that diet alone explained 48% of the variation in microbiome composition, as opposed to 3% explained by individual ID alone and 4% explained by capture period. We observed a clear shift in dominant taxa between the restricted regime compared with the hay and green vegetation regimes (Fig. 1a). The most common bacterial genus under the hay and green vegetation regimes was Ruminococcaceae-UCG-005, which was the most abundant genus in 90% of samples from the green vegetation group and 88% of the hay group. In contrast, under the restricted regime, the majority (72%) of samples were dominated by genus Solibacillus (Fig. 1b). Due to the similarity observed at the genus level between the green vegetation and hay-fed regimes, downstream linear discriminate analysis of effect size (LEfSe) was used to identify higher level taxonomic differences that distinguished these two groups from the restricted regime. LEfSe and visualization with metacoder showed that higher level taxonomic trends (i.e. phylum-family levels) aligned with the genus-level distinction (Fig. 1a, Supplementary Fig. S1). We also confirmed that when LEfSe was run at the class-phylum levels, it was robust to filtering ASVs not classified to the genus level. Eight out of the nine phyla that were identified as differentially abundant between restricted vs. hay/green vegetation regimes in the filtered dataset were also differentially abundant in the unfiltered dataset.

While gamma diversity (population-level richness) did not change significantly across dietary regimes (Kruskal–Wallace p = 0.076), we observed significant opposing shifts in alpha diversity (individual-level richness) and beta diversity (inter-individual and intra-individual compositional differences) between the restricted regime versus the hay and green vegetation regimes (Fig. 2). GLMMs showed that alpha diversity was reduced in the restricted vegetation regime compared with the green vegetation (p = 0.00136) and hay regimes (p = 7.12e−7) but did not differ between the hay and green vegetation regimes (p = 0.354). In contrast, permutation tests for homogeneity of multivariate dispersions showed that beta diversity (Bray–Curtis distance to mean) was elevated during the restricted vegetation regime compared with the green vegetation regime (permuted p-value = 0.002) or hay (permuted p-value = 0.001) but did not differ significantly between the hay and green vegetation regimes (permuted p-value = 0.056).

We defined two host enterotypes based on the alpha and beta diversity dynamics observed at the population level over shifts in feeding regime: a restricted nutrition enterotype, defined by dominance of Solibacillus, low alpha diversity and high beta diversity, and a high nutrition enterotype, defined by Ruminococcaceae UCG-005 dominance, high alpha diversity, and low beta diversity, prevalent across the hay and green vegetation regimes. According to redundancy analysis (RDA) results, microbiome composition associates with both individual animal identity (p = 0.001) and diet (p = 0.001), but variance partitioning demonstrated that diet explained a much larger proportion of variation in the data than individual identity (48% versus 3%). Moreover, canonical correspondence analysis (CCA) results showed that individual effects disappeared when other host factors (age, sex, infection status) were accounted for, therefore we attribute the significant effect of individual identity to physiological variation rather than as evidence of persistent individual microbiome signatures.

We identified three respiratory infections that associated with microbiome variation after accounting for capture period, diet, age, sex, and nutritional variables (Table 1). Preliminary analysis with envfit suggested that microbiome beta diversity associates with M. bovis incidence, bovine viral diarrhea virus (BVDV), and strongyle burden during the restricted dietary regime, and with bovine herpes virus (BHV) during the green vegetation regime. The subset of host traits and diseases that were selected via envfit analysis were included in an initial CCA (Eq. (2)), which was then subject to bidirectional selection resulting in Eq. (1).

In addition to multivariate community-level shifts associated with disease, we also identified specific bacterial genera associated with disease incidence or presence within the dietary regimes in which envfit analysis suggested correlation with community variation. GLMM results identified one genus associated with M. bovis, seven with BHV, and six with BVDV (Table 2).

This study reveals plasticity in the African buffalo gut microbiome that is closely tied to changes in dietary resources. We demonstrate striking fluctuations in microbiome community structure between resource-restricted and resource-rich diet regimes (i.e. dry season conditions with no supplementary feeding versus high availability of green vegetation or supplementary hay), and very little difference between resource-rich diets (green vegetation versus supplementary hay). Uniquely, this study demonstrates that abundant dietary intake associates with predictable outcomes for microbiome community structure at the host population level regardless of the dietary source (i.e. natural vegetation or supplementary feed) and regardless of conditions (i.e. dry season or wet season). Shifts between dietary regimes had by far the most profound influence on microbiome structure compared to host traits, individual ID, and infectious disease. These findings contribute to the understanding of diet-driven enterotype formation of the gut microbiome. During resource abundant dietary regimes, individual hosts harbor similar, species-rich microbiomes. Individuals lose microbial taxa during periods of resource restriction, resulting in reduced alpha diversity, but microbial gamma diversity is maintained at the host population level via increased beta diversity among hosts. Enterotype shifts are predictable at the population level based on diet regime. However, within each diet regime, microbiome variation is largely stochastic with respect to individual. Taken together, our findings on diet-driven shifts in alpha and beta diversity suggest that within-host extinction of microbial taxa is driven by resource restriction, but that recolonization via microbial sharing between hosts facilitates microbiome resilience once abundant dietary conditions return.

The study of wildlife microbiome communities has the potential to contribute to conservation efforts in addition to expanding our understanding of host–microbe ecology. We demonstrate resource-driven enterotype plasticity in the gut microbiomes of a social herbivore population, underscoring the dynamic interplay between environmental change and microbiome communities. This study demonstrates how microbial diversity can be maintained in a host population over the long term, despite resource-driven reductions in individual-level alpha diversity. We found that the increase in beta diversity among individuals during dietary restriction maintains population-level gamma diversity. This suggests that a large, well-connected host population could be important for recolonizing and restoring individual-level alpha diversity following dietary restriction. These results imply that host population size and connectivity may be important for maintaining microbiome diversity within a population, especially as climate change and habitat loss drive more dramatic fluctuations in resource availability. Our findings could inform future efforts to utilize microbiome information as a form of noninvasive monitoring to guide conservation efforts for wildlife populations threatened by environmental change. Additionally, understanding commensal–pathogen dynamics in natural host populations under a range of environmental conditions is key to bridging the gap between laboratory studies and observational surveys of wildlife microbiomes. As demonstrated in our results, altered gut enterotypes and differential relationships between pathogens and commensal microbiome communities can manifest under fluctuating resource regimes. Considering current trajectories of human-caused environmental change, understanding how resource availability shapes wildlife gut microbiome communities, and clarifying the downstream consequences for host health and disease, will be crucial aspects of efforts to manage wildlife populations. Moreover, broadening our understanding of long-term microbiome community dynamics in natural host populations can help contextualize our understanding of microbiome dynamics in humans and domestic animals.

Our study was located in Kruger National Park (KNP), a 19,000 km2 reserve located in northeastern South Africa with ~30,000 free-ranging African buffalo. For this study, we longitudinally sampled a herd of buffalo contained in a 900-ha enclosure near Satara rest camp (Fig. 4). This enclosure was designed to exclude large predators (e.g. lions, leopards), rhinoceros, and elephants, but contained other herbivores and small mammalian predators typical of the ecosystem, in addition to the buffalo. The approximate size of the herd at any given time was between 50 and 65 buffalo depending on births and deaths. Every 2–4 months over the course of 3 years (February 2014–February 2017), each individual was captured for physical examination and biological sampling, resulting in a total of 15 captures during which 72 buffalo were sampled, 62 of which were sampled more than once. This period overlapped with three different dietary regimes: periods of high green vegetation driven by seasonal rainfall, restricted forage availability driven by seasonally low rainfall and vegetation, and supplementary feeding during periods of extended drought (Table 4). Due to an unusual period of drought that extended beyond the dry season of 2014 through October of 2016, grass inside the enclosure was limited. Dry season versus wet season conditions were identified based on normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI) values. We used 16-day composite, 250-m resolution NDVI data from MODIS for the North American Carbon Program (MODIS for NACP, https://accweb.gsfc.nasa.gov/). NDVI data was extracted to the 900-ha enclosure (Fig. 1) and mean NDVI for each capture period was calculated statistic using R packages raster47, sp48, rgdal49, maptools50, and rgeos51. To prevent mortalities, buffalo were provided with supplemental feed. From February 2015 through February 2016, the herd was provided with 800 kg bale of lucerne, five 370 kg bales of grass hay and 20 kg of concentrated game pellets (Alzu feeds) per day to retain body condition typical under wet season conditions. Following this period, feed was reduced to mimic dry season conditions by removing the concentrate and gradually reducing the alfalfa to 2/3 bale until the rains began in December 2016. For simplicity, the abundant supplemental feed period is referred to throughout this work as “hay” and dry season periods with reduced or no supplemental feed are referred to as “restricted”. During captures, each animal was sedated with a high potency opioid (Thianil or etorphine hydrocholoride) and azaperone at dosages appropriate to weight and sex52.

Blood was collected by jugular venipuncture for hematocrit measurements53, biochemical analysis, and disease assays54,55. Age in years was calculated from incisor emergence and tooth wear56, and sex was determined visually. Body condition score (BCS) was assessed by palpation of four regions (ribs, hips, spine, and base of tail), each of which were scored on a scale of 1–5 and then averaged across the four regions. This method has been shown to correlate with kidney fat index and total hematocrit57. Rectal samples of feces were collected directly from sedated animals using sterile gloves, and samples were immediately placed on ice for 5–8 h during travel to the laboratory, where they were aliquoted for gastrointestinal parasite counts57, fecal chlorophyll analysis58, and microbiome analysis, then frozen at −80 °C. Blood was collected via jugular venipuncture directly into vacutainer tubes with (plasma, whole blood) or without (serum) heparin, and stored on ice for transport. Blood was centrifuged at 5000×g for 10 min, and plasma, and serum were pipetted off the cellular layer and frozen at −80 °C until they were used to run serum biochemistry panels54 and test for a suite of respiratory pathogens55 (Table 3). Mycobacterium bovis, the causative agent of bovine tuberculosis, was evaluated using the BOVIGAM test according to manufacturer’s instructions (ThermoFisher Scientific product no. 63326). Seroconversion of adenovirus (AD3), parainfluenza virus (PI3), BHV, and Mycoplasma bovis were tested using the Bio-X IPAMM sandwich ELISA kit. Bovine diarrhea virus (BVDV) and bovine respiratory syncytial virus (BRSV) were tested using the Bio-X BVDV and Bio-X BRSV ELISA kits. Samples were considered positive for pathogen antibodies if antibody titers exceeded threshold absorbance values calculated using the quality control procedures outlined in each kit. Incidence was calculated as a binomial variable for acute infections (AD3, PI3, M. bovis) and was assigned a 1 if an animal seroconverted from the previous capture period and 0 if the animal had not seroconverted45. All animal work for this study was approved by the institutional animal care and use committee at Oregon State University, ACUP project number 4478, and by KNP, ACUP project number JOLAE1157‐12.

Fecal samples were collected within 30 min of sedation from captured animals, placed on ice within 15–30 min of collection, and frozen at −80 °C within 8 h of collection. Genomic DNA was extracted using the DNEasy PowerSoil kit following manufacturer’s instructions, with the addition of a 10 min incubation step at 65 °C immediately prior to bead-beating for 20 min. We amplified a 450 bp region of the V3/V4 region of the bacterial 16S gene. Extracted DNA was subject to a first round 16S PCR amplification using the following primers: 16S Forward Primer 5′-TCGTCGGCAGCGTCAGATGTGTATAAGAGA CAGCCTACGGGNGGCWGCAG-3′ and 16S Reverse Primer 5′-GTCTCGTGGGCTCGGAGATGTGTA TAAGAGACAGGACTACHVGGGTATCTAATCC-3′. PCR reactions were amplified with GoTaq Hot Start Polymerase (Promega, Madison, WI) following manufacturer’s suggested use. PCR cycling conditions were as follows: an initial melt of 94 °C for 3 min followed by 35 cycles of amplification with a 94 °C for 30 s, 55 °C annealing step for 1 min, and a 68 °C extension step for 1.5 min. A final, 5-min extension step was included following the last cycle. Amplicons were cleaned, indexed, and normalized by the Oregon State University Center for Genome Research and Biocomputing prior to sequencing on two runs of the Illumina Miseq V2 platform using Miseq control software v2.6.2.1, resulting in 250 bp paired-end reads. We employed the DADA2 workflow implemented in the dada2 R package (version 1.12.1)59 to identify ASVs, trim adapter sequences, and remove chimeras. Raw sequence data were processed through the dada2 pipeline using the following trimming parameters: trimLeft = c(17, 21), truncLen = c(250,250), maxN = 0, maxEE = 2, truncQ = 2. Default parameters were used for estimating error parameters using learnErrors, and chimeras were removed using removeBimeraDenova (method = “consensus”). Prior to statistical analysis, data from the two runs were combined, each sample was randomly subsampled to a depth of 20,000 reads, and samples with sequencing depth below this cutoff were excluded from downstream analysis60. ASVs not identified to the genus level were also removed from downstream analysis. Relative abundance of these unclassified ASVs were rare, with a median relative abundance of 2.34e−07, and none exceeding 2% of reads.

All statistical analyses and visualizations were conducted in R (version 3.6.1)61 unless otherwise specified. After subsampling to an even depth, ASVs were merged by genus, resulting in 543 unique genera. The function estimate_richness in the phyloseq package (version 1.30.0)62 was used to calculate genus-level richness. GLMMs assuming Poisson distribution were used to perform pairwise comparisons of genus richness among the three nutritional regimes while controlling for capture number using the lme4 package (version 1.1.21)63. Bray–Curtis distance calculations of genus abundance tables, principal coordinate analysis, and initial data visualization were performed in phyloseq. Sequencing runs were compared using PERMANOVA stratified by capture number. Because sequencing run had no effect on composition (R squared = 0.08, p = 0.52) after accounting for capture number, it was not included as a variable in downstream analysis. To identify a priori clusters in the microbiome data16, we used the partition around medoids (PAM) algorithm64 on Bray–Curtis distances using the pam function in the cluster package65 and then identified the optimum number of clusters by calculating the Calinski–Harabasz index for 2–20 clusters66. PAM clustering was repeated including all rarefied ASVs including those not classified to the genus level to ensure that clustering was robust to the ASV filtering. Repeatability of enterotype membership across captures within individuals was analyzed using the GLMM-based function rptBinary with a logit link in the rptR package67. The relationship between enterotype and diet was estimated using a GLMM model with cluster membership as the response variable, abundant vs. restricted diet as a fixed response variable, and individual ID as a random effect. Differences in the most abundant bacterial genera for each of the three dietary regimes were visualized using the plot_bar function in phyloseq. We assessed the significance of dietary regime and individual ID by running distance-based RDA using the dbrda function in vegan (version 2.5.6)68, while controlling for capture number using the Condition() argument. Proportion of variance explained by diet, individual ID, and capture period were calculated and visualized using the vegan function varpart. The vegan function betadisper was used to compute multivariate dispersion (average distance to median) for each group, and these results were then compared using the permutest function. LEfSe was used to identify diet-associated differences at higher taxonomic levels (i.e. phylum, class)69. Based on observed patterns of composition and alpha diversity, we used “high nutrition” (hay and green vegetation) versus restricted as the main grouping variables, and finer-scale diet regime (hay, green vegetation, and restricted) as the subgrouping variables in the LEfSe algorithm. Individual effects were ignored in the LEfSe algorithm. Differences in taxonomic abundances between the three feed regimes were visualized using the heat_tree_matrix function in the metacoder package70. LEfSe was also conducted using all rarefied ASVs including those not classified to the genus level to verify that phylum-level results were robust to the ASV filtering.

After analyzing the relationships between disease and diet covariates and overall microbiome composition using ordination-based approaches, we identified the specific bacterial genera associated with these relationships using Tweedie compound Poisson generalized linear-mixed models (GLMMs) implemented in the cpglmm function of the cplm package72,73. For each genus, we compared GLMMs of the general structure of Eq. (3) with a reduced model (4) using the anova function to determine the significance of association between each genus and covariate of interest. GLMMs were run only within the dietary regime for which the envfit analysis identified significant correlation with the covariate of interest. Because GLMMs were run separately for each covariate of interest, sample sizes were slightly larger than for the envfit analysis (Table 2). Model results were ignored taxa with insufficient prevalence or variation for model convergence. We ran three sets of GLMMs assessing genus correlations with (1) M. bovis seroconversion in the restricted regime, (2) BVDV presence in the restricted regime, and (3) BHV presence in the enriched (hay/green vegetation) regimes.

Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.

Source Data(112K, zip)

Peer review information Nature Communications thanks the anonymous reviewers for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Peer reviewer reports are available.

Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

These authors jointly supervised this work: Thomas J. Sharpton, Brianna R. Beechler, Anna E. Jolles.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41467-021-22510-8.

