Metagenomic analysis reveals distinct patterns of gut lactobacillus prevalence, abundance, and geographical variation in health and disease

Lactobacilli are exploited extensively for food fermentation and biotechnology. Some food and gut isolates have been developed as probiotics, for which species that may be commensal to the human host are considered desirable. However, the robustness of defining original niches for lactobacilli – food, environment, the gut – is questionable, and culture-independent analyses of prevalence in different human populations is lacking. Here we analyzed the abundance of lactobacilli in 6,154 subjects from a database of highly curated fecal shotgun metagenomics data spanning 25 nationalities, with ages ranging from infancy to 102 years. Twenty-five species were detected, which we assigned into low, medium, and high prevalence groups. The microbiome of apparently healthy individuals could be categorized into 6 clusters or Lactobacillotypes (LbTypes), with three of the Lbtypes being dominated by L. delbrueckii, L. ruminis, L. casei, and the other three comprising a combination of different species. These Lactobacillus clusters exhibit distinct global abundance patterns. The cluster prevalences also display distinct age-specific trends influenced by geography, with overall lactobacillus prevalence increasing significantly with age in North America and Europe but declining with age in non-Westernized societies. Regression analysis stratified by regional location identified distinct associations of the Lactobacillotypes with age, BMI, and gender. Cirrhosis, fatty-liver, , IBD and T2D were characterized by net gain of lactobacilli, whereas hypertension patients harbored depleted lactobacillus levels. Collectively these data indicate that the species abundance of gut lactobacilli is moderated by geography, diet, and interaction with the whole microbiome, and has strong interactions with diseases associated with a western lifestyle.

Humans, mammals, insects and plants harbor distinct communities of microorganisms with whom they have co-evolved.1–3 Despite the challenges of defining the “normal” or health-associated state of the microbiome, 4 there is emerging consensus that alterations in the composition and function of the animal gut microbiome are associated with pathophysiological syndromes or disease, both intestinal and extraintestinal.5 The precise molecular mechanisms whereby gut microbes could be involved in disease are still largely unexplained, but they include effects on metabolism, 6 immunity/inflammation, 7 tumorigenesis, 8 and signaling.9 Analysis of the microbiome state may also be informative for assessing risk of, diagnosing or managing disease. 10–13

The overall composition and function of the gut microbiome is influenced by external factors including geographical region, 42 ethnicity, 43 and diet. 44,45 How these factors intersect to modulate the lactobacillus species that are prevalent or abundant on a global basis is currently unknown. The availability of a large number of metagenomic datasets from globally distributed cohorts, apparently healthy controls and case studies, has allowed us to dissect the interaction of location, age, health, and disease with the abundance of commensal lactobacilli. We observe that the Lactobacillus composition in gut microbiomes displays distinct associations with geographical location, age, BMI, and gender of the individuals. Lactobacillus-microbiome configurations in western countries may represent recent reconfiguration of a primordial intestinal ecotype, among which a specific configuration of lactobacilli is positively associated with not only age and BMI, but also with multiple diseases and disease marker taxa.

Lactobacilli present in human stool may be either autochthonous species being shed, or allochthonous strains transiently acquired from food or the physical environment. We reasoned that transient carriage would be less of a factor in a very large dataset derived by culture-independent methods. The curatedMetagenomicData repository provides such a resource, comprising more than 5,700 fecal shotgun metagenome datasets from 34 studies. Of these, 21 are disease-microbiome studies, with 17 containing paired control and diseased samples46 (detailed in Supplementary Table S1). The remaining 13 study cohorts included only apparently healthy individuals, either from specific nationalities/ethnicities or age-groups. These datasets have all been collated and analyzed in a uniform manner which virtually eliminates bioinformatic-analysis-related variations across studies. We supplemented this dataset with 408 fecal microbiome profiles from our own ELDERMET project and a recently published case-control dataset comprising of IBD patients. 47,48

Analyzing the Lb-Type associations with the Enterotypes revealed a positive association between the ruminis-associated LbTypes 5 and 6 with the Prevotella-associated Enterotype 3 (Benjamini Hochberg FDR of Fishers’ Exact Test < 0.05; Supplementary Figure S3e). A similar link was also found between the LbTypes 1 (GSF), 2 (Casei) and 3 (Mixed), and the Bifidobacterium-associated Enterotype 1 (Benjamini Hochberg FDR of Fishers’ Exact Test < 0.05). The Bacteroides-associated Enterotype 2 was present across all LbTypes. However, significant positive associations were observed with LbTypes 3 (Mixed), 4 (Delbrueckii) and 5 (Ruminis) (Supplementary Figure S3e).

As described above, geographic variation incorporates the key variations in ethnicity, diet, and life-styles, which have previously been identified as strong covariates of microbiome composition. 43,44,48,52 However, previous studies of lactobacillus abundance in the human gut did not overtly consider the effects of geographical region and country. The prevalence rates of Lactobacilli across the different regions displayed significant variations even after adjusting for study-specific effects (Supplementary Figure S4), with the nationalities belonging to the other non-industrialized regions having significantly higher prevalence rates as compared to North America (significantly lower rates of Lactobacilli prevalence).

These country-to-LbType relationships were also reflected in the country-to-species prevalence patterns (Supplementary Figure S5), whereby the Lactobacillus spcies composition of the subjects belonging to the North American and European countries were diverse (and characterized by distinctly lower prevalence of L. ruminis). In contrast, the subjects living in the non-industrialized countries were notably similar, being characterized by the dominance of L. ruminis.

Given that geography was significantly associated with both the prevalence of Lactobacillus species and LbTypes, we performed a region-stratified analysis of the association of host anthropometric factors including age, BMI and gender on the Lactobacillus relative abundance in the gut microbiome.

Further logistic regression analysis taking the region as cofounder identified L. gasseri-salivarius-fermentum LbType as positively associated with both age and BMI (Figure 3(b)). The mixed LbType showed the opposite trend. L. delbrueckii LbType was associated with lower BMI and the female gender. Interestingly, the L. ruminis LbType was positively associated with BMI. However, these results should be treated with caution as they could not be validated after taking into account the country-specific biases within each region. We could not perform this adjustment because of the gender/BMI biases within countries and the complete absence of certain LbType in different countries.

We next investigated the association of various Lactobacilli with different diseases. To avoid variations originating from differences in inclusion/exclusion criteria and experimental conditions, for each disease, we focussed only on cohorts specific to that disease. We identified 15 case-control studies corresponding to nine diseases that included at least 20 disease subjects and matched control samples (as part of the same study) (See Methods). We used logistic regression models to associate disease occurrence with the overall Lactobacillus prevalence rate as well as with the abundance of each Lactobacillus species after accounting for host anthropometric factors like age, BMI and gender.

We next investigated, in the non-diseased control individuals, if certain Lactobacillotypes were more associated with disease-like microbiome configurations as compared to others. For this purpose, we checked if any of the gut microbial taxa previously shown to be associated with multiple diseases also displayed significant variations across the different Lactobacillotypes. In a recent meta-analysis covering five major diseases (namely, colorectal cancer, inflammatory bowel disease, type II diabetes, polyps and cirrhosis), we identified a specific group of taxa that were associated (either enriched or depleted) across multiple diseases (as shown in Figure 4(b)). 48 In addition, we also observed that a subset of these taxa that were enriched in multiple diseases were also associated with frailty in the ELDERMET cohort. In this current analysis, we, therefore, checked for either enrichment or depletion of each of these multiple-disease-associated taxa in each of the six LbTypes. We found that subjects harboring the L. gasseri-fermentum-salivarius Lactobacillotype were enriched for several taxa including C. citroniae, C. symbiosum, C. bolteae, C. asparagiforme, C. symbiosum, Clostridiales bacterium 1_47FAA, that were not only enriched in multiple diseases but also associated with increased frailty in the elderly individuals (Figure 4(b)). 48 In contrast, this LbType was negatively associated with multiple health-associated taxa including C. catus, E. rectale, B. crossotus, D. longicatena. These data corroborate the association of L. gasseri, and L. salivarius with the altered microbiome found in multiple disease states (in other words as indicated by their increased detection in multiple diseases as seen in Figure 4(a)). In contrast, the L. ruminis Lactobacillotype showed the exact opposite trend, with enrichment of multiple health-associated taxa and depletion of the pathobionts that were enriched in subjects of the Gasseri/Fermentum/Salivarius LbType. The Delbrueckii and Casei LbTypes also showed multiple positive and negative associations with health-associated taxa, respectively.

Prior to the recent upsurge in culture-independent analyses of the gut microbiome, Lactobacilli were considered textbook examples of dominant or sub-dominant taxa. The vast number of 16S rRNA gene profiling studies and shotgun studies of the past decade showed this not to be true, but there had been no systematic studies of what Lactobacilli were present in what populations, and what, if any, host metadata co-varied with the Lactobacillus composition of the gut microbiome. Such insights could be helpful in the design and development of Lactobacillus-based (Lb-based) probiotic formulations. In spite of the availability of a multitude of over-the-counter Lb-based probiotic formulations, investigations into their clinical efficacy have yielded conflicting results, that are further confounded by the geographical region of the study-cohort, as well as by other host-associated factors like age (reviewed in55). Studies in animals and humans have indicated that the ability of an administered probiotic to engraft is dependent on predictive baseline host and microbiome features. 56 It is debatable whether or not probiotic engraftment is desirable or necessary, but the specific patterns of lactobacillus species-gut microbiome interactions we report here are consistent with the notion that an administered probiotic will show different rates of successful network interaction with different microbiome types. The efficacy of any species to ameliorate disease symptoms may thus be modulated by the diet, environment and the indigenous microbiome of the host. Thus, insights into the differential prevalence of Lactobacilli across the geographical and age-landscape may aid in the formulation of personalized or population-specific probiotic formulations.

The practice of employing lactobacillus cultures for various beneficial functions and processes has been complicated by challenges in species identity, nomenclature and relatedness that will soon be simplified by the long-overdue taxonomic and phylogenetic overhaul of the 253 species. 24,65 Aided by the genome sequences of type species, and the ambition to sequence to sequence a million human gut microbiomes (“Million Microbiome of Humans Project” (https://en.mgitech.cn/news/114/)), we will soon have even greater geographic and age coverage to adjust for confounders in determining lactobacillus-microbiome-host interactions. However, the present study already shows that human gut lactobacilli reflect and respond to the geographic and lifestyle differences in the human host, and identify the key species involved.

The curatedMetagenomicData is available as a R package, downloadable from Bioconductor. The curatedMetagenomicData package (as on September 2019) was downloaded, filtered and processed as discussed in a previous study. 48 This created a repository of 5746 gut (fecal) microbiome profiles. To this, we added a further 189 and 219 from the ELDERMET cohort and a previous IBD case-control dataset. 47,48 The samples from the later two datasets were processed using the same approach as used for the samples in the curatedMetagenomicData repository, using Metaphlan2 and humann2. 66,67 The details of the datasets included in this study along with their geographical locations, the distribution availability of the age and BMI of the subjects, as well as the total number and the number of ‘control’ (apparently healthy) and ‘non-control’ (diseased and other conditions) have been listed in Supplementary Table S1. The details of the subject-specific metadata (including BMI, age, etc) for each study were already collected in the curatedMetagenomic repository from the individual studies (and used directly in this analysis). The collated fecal microbiome profiles corresponded to samples from 36 studies, spanning 25 nationalities across Europe, North America, Asia and Africa/South America/Oceania (grouped together as Others), distributed across five major age groups ranging from infancy to 102 years of age. The non-industrialized versus industrialized terminology was adopted from a recent study published recently by our group that used the same curatedMetagenomicData repository, 62 where in designations of industrialized and non-industrialized status were based on the classifications of the different nationalities by the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO).

The first challenge here was to determine an appropriate abundance threshold to report a given Lactobacillus species as detected in a given metagenome. Using simulated metagenomes, previous studies on the validation of Metaphlan had observed that for abundance values greater than 0.01%, there was a linear relationship between the Metaphlan-calculated and the actual abundance values. 57 Therefore, we used this abundance threshold to identify a given Lactobacillus as being a present in each metagenome. Using this threshold, we identified the number of times a given Lactobacillus was detected across the different gut microbiome samples as well as the number of Lactobacilli detected in each sample. We specifically focussed on the non-diseased control individuals (tagged as ‘control’ in the study-condition metadata in the curatedMetagenomicData) for this purpose.

For obtaining a Lactobacillus specific species profile, we retained only those species belonging to the Lactobacillus genus and removed abundance values of less than 0.01%. For the overall microbiome profile, we restricted the species abundance profile to only those species that were present with abundance > 0.01% in 5% percent of the samples.

Unlike previous approaches on Enterotyping that have either used Jensen-Shannon Divergence (JSD) or Drichlet Mixture Models (DMMs) on the global microbiome profiles, 50,68 in this study, we adopted a two-step strategy. First, we used a dimensionality reduction technique Principal Coordinate Analysis (PCoA) on the gut microbiome profile. The objective behind implementing a dimensionality reduction was reduction of the ‘noise’ associated with individual samples. Often, a group of samples, that may have an otherwise similar composition with respect to the large majority of the constituent taxa, may large variations amongst each other because of aberrantly high or low abundance of a few minority taxa that may have no contribution to the overall grouping schema. Utilizing a dimensionality-reduction technique and then representing each sample in terms of its top three axes (ordination axes explaining the largest variation) is expected to reduce this noise. Thus, in this study, we first performed a PCoA on the samples based on the intra-sample Spearman distances and subsequently represented the samples. We used the dudi.pco function (available in the ade4 package) and the cor function, both available in the R programming interface.

Associations between Enterotypes and the different regions and age-groups were performed using a combination of Fishers’ exact test and logistic regression models. While Fishers’ exact tests tested for association using simple count data, logistic regressions could test for the strength of these associations after taking into account the biases due to the various confounders (for example, biases in the representation of various age-groups across regions and biases in the representation of the different regions in sub-cohorts of individuals belonging to the different age-groups; described in detail in Supplementary Table S3).

The association of specific Lactobacillotypes with distinct regions or countries were tested using Fishers’ exact test. For each of these tests, a 2 × 2 contingency matrix was utilized which contained four values, namely the number of times a Lactobacillotype was detected in samples belonging to a given region/country, the remaining number of samples in the region/country, the number of times a Lactobacillotype was detected in all the other regions/countries, the remaining number of samples (that is those in which the Lactobacillotype is not detected) in all the other regions/countries. Fishers’ exact test provides two measures, namely the estimate (the extent of enrichment in the region/country versus the others, greater than 1 indicating enrichment and less than one indicating depletion) and the p-value (indicating the significance of association). For any region or country, enriched Lactobacillotypes were identified as those having estimates of greater than 1 and Benjamini–Hochberg FDR < 0.1.

For comparing the prevalence rates across countries, we used similar Fishers’ exact test-based approach, wherein we counted the total number of samples where in any lactobacillus was detected rather than a specific Lactobacillotype. Specifically, a 2 × 2 contingency matrix was utilized which contained four values, namely the number of times any Lactobacillus was detected in samples belonging to a given region/country, the remaining number of samples in the region/country, the number of times any Lactobacillus was detected in all the other regions/countries, the remaining number of samples (that is those in which Lactobacilli were not detected) in all the other regions/countries. For any region or country, enriched prevalence of lactobacilli was identified when estimates of greater than 1 were obtained along with Benjamini–Hochberg FDR < 0.1.

Association of Lactobacillus prevalence and Lactobacillotypes with host anthropometrics (age-group/age/BMI/gender) and disease were investigated using Fishers’ exact tests (as described above) and validated using Logistic regression models (that took into account various host-associated factors like region, country, age, BMI, and gender). The age-groups of the individuals were defined as Infants: ≤ 2 years, Child/Teen: (2–20] years, Young: (20–40] years, Middle: (40–60] years and Elderly (> 60 years, with the maximum age being 102 years). The selection of these host-associated factors as possible de-confounders was done based on the results of our previous meta-analysis, 48 wherein these host-associated metadata were present in more than 30% of the subjects, and also had the highest effect on the microbiome composition.

The list of multiple disease markers were obtained from a previous study by our group. 48 The association of generic disease markers with Lactobacillotypes was performed using Mann-Whitney Tests. For each Lactobacillotype, the abundances of the disease markers were compared between all samples belonging to a Lactobacillotype and those not belonging to the Lactobacillotype. Species that were significantly enriched or depleted with Benjamini-Hochberg FDR < 0.1 were identified.

No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

Supplemental data for this article can be accessed on the publisher’s website.

