Systematic Review: The Gut Microbiome and Its Potential Clinical Application in Inflammatory Bowel Disease

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a chronic relapsing–remitting systemic disease of the gastrointestinal tract. It is well established that the gut microbiome has a profound impact on IBD pathogenesis. Our aim was to systematically review the literature on the IBD gut microbiome and its usefulness to provide microbiome-based biomarkers. A systematic search of the online bibliographic database PubMed from inception to August 2020 with screening in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines was conducted. One-hundred and forty-four papers were eligible for inclusion. There was a wide heterogeneity in microbiome analysis methods or experimental design. The IBD intestinal microbiome was generally characterized by reduced species richness and diversity, and lower temporal stability, while changes in the gut microbiome seemed to play a pivotal role in determining the onset of IBD. Multiple studies have identified certain microbial taxa that are enriched or depleted in IBD, including bacteria, fungi, viruses, and archaea. The two main features in this sense are the decrease in beneficial bacteria and the increase in pathogenic bacteria. Significant differences were also present between remission and relapse IBD status. Shifts in gut microbial community composition and abundance have proven to be valuable as diagnostic biomarkers. The gut microbiome plays a major role in IBD, yet studies need to go from casualty to causality. Longitudinal designs including newly diagnosed treatment-naïve patients are needed to provide insights into the role of microbes in the onset of intestinal inflammation. A better understanding of the human gut microbiome could provide innovative targets for diagnosis, prognosis, treatment and even cure of this relevant disease.

The gastrointestinal microbiota comprises a collection of microbial communities, including viruses, bacteria, archaea and fungi, inhabiting the gastrointestinal tract [1]. The constitution and diversity of the microbiota in different sections of the gastrointestinal tract are highly variable and its concentration increases steadily along it, with small numbers in the stomach and very high concentrations in the colon [2,3]. This community has been linked to many diseases, including inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) [4].

We conducted a systematic review to comprehensively collate the body of evidence surrounding the relationship between the gut microbiome and IBD. Our objective was to describe the associations between IBD and dysbiosis and the potential clinical translation of microbiome-based biomarkers.

An electronic search was conducted using the MEDLINE database via PubMed to identify published articles on the gut microbiome and IBD, from inception to August 2020. The search strings used were:

The work was conducted in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses statement in Appendix A [11].

The inclusion criteria were intestinal microbiome studies comparing IBD patients with controls; performed on fecal, intestinal lavage or intestinal tissue samples; focused on human adults; written in English.

Studies were excluded if they reported data on IBD complications or postsurgery (pouchitis, fistulae, among others); studied other conditions in addition to IBD (irritable bowel syndrome, Clostridium difficile infection, primary sclerosing cholangitis, among others); were abstracts from conference proceedings, letters to editor, reviews or reported only one patient.

A total of 5267 records were identified from the PUBMED database. Of 190 papers remaining after screening, 23 did not include controls, 22 included other pathologies and 2 were in silico studies. A total of 143 papers were ultimately included.

The main methodologic characteristics of the studies included in this review are summarized in Table 1 (IBD gut microbiome studies using non-next-generation sequencing [NGS] approaches) and Table 2 (IBD gut microbiome studies using NGS approaches).

Abbreviations: CD, Crohn’s disease; UC, ulcerative colitis; IBD, inflammatory bowel disease; IBDU, inflammatory bowel disease unclassified; HC, healthy control; C, control; NA, not applicable; FISH, fluorescence in situ hybridization; TTGE, temporal temperature gradient gel electrophoresis; DGGE, denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis; qPCR, quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction; ARISA, automated ribosomal intergenic spacer analysis; T-RFLP, terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism; Ur, unaffected relatives; LH-PCR, length heterogeneity polymerase chain reaction; OTUs, operational taxonomic unit. * No microorganisms specified.

Abbreviations: CD, Crohn’s disease; UC, ulcerative colitis; IBD, inflammatory bowel disease; IBDU, inflammatory bowel disease unclassified; HC, healthy control; C, control; NA, not applicable; Ur, unaffected relatives; WGS, whole-genome shotgun sequencing; qPCR, quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction; VLP, virus-like particle; ITS, internal transcribed spacer.

Across the included studies, populations ranged from 2 to 531 patients, many of them with a small sample size that reduced the precision of the estimations. Thus, since many results are limited by sample size, further studies with larger cohorts are desirable to confirm these results and to clarify the significance of the microbiome in the pathogenesis of IBD.

Current knowledge, despite some controversy, provides valuable insights supporting the idea that microbial alterations may precede IBD onset. Given the limited number of studies in this type of patients, no consistent conclusion can be inferred, and further work is needed to investigate in depth the gut dysbiosis of newly diagnosed treatment-naïve IBD patients.

Culture-independent and -dependent methods for microbial community analysis have both been used to describe microorganisms from different environments, including the human gut. However, due to the inability to culture the majority of the resident bacteria from the gastrointestinal tract, culture-independent methods have proven much more reliable and faster in profiling complex microbial communities.

Another recent technique much less used in this field is flow cytometry. A recent study demonstrated that cytometry fingerprints can be used as a diagnostic tool to classify samples according to CD state [154]. These results highlight the potential of flow cytometry as a tool to conduct rapid and cheaper diagnostics of microbiome-associated diseases.

Currently, bacterial diversity in the human gut is determined through analysis of the luminal content (stool) and mucosal biopsies; however, the stool microbiome differs from the mucosa-associated microbiome [161]. Most of the bacteria are tightly adhered to the mucus and this mucosa-adhered microbiota may be associated with the pathogenesis of the disease [9,76]. Changes observed in stool samples likely represent an indirect measure of what is happening at the mucosal surface, where microorganisms interact more intimately with the host and induce disease.

In spite of the controversial results, there is evidence supporting that inflamed and non-inflamed tissue samples in both CD and UC may present some differential microbiota composition suggesting that a comparison of mucosal samples obtained from identical sites in IBD patients and non-IBD controls is needed to avoid the confounding effect of inflammation in the assessment of the microbial profile.

IBD microbiome studies have typically focused on characterizing the composition of a community and less attention has been paid to functional profiles of the microbes within a community. Functional information can be inferred from the taxa through bioinformatic approaches or directly assessed via whole-genome shotgun sequencing.

Some IBD gut microbiome studies have assessed the change in microbial function compared to healthy subjects. Outcomes of such studies showed a quite distinct change in microbial functions, such as fecal tryptic activity, oxidative response or lipid and glycan metabolism pathways [52,80,83,88,132]. Based on these results, it is necessary to redirect the study of dysbiosis from a purely compositional definition to a definition that includes functional changes of the microbiota.

The microbiome is different among healthy individuals around the globe [163], and the great differences found between the microbiomes of apparently healthy people complicate the definition of a healthy microbiome. Despite this divergence, the vast and diverse microbial gut community lives in relative balance in healthy individuals. Dysbiosis refers to an imbalance in microbial species, which is commonly associated with impaired gut barrier function and inflammatory activity [164]. It encompasses major traits such as loss of beneficial microbes, expansion of pathobionts, and loss of diversity [3] (Figure 1). The following sections will describe the key alterations found in the gut of IBD patients.

Although the gastrointestinal tract contains trillions of resident microorganisms that include bacteria, archaea, fungi and viruses, the studies revised herein highlighted that current research on microbiome is mainly focused on bacteria.

It has consistently been shown that there is a disease-dependent restriction of biodiversity and an imbalanced bacterial composition associated with IBD. The abundance of beneficial microorganisms such as Clostridium groups IV and XIVa, Bacteroides, Suterella, Roseburia, Bifidobacterium species and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii is reduced, whereas some pathogens such as Proteobacteria members (including invasive and adherent Escherichia coli), Veillonellaceae, Pasteurellaceae, Fusobacterium species, and Ruminococcus gnavus are increased [4]. Most of the studies have revealed that in IBD patients, commensal bacteria are depleted and the microbial community is less diverse [14,22,37,48,80,94,106,108,126,143,150,152,153].

In the Firmicutes phylum, F. prausnitzii, an anti-inflammatory commensal bacterium, is frequently decreased in CD, while less evidence has been reported in UC, where it is sometimes increased and in other studies decreased [14,22,51,59,73,89,109,140,142,166,167]. Specific decrease in Roseburia spp. in patients with IBD has also been consistently noted [56,59,76,99,115,116,130]. Both bacteria are known to be involved in the production of butyrate, an important energy source for intestinal epithelial cells, which strengthens gut barrier function and exerts important immunomodulatory functions [168]. In this same phylum, the mucin degrader R. gnavus is frequently increased in IBD patients’ gut, which may impair barrier stability and contribute to inflammation [38,76,103,111,116,132,140,144].

Despite the large body of literature on the IBD gut bacterial microbiome, little has been published on the gut mycobiome; specifically, only nine studies reviewed herein included fungal analysis.

Nowadays, the exact mechanisms of intestinal fungi in IBD remain unclear and microbiome studies need to include fungi to properly address the complex challenges of this promising field.

The human gut virome includes a diverse collection of viruses, mostly bacteriophages, directly impacting on human health [172]. In this systematic review, only seven studies included viral analysis [87,90,93,95,129,132,136]. Alterations in IBD gut virome showed an expansion of Caudovirales and an inverse correlation between the virome and bacterial microbiome, suggesting an hypothesis where changes in the gut virome may affect bacterial dysbiosis [90,95,129,136]. The use of data on both bacteriome and virome composition would contribute to improve classification between health and disease.

These findings suggest that the loss of virus-bacterium relationships can cause microbiota dysbiosis and intestinal inflammation. However, whether viruses have a direct role in IBD pathogenesis, or merely reflect underlying dysbiosis remains to be determined.

The human gut microbiota also contains prokaryotes of the domain Archaea. Methane-producing archaea (methanogens) have been associated with disorders of the gastrointestinal tract and dysbiosis. Methanogens play an important role in digestion, improving polysaccharide fermentation by preventing accumulation of acids, reaction end-products and hydrogen gas [173].

Although archaeal diversity in the gastrointestinal tract is far lower than that of bacteria, these microorganisms can also exert inflammatory effects and their consideration in microbiome studies may be crucial for developing optimal diagnostics and prognostics tools.

Different disease activity and severity have been described among IBD patients with a given clinically defined condition, suggesting that, in the context of microbiome dysfunction, each condition may present different microbial profiles. The reviewed studies showed a clear difference in the gut microbiota associated with different disease activity and severity in IBD patients.

This area is still in its infancy and some results are inconsistent between studies. Several studies have evidenced microbiota signatures of disease activity and severity and the likelihood of a flare-up. However, more research is necessary to identify specific microbial taxa.

Ideal biomarkers should be easy to obtain, easy to determine, non-invasive, cheap, and capable of providing rapid and reproducible results. Non-invasive tests for IBD are already available, including serum antibodies [174,175], imaging-based screenings [176], and fecal biomarkers [177]. However, endoscopy remains the gold standard for IBD diagnosis, as the aforementioned non-invasive tests are limited to active disease and their outcome can be interfered by diseases other than IBD limiting their clinical utility.

Nevertheless, due to the high microbiome diversity between individuals, and within the same individual over time, the predictive value of these potential indicators is currently far below the level required for utility in diagnosis, prognosis, or response to treatment. Nonetheless, the increasing number of microbiome studies along with the use of longitudinal approaches pave the way to the refinement of microbiome-based biomarkers as useful disease indicators.

The study of the human microbiome and its involvement in human health is nowadays one of the most active research topics in biomedicine. A simple search for “Microbiota” and “disease” within PubMed Database reveals almost 28,000 hits to date (august 2020). Given the potential clinical application of the microbiome, the number of studies in this field is rapidly increasing. However, some limitations can be found across these studies, including different methodologic approaches, small cohort sizes, different microbiome analysis methods and sample types and sites, main focus on bacteria, and influence of disease activity and treatment interventions. Therefore, these limitations result in variable findings, difficulty to establish comparison between studies and lack of reproducibility of microbiome signatures across studies.

The usefulness of the gut microbiome as a tool towards targeted non-invasive biomarkers for IBD has been evaluated by compelling studies. An acceptable biomarker may help in early diagnosis and classification of IBD as well as in the prediction of disease outcome. Overall, IBD clinical management would benefit from the identification of microbiome-based biomarkers, which could provide less invasive assessment tools, enable personalized treatments, and reduce the health care economic burden associated with IBD. Collectively, these microbiome data represent a valuable data source that can be continually mined to identify associations between the microbiome and IBD for a deeper pathophysiological understanding which may promote the development of clinical strategies, including disease prevention, treatment, stratification and assessment of high-risk population.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

