Development of a 3D-Printed High Temperature Resin Cecal Fistula Implant for Long-Term and Minimally Invasive Access to the Gut Microbiome

Microbiota dysbiosis has been associated with chronic diseases ranging from gastrointestinal inflammatory and metabolic conditions to neurological changes affecting the gut-brain neural axis, mental health, and general well-being. However, current animal studies using oral gavage and gnotobiotic animals do not allow for non-invasive long-term access to gut microbiome. The purpose of the present study was to evaluate the feasibility of 3D-printed fistula implants through the body wall and into the cecum of rats to obtain long-term access to gut microbiome. Cecal fistulas were designed and 3D-printed using a high temperature resin (Formlabs; acrylic and methacrylic mixture). Nine male Sprague-Dawley rats underwent the fistula implantation. Food intake, body weight, and body fat were measured to determine the impact of fistula manipulation. Gut microbiome, vagal afferents in the hindbrain, and microglia activation were analyzed to determine if fistula implantation disrupted the gut-brain neural axis. We found that the procedure induced a transient decrease in microbial diversity in the gut that resolved within a few weeks. Fistula implantation had no impact on food intake, body weight, fat mass, or microglia activation. Our study shows that 3D-printed cecal fistula implantation is an effective procedure that allows long-term and minimally invasive access to gut microbiome.

The gut microbiome has become an area of intense study for contemporary researchers. Studies have shown that the gut microbiome plays a crucial role in early physiological development in humans, influencing everything from bone growth to the outcome of diseases such as asthma and certain neurodevelopmental disorders [1]. Germ-free animals (GF), which lack all microorganisms including the gut microbiome, exhibit altered expression of motor control and anxiety-like behavior [2], decreased microglia development in the brain, inhibited responses to spatial and temporal stimuli, and increased blood-brain barrier permeability [3]. Additionally, they have been shown to have arrested the growth of capillary networks [4]. Perhaps the most relevant association between modern western health issues and the microbiome is the link between diet induced obesity and gut dysbiosis [5,6,7]. Gut dysbiosis refers to the imbalance of bacterial species compositions, which can lead to deleterious effects on the intestinal lining and overall immune function. Crohn’s disease, ulcerative colitis (UC), and pouchitis are all the result of the pathogenic immune response following antigenic stimulation by microbiota in the gut, due to mucosal barrier defects [8]. Consumption of a high-fat/high sugar diet rapidly, within a few weeks, increased ratio of Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes species and decreased in overall microbiota diversity [5,6,7]. An increased ratio of Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes species and decreased microbial diversity are known markers of microbiota dysbiosis. In addition, it has been reported that analysis of the gut microbiome could be a tool in the diagnosis of colorectal cancer. Cordero, et al. reported that colorectal cancer patients exhibit a significantly different microbiota composition, with Firmicutes being the most abundant phylum, when compared to healthy subjects and patients with adenoma [9].

Thus, there is a meaningful need to explore alternate methods of microbiome manipulation and long-term and minimally invasive access to the gut microbiome. However, the studies revealing the methods for direct gut microbiome access in animal models are limited and do not provide information about long-term impact of the procedure on gut dysbiosis [21,22]. Therefore, the goal of this study was to evaluate the feasibility of a 3D-printed fistula, designed in our laboratory (Figure 1), and implanted through the abdominal wall and into the cecum of rats to obtain direct access to gut microbiome without long-term dysbiosis. Results of the study show that implanting a cecal fistula did not induce long-term phenotypic dysbiosis, which was also evidenced by no effect on the integrity of vagal gut-brain connections. Moreover, cecal fistula manipulation did not impact food intake, body weight, and fat mass. Our study shows that 3D-printed cecal fistula implantation is an effective procedure that allows long-term and minimally invasive access to the gut microbiome and enables future studies on microbiome transplant by minimizing limitations of currently used methods in the field of microbiome research.

Male Sprague–Dawley rats (n = 12; ~300 g; Envigo, Indianapolis, IN, USA) were housed individually in conventional polycarbonate shoe-box cages in a temperature-controlled vivarium with ad libitum access to regular chow pellets (PicoLab rodent diet 20, product #5053, Fort Worth, TX, USA) and water. Rats were maintained on a 12:12-h light: dark cycle with lights on at 0700-h and allowed to acclimate to laboratory conditions for one week prior to starting experiments. All animal procedures were approved by the University of Georgia Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee and conformed to National Institutes of Health Guidelines for the Care and Use of Laboratory.

The experiment had a duration of 12 weeks. During the first week, baseline measures of food intake, body weight, and body composition were taken. Then, the animals underwent the fistula implantation surgery and were allowed to recover for three weeks (weeks 2–4). After recovery, the animals were randomly assigned to following groups: HFD/F (n = 3), Chow/C (n = 3), and Chow/F (n = 3). The HFD/F group was switched to a high-fat/high sugar diet. The other two groups remained on regular chow. During the last four weeks of the experiment, the HFD/F and Chow/F groups were restrained using a plastic decapicone three times per week, their fistulas were opened, and gut contents were removed using a 3 mL plastic pipette.

Following the acclimation period, rats were maintained on regular chow for an additional three days to obtain a baseline measure of food intake, body weight, and composition. Henceforth, 24-h food intake was measured once a week. Body weight and body composition were measured weekly using a minispec LF 110 BCA Analyzer (Bruker Corp., Billerica, MA, USA).

Following their recovery from surgery, animals were randomly divided into three experimental groups: Chow/C (consuming rodent chow and fistula not opened/manipulated = control; n = 3), Chow/F (consuming rodent chow and cecal content collected via fistula; n = 3), and HFD/F (consuming high-fat diet and cecal content collected via fistula; n = 3). Both the Chow/C and Chow/F groups remained on standard pellets of rat chow, and the HFD/F cohort was switched to a 45% fat, 20% sucrose diet (Research Diet #D12451, New Brunswick, NJ, USA). Rats were maintained on their respective diets for seven weeks. During the last three weeks on their respective diet, the Chow/F and HFD/F groups had their fistulas opened and closed three times a week to gauge the animals’ behavioral response to the manipulation and inspect the area.

All fistulas were designed in Shapr3D and printed on a Formlabs Form 3, 3D printer using Formlabs High Temp Resin (Formlabs Inc., Somerville, MA, USA) (Figure 1). The fistula shape was designed through a period of research and development using rat cadavers at the beginning of this study. Utilizing the rapid production nature of 3D printing, researchers were able to analyze the shape of the cadavers’ cecum and its position in the body, prototype a rough design on an Apple IPad Pro, and quickly send samples to print. This process was repeated several times to produce the final iteration of the device seen in this experiment. Upon final printing, Formlabs High Temp Resin was determined to be the most appropriate printing material for the study. Current limitations in resin printing technology mean that researchers are forced to decide between different resins with different properties, such as temperature resistance or hardness. Ultimately, it was decided that the assurance of minimal warping following the presurgical autoclave of all devices was of the utmost importance, making Formlabs High Temp Resin the clear choice for this experiment. The 10–24 thread Size, 1” long titanium hex head screw (# 94081A103; https://www.mcmaster.com/94081A103/; accessed on 12 November 2001) was used to close the fistula opening.

During the postoperative period, the rats were monitored daily for the progression of their recovery. They received injections of buprenorphine (0.05–0.1 mg/kg IM) every 12 h to minimize post-surgery pain and gentamicin (0.1 mg/kg IM) to prevent infections. Animals were closely monitored and considered as fully recovered when body weight returned to pre-surgery body weight. Three of the 12 rats in this initial proof-of-concept trial did not have a full recovery and were removed from the experiment. See Figure 3 for an overview of the experimental timeline.

Fecal samples were collected at baseline (A), after recovery from surgery (B), four weeks after the introduction of the high energy density diet (C), and on the last day of the experiment (D). Bacterial DNA was extracted from feces using a commercial kit (Quick-DNA Fecal/Soil Microbe Miniprep Kit, cat #D6010, Zymo Research, Irvine, CA, USA). High throughput sequencing was performed using Illumina MiSeq paired-end runs (GGBC, Athens, GA, USA). Amplification targeted the V3-V4 region of the 16S ribosomal RNA genes using the following primers: S-D-Bact-041-b-S-17 (5′-CCTACGGGNGGCWGCAG-3′) forward and S-D-Bact-0785-a-A-21 (5′-GACTACHVGGGTATCTAATCC-3′) [17]. Sequences were subsequently trimmed, joined, and quality filtered. To identify Operational Taxonomic Units (OTUs) and to evaluate beta and alpha diversities, we used the Quantitative Insights Into Microbial Ecology (QIIME) software package [20].

Rats were anesthetized with CO2 and transcranial perfused with 0.1 M phosphate-buffered saline (PBS; pH 7.4) followed by 4% paraformaldehyde. Hindbrains were harvested, post-fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 2-h, and immersed in 30% sucrose, 0.1% NaN3 (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA; pH 7.4) in PBS and stored at 4 °C until processing. Hindbrain samples were cryosectioned (Leica CM1950, Leica Biosystems, Wetzlar, Germany) at 20 μm thickness.

Standard immunofluorescence was used to determine microglia activation and vagal afferent density in the hindbrain. Sections were incubated overnight with a primary antibody against ionized calcium-binding adaptor molecule 1 (Iba-1, Wako, Richmond, VA, USA; Cat#019-19741, RRDI: AB_839504) followed by Alexa-488 secondary antibody to visualize microglia activation as previously described [5]. In addition, hindbrain sections were incubated with GSL I-isolectin B4 biotin-conjugated (IB4, Vector Laboratories Cat#B-1205, RRDI: AB_2314661) overnight followed by ExtrAvidin-CY3 (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA; Cat#E-4142) for 2 h to visualize primary unmyelinated vagal afferents innervating the GI tract as previously described [8]. Sections were mounted in ProLong (Molecular Probes, OR) and examined under a Nikon 80-I fluorescent microscope. The area fraction of Iba1 was analyzed using Nikon Elements AR software as previously described [18,23].

GraphPad Prism 7 (GraphPad Software, Inc., San Diego, CA, USA) was used to conduct statistical analyses. Data are expressed as mean ± SEM and were analyzed using ANOVA followed by Holm-Sidak multiple comparisons test. The alpha value for statistical significance was set at 0.05.

Multiple collections of the cecal content via 3D-printed High Temp Resin cecal fistula over a period of four weeks (Figure 3; week 9–12) proved to be an effective procedure that allowed long-term and minimally invasive access to the gut microbiome. The implantation allowed the use of a single wrap sterile transfer pipette (# HS206373C; Heathrow Scientific) to collect ~3 mL of cecal content, while inducing little to no stress to the animal during manipulation. The animals were acclimated to being restrained using plastic decapicones and displayed normal calm restraint behaviors while opening/closing the fistulas by the titanium screw.

Group means for caloric intake, body weight, and body fat mass are shown in Figure 4A–C. There was no difference in food intake between the groups, except for a spike when the high-fat diet was first introduced to the HFD/F group (Figure 4A). This transient increase in food intake has been previously reported [5]. There was no difference in body weight (Figure 4B). Body fat mass increased significantly (p < 0.05) in the high-fat fed animals (Figure 4C).

Results from microbiome analysis are shown in Figure 5. Microbiome analysis showed no persisting disruption by the cecal implantation. Principal Component Analysis (PCA; Figure 5A) showed that at baseline a, all animals clustered together. After recovery from surgery, the animals clustered away from their baseline profile. Four and eight weeks after recovery from surgery, all chow-fed animals clustered together close to their baseline profile. Four and eight weeks after the introduction of the high-fat diet, high-fat animals clustered together and away from their baseline profile. Analysis of the Shannon index, a measure of species diversity, revealed a transient non-significant decrease in bacterial diversity immediately after surgery (Figure 5B).

Analysis of the binary area fraction of IB4-labeled afferents in the intermediate nucleus tractus solitarius (NTS) showed no significant difference in the density of the vagal afferents among the groups (Figure 6). Similarly, immunostaining against Iba1 revealed that implanting a cecal fistula did not trigger microglia activation in the intermediate NTS (Figure 7).

The goal of this study was to evaluate the feasibility of a 3D-printed fistula designed in our laboratory as a method for obtaining direct access to gut microbiome without inducing long-term dysbiosis following the implantation of the fistula in the cecum of rats. Results of the study show that implanting a cecal fistula did not induce long-term dysbiosis and did not affect the integrity of vagal gut-brain connections. Moreover, cecal fistula manipulation did not impact food intake, body weight, or fat mass. These results indicate the implantation of a cecal fistula is an effective procedure that allows long-term and minimally invasive access to the gut microbiome to better facilitate future studies on microbiome transplants by minimizing the limitations of currently used methods in the field of microbiome research. The surgical implantation procedure proved to be well tolerated among study animals with no alteration in their mobility or physical activity, indicating the long-term efficacy of the device. By the endpoint of the experiment, all animals were found to be in good health.

While our results advance the knowledge on cecum fistulation and enable low-stress and long-term access to gut microbiome, there are two major limitations in this study that will be addressed in future research. First, using more animals in each group could introduce the statistical significance in microglia activation changes observed after the fistula implantation, suggesting that the procedure is altering vagal gut-brain signaling. And second, the microbiome analysis from cecal content samples, collected during the study, could directly address the influence of oxygen entering the cecum on intestinal flora and fermentation. Therefore, we plan to address the above limitations in future studies.

In conclusion, our results demonstrate that 3D-printed cecal fistula implantation is an effective procedure that allows long-term and minimally invasive access to the gut microbiome in rats without the confounding negative side effects observed with other methods currently in use. Moreover, the manipulation of gut microbiome via cecal fistula could enable potential treatments for a wide array of diseases. Studies are now needed to explore this method further, in order to better understand the mechanisms by which researchers can influence the development or treatment of disease through the manipulation of the gut microbiome.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

