Intestinal transgene delivery with native E. coli chassis allows persistent physiological changes







Live bacterial therapeutics (LBTs) could reverse diseases by engrafting in the gut and providing persistent beneficial functions in the host. However, attempts to functionally manipulate the gut microbiome of conventionally raised (CR) hosts have been unsuccessful because engineered microbial organisms (i.e., chassis) have difficulty in colonizing the hostile luminal environment. In this proof-of-concept study, we use native bacteria as chassis for transgene delivery to impact CR host physiology. Native Escherichia coli bacteria isolated from the stool cultures of CR mice were modified to express functional genes. The reintroduction of these strains induces perpetual engraftment in the intestine. In addition, engineered native E. coli can induce functional changes that affect physiology of and reverse pathology in CR hosts months after administration. Thus, using native bacteria as chassis to “knock in” specific functions allows mechanistic studies of specific microbial activities in the microbiome of CR hosts and enables LBT with curative intent.



Native E. coli strains isolated from mouse stool are genetically engineered for long-term engraftment in the conventional mouse gut and enable long-term systemic effects on the host, such as improvements in insulin sensitivity in mouse models of type 2 diabetes.

Gut microbes sense and condition the luminal environment over time periods measured in years. Numerous chronic human diseases, including obesity (Muscogiuri et al., 2019; Zarrinpar et al., 2014), non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (Aron-Wisnewsky et al., 2020; Saran et al., 2020), type 2 diabetes (Gurung et al., 2020; Zarrinpar et al., 2014), atherosclerosis (Allaband et al., 2021; Jie et al., 2017; Xue et al., 2021), polycystic ovary syndrome (Rizk and Thackray, 2021), inflammatory bowel disease (Kostic et al., 2014), and cancer (Sepich-Poore et al., 2021), have protracted symptomology and have consequently been targets of potential engineered, live bacterial therapeutics (LBTs). LBTs can also be designed to express functions that address monogenic inborn errors of metabolism (e.g., phenylalanine metabolism in patients with phenylketonuria) and other orphan diseases (Isabella et al., 2018; Puurunen et al., 2021). Engineered bacteria also enable otherwise challenging mechanistic studies, allowing researchers to learn how individual bacterial functions or proteins in the microbiome contribute to host physiology, pathophysiology, or the microbiome community (Biteen et al., 2016). Although synthetic biologists have designed increasingly elaborate genetic circuits that in principle could risk-stratify patients and combat disease, these circuits have only worked in reduced-community models in vivo (i.e., gnotobiotic mice, antibiotic-treated mice) (Claesen and Fischbach, 2015; Mimee et al., 2016).

Here we present a proof-of-concept study that advances our ability to use engineered bacteria to effectively change physiology in CR wild-type (WT) hosts by demonstrating that native bacteria can serve as chassis for transgene delivery that modifies the host phenotype. This is accomplished by identifying a genetically tractable, native bacterial strain from a host (i.e., an undomesticated E. coli), modifying this strain to express a transgene of interest, and then reintroducing the engineered native bacteria to the host (Figure 1A). The transgenes of interest included bile salt hydrolase (BSH), a prokaryotic bile acid deconjugation enzyme (Figure S1A) that can potentially affect host metabolic homeostasis, and IL-10, a mammalian cytokine that can function as an anti-inflammatory agent. After a single treatment, engineered native bacteria engraft throughout the entire gut of CR hosts for the lifetime of the mouse, retain the function of their transgene, induce metabolomic changes, affect host physiology, and even ameliorate pathophysiological conditions. We evaluate the robustness of the approach by performing experiments in non-sterile facilities, testing biocontainment between co-housed littermates, and changing diets. We demonstrate the translational potential of this method by successfully and stably transforming native, undomesticated, human-derived E. coli that can be used for transgene delivery in humans to potentially treat disease. Although the individual steps of the proposed approach for engineering undomesticated native bacteria to express the desired function of interest are not particularly difficult, the combination is novel, and, put together, they clearly demonstrate that even resource-limited labs can accomplish what has yet to be achieved with other synthetic biology approaches: persistent functional manipulation of the luminal environment of CR hosts to study the physiological effects.

An ideal chassis is genetically tractable, can stably and persistently colonize the selected host, express the gene of interest persistently (and without much effect on bacterial fitness), and impose a functional change to alter the lumen and/or serum to affect host physiology (Figure 1B). Importantly, the strategy should be easily translated to humans, as this has been a particular challenge in adapting synthetic biology tools to clinical problems (Figure 1B). In our studies, we used an undomesticated, native E. coli, EcAZ-1, isolated from the stool of a CR-WT C57BL/6 male mouse acquired from Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME). As measured using MUMmer4 alignments (Març ais et al., 2018), EcAZ-1 is a closely related strain to NGF-1 (Kotula et al., 2014; Riglar et al., 2017), with >99% identity across the full length of the main chromosome and 8-kb plasmid, and 88% in the 42-kb plasmid. E. coli MP-1 (Lasaro et al., 2014) is more distantly related, with ~97% identity across only 87% of the EcAZ-1 chromosome. The 8-kb plasmid of EcAZ-1 is present in MP-1 at >99% identity across its length.

We performed additional assays to quantitatively assess protein expression in EcAZ-2BSH+ and EcAZ-2IL10+. Proteomic analysis demonstrates that BSH is one of the most highly expressed proteins in EcAZ-2BSH+, whereas it is not detectable in EcAZ-1 or EcAZ-2 (Figure 1E; Figure S1F). Constitutively expressed BSH produced by EcAZ-2BSH+ converts TDCA to DCA in a controlled in vitro assay rapidly, whereas no shift is seen with EcAZ-1 or EcAZ-2 (Figure 1F; Figure S1G). For EcAZ-2IL10+, IL-10 was detected in cell lysates but not the supernatant (Figure 1G). Thus, proteins produced by native E. coli are functional and highly expressed constitutively.

Next, we assessed the candidate chassis’ ability to stably colonize the murine gut by gavaging 1010 CFUs of engineered bacteria with different E. coli chassis in CR-WT C57BL/6, non-antibiotic-treated mice. EcAZ-2 stably maintained colonization in 100% (n = 8) of mice for over 110 days in a non-sterile, low-barrier facility (Figures 2A and S2A). Domesticated lab bacteria that are often used as chassis for LBT applications (i.e., E. coli MG1655 and E. coli Nissle 1917), lost colonization over time (p = 0.02, log rank test, Figure S2A) and did not maintain colonization long-term (p < 0.0001, Fisher’s exact test, Figure 2B). Mice that had detectable non-native E. coli in their stool were nearly two orders of magnitude lower (as determined by CFU/g of stool) than those treated with EcAZ-2 (Figure 2A). Co-housing of mice colonized with EcAZ-2 with non-colonized mice did not lead to horizontal transmission between mice, despite the opportunity for coprophagia (Figure 2C). This is likely due to an insufficiently high enough dose of bacteria being transmitted through coprophagia, as gavage with 102 and 104 CFUs of EcAZ-2 in CR-WT C57BL/6, non-antibiotic-treated mice did not lead to engraftment in any mice in the non-sterile low-barrier facility, whereas 106 CFUs led to sporadic—and 108 CFUs more consistent—engraftment (Figure 2D). Mice gavaged with 108 CFUs were significantly more likely to be colonized than those gavaged with lower doses at every time point measured (Fisher’s exact test, Figure S2B).

We cultured gastrointestinal tissues (i.e., duodenum, jejunum, ileum, cecum, and rectum) to determine the extent of bacterial colonization in the various regions of the gut. In contrast to what has been reported for engineered non-native E. coli (Isabella et al., 2018), EcAZ-2 colonizes the proximal gut/small intestine regardless of whether it contains the bsh gene, Il-10 gene, or not, with the highest colonization in the cecum and ileum for the BSH strain and cecum and jejunum for the IL-10 strain (Figures 2H,
2I, and S2H). Colonization throughout the GI tract was consistent in fed and fasted mice (Figure S2H), and isolates from throughout the GI tract retained transgene activity (Figure S2I). These experiments demonstrate that EcAZ-2 can stably and persistently colonize CR-WT hosts for perpetuity, while retaining functionality of a gene of interest.

After demonstrating that native bacteria are genetically tractable and can persistently colonize the proximal gut and colon, we assessed whether the transgene delivered by the EcAZ-2 chassis can functionally manipulate the luminal environment of CR hosts. We used bsh as our transgene to evaluate the native bacterial chassis because its functions are well-described and it has been studied in reduced-community/gnotobiotic models (Jones et al., 2008, 2014a; Yao et al., 2018). Bile acid changes induced by BSH activity are presumed to affect multiple metabolic systems, including glucose, lipid, and bile acid homeostasis, as well as immunity/inflammation and thermogenesis (Joyce et al., 2014b; Wahlström et al., 2016). Hepatic primary conjugated bile acids are deconjugated by BSH (Figure 3A). Whereas the ileum has active transporters for the highly polar conjugated bile acids, deconjugated bile acids are less polar and are reabsorbed through passive diffusion. In the distal gut, deconjugated bile acids are substrates for luminal bacterial bile acid biotransformations that convert them to secondary bile acids. Secondary bile acids can be reabsorbed by passive diffusion, conjugated by the liver into conjugated secondary bile acids, and re-released into the lumen. Hence, increased BSH activity can affect all of these various bile acid pools.

There were no E. coli detectable by ASV matching the 16S rRNA gene sequence of E. coli prior to gavage. Although E. coli could be identified in some of the samples from mice treated with EcAZ-2 or EcAZ-2BSH+, most had levels of E. coli in stool that were statistically indistinguishable as a group from the vehicle-treated controls (Figure 3H). Overall, based on 16S rRNA gene sequencing, E. coli comprised <0.1% of the fecal microbiome. Principal coordinate analysis of the UniFrac weighted β-diversity performed at 2, 10, and 16 weeks could not distinguish the three treatment groups (Figure 3I; pseudo-F = 1.304, p = 0.233). The lack of a difference is reflected in the ileum as well (Figure 3J; pseudo-F = 1.114, p = 0.339). This demonstrates that, even at low abundances, the native E. coli can be used to introduce a function of interest in CR hosts, and that they do so without significantly altering the microbial community already established in the host.

We next investigated whether transgene delivery and expression by the native E. coli chassis can affect host physiology by first determining the impact of colonization with EcAZ-2BSH+ on circulating bile acids. Mice colonized with EcAZ-2BSH+ had reduced total serum bile acids, increased primary bile acids, and decreased secondary bile acids, though these did not achieve significance (Figures 4A and S4A). There were larger changes in specific circulating bile acids, including known agonists and antagonists of FXR, such as increased TCA and TbMCA, respectively, compared with their deconjugated counterparts (Figures 4B,
4C, and S4B). We measured the impact of these differences in circulating bile acids on hepatic gene expression, focusing on genes important for bile acid metabolism. We found increased expression of Fxr, Shp, and Cyp27a1 (Figure 4D), consistent with increased bile acid biosynthesis through the alternative pathway, perhaps to alleviate the higher excretion of bile acids in the stool of mice colonized with EcAZ-2BSH+. This demonstrates that the addition of a single gene into the microbiome via engineered native bacteria can significantly alter host physiology.

Decreased postprandial insulin induced by EcAZ-2BSH+ suggests improved insulin sensitivity and glucose tolerance. To determine whether transgene delivery with a native E. coli chassis could be used to ameliorate disease, we investigated the effect of EcAZ-2BSH+ in a genetic model of type 2 diabetes, the Ob/Ob mice. EcAZ-2 and EcAZ-2BSH+ stably colonized CR Ob/Ob mice (Figure S4F). Similar to what we had observed in CR-WT mice, EcAZ-2BSH+ did not induce a change in body weight (Figure 4G). Despite identical body weights, Ob/Ob mice colonized with EcAZ-2BSH+ had significant improvements in insulin sensitivity compared with the control cohort (Figure 4H) after receiving a single treatment of engineered native bacteria more than 3 months earlier. Thus, these experiments show that transgene delivery using native E. coli affects the serum metabolome, extra-intestinal (e.g., hepatic) gene expression, and host physiology, and ameliorates disease months after a single administration.

To determine whether the engineered native bacteria strategy can be translated to humans, we isolated E. coli strains from biopsies obtained from multiple regions of the gastrointestinal tracts of volunteers undergoing routine outpatient endoscopy. Nine isolated strains were assessed for antibiotic sensitivity, tractability via transduction, transformation with assorted sizes of plasmids, and conjugation (a subset shown in Table 1). Many isolates were sensitive to commonly used laboratory antibiotics, including kanamycin, chloramphenicol, and carbenicillin. All isolates evaluated were resistant to transduction via P1vir when lysates were generated from E. coli MG1655 or E. coli Nissle 1917. Strains were transformable with several differently sized plasmids. Conjugation using a modified F-plasmid (Figure S5) proved to be a universally successful method for manipulation for 10/10 human-derived E. coli, quantified for a subset of the strains shown in Table 1. To encourage plasmid retention, conjugation machinery was removed post-transfer. Thus, the first steps of the engineered native bacteria approach, identification/isolation of genetically tractable bacteria and modification to express a gene of interest, can be translated to humans. Further studies are necessary to determine whether the autologous transfer of engineered native bacteria can lead to long-lasting colonization of a human host and treatment of long-standing chronic conditions and genetic diseases.

Abbreviations: Cm, chloramphenicol; Kan, kanamycin; Carb, carbenicillin; see also Figure S5.

Most therapies that target microbiome composition do not have a detectable impact on the gut microbiome and are not robust to the interpersonal diversity and plasticity of the microbiome in human hosts (Kristensen et al., 2016; Mimee et al., 2016). In addition, many different configurations of the gut microbiota lead to the same functional result (Human Microbiome Project, 2012; Turnbaugh et al., 2009), suggesting that microbial function may be difficult to manipulate with therapies that target the composition of the microbiome alone. To develop a better mechanistic understanding of the microbe-host relationship and more effective microbiome-mediated therapies, approaches based on functional modulation of the gut microbiome are necessary. However, these approaches have been difficult to develop, and none have demonstrated long-term engraftment with a change in physiology and/or improvement of pathologic phenotype.

The central novelty of engineered native E. coli is that they demonstrate: (1) stable, long-term engraftment of low-abundance organisms in the absence of antibiotic pre-treatment or selection; (2) persistent metabolomic change from a single treatment; (3) persistent physiological change from a single treatment; and (4) reversal of the pathological phenotype after a single treatment. The strategy of using native bacteria as a chassis to introduce transgenes of interest can be used for different organ systems (e.g., skin, lungs, vagina), expanding our ability to perform mechanistic studies and providing a strategy for the creation of therapeutic engineered native bacteria in any microbiome- mediated/modulated disease. Moreover, personalized engineered native bacteria will help overcome the barriers that have limited the use of engineered bacteria in humans, including interpersonal differences and micro-niche changes induced by disease. Finally, life-long compliance with chronic therapies is a substantial burden in patients with chronic diseases, which contributes to their poor morbidity and mortality—and to rising healthcare costs. Some engineered probiotics in development for disease intervention require multiple doses (sometimes up to 3 times daily), which may add significant complications for feasibility, cost, and adherence. If the engineered native bacteria strategy is successfully developed and translated to humans, it has the potential to introduce novel, curative biotherapeutics that improve treatment of chronic diseases without relying on patient compliance.

Our analysis of isolated human native E. coli demonstrates that these bacteria are quite resistant to genetic manipulation. However, several recent publications report more effective methods of engineering native bacteria (Brophy et al., 2018; Jin et al., 2022; Rubin et al., 2022; Wiles et al., 2018). Any function engineered into native bacteria will likely reduce the fitness of bacteria unless there is selective pressure to maintain the transgene of interest. Moreover, some genes may be more burdensome than others. Nevertheless, in these proof-of-concept studies we have demonstrated that, even without selective pressure, native E. coli have the potential to maintain an engineered function for years. IL-10 and BSH production are likely not burdensome enough to affect chassis fitness and native E. coli are resilient enough to continue to constitutively express the transgenes of interest. However, whether this observation can be generalized to all other functions potentially introduced with native E. coli chassis is unlikely. Moreover, it is unclear whether other native chassis are as resilient, and thus would elicit the same physiological response, as the native E. coli described in this study.

Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper and include the following:

Further information and requests for resources should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Amir Zarrinpar (ude.dscu@rapnirraza).

EcAZ-1, EcAZ-2, EcAZ-2BSH+, and EcAZ-2IL10+ will be made available subject to a materials transfer agreement with the University of California, San Diego.

Data have been deposited at the European Nucleotide Archive under accession number ENA:PRJEB39003 and are publicly available as of the date of publication. Proteome data was uploaded to massive.ucsd.edu and can be accessed using the following identifiers: PXD032187.

Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request.

All animal experiments were conducted in accordance with the guidelines of the IACUC of the University of California, San Diego. C57BL/6 mice (Jackson Laboratories) or B6.Cg-Lepob/J (Jackson Laboratories) were housed in a specific pathogen free facility (irradiated chow and autoclaved bedding), or when specified, in a separate section of the vivarium that was a low barrier facility (non-irradiated chow and non-autoclaved bedding; e.g., Figures 1A and
1D). Mice were housed 4–5 per cage unless otherwise stated. They were fed a normal-chow diet (Diet 7912, Teklad Diets, Madion, WI). After an acclimation period, 12-week-old male mice were pseudorandomized into two groups. This pseudorandomization was based on the initial weight of the mice; in the end, the mean and standard deviation of the weight of the mice was the same between all groups. Mice were gavaged with 200 μL of either PBS or ~1×1010 cfu/mL of the corresponding bacterial strain unless otherwise stated. Body weight and food consumption were monitored every 1–2 weeks. In the experiment including mice on a 0% fat diet, weight was monitored more frequently, and the study was terminated due to poor health (e.g. low weight, instances of bone fractures) of the animals in accordance with our Animal Care Protocol.

For human-derived strains, volunteers undergoing outpatient endoscopy were selected in accordance with VA San Diego IRB #H130266. Meta data including sex, gender identity, and age of the participants were not recorded as they did not pertain to the goal of the study.

For murine derived strains; stool was collected from a male C57BL/6 male mouse acquired from Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME). Stool was suspended in sterile DI water and homogenized for 2 min. at 3500 rpm in Mini-Beadbeater-24 (Biospec, Bartlesville, OK). Homogenized stool was plated on MacConkey agar containing lactose. Potential E. coli colonies were selected based on colony shape and ability to ferment lactose. They were cultured for isolation twice. 16S rRNA genes were amplified using the primers described below (Illumina Part #15044223 Rev. B) and sequenced using Sanger sequencing (Eton Biosciences, La Jolla, CA) to confirm identity.

(Klindworth et al., 2013).

The index native murine E. coli used for transformation was labeled as EcAZ-1. Genome assembly for this strain can be found at the European Nucleotide Archive under accession number ENA:PRJEB39003. Pacbio and Illumina reads were assembled using Unicycler (https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005595) v.0.5.0 using default settings and annotated with Prokka (https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btu153) v.1.14.6 with an assigned species of Escherichia coli and adding Swissprot proteins (downloaded 6/16/2021) as an additional annotation source. For EcAZ-2, ECAZ-1 was exposed to P1vir lysate trained on MG1655 with kanamycin resistance (aph) and fluorescence (GFP-mut2) cassette added at the attB site using recombination (pSIM18). Successful transductants were selected for using kanamycin resistance (aph) and fluorescence (EcAZ-2). EcAZ-1 was nearly 100-fold more resistant to phage transduction than E. coli Nissle. For the construction of EcAZ-2 containing bile salt hydrolase (BSH; EcAZ-2BSH+), EcAZ-1 was exposed to P1vir lysate trained on MG1655 containing chloramphenicol resistance (cat) and bsh cassette added at the yfgG site using recombination (pSIM18). Successful transductant was selected for functionality of BSH and chloramphenicol resistance. Verification of BSH functionality was verified by plating on lactose-containing LB plates supplemented with TDCA. Precipitation of DCA indicated functioning BSH. The successful transductant was then exposed to lysate with kanamycin resistance (aph) and fluorescence (GFP-mut2). Successful transductant was selected for gain of kanamycin resistance. The bsh gene used for this study naturally occurs in Lactobacillus salivarius JCM1046 and is effective at altering bile acids in germ free and antibiotic-treated, conventionalized mice when expressed by an E. coli Nissle chassis (https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1323599111). The first insertion event (for the cassette containing aph and gfp) occurred between chromosomal bases 3,267,361–3,274,418, which covers a Ribosomal RNA operon, murI (glutamate racemase) and btuB (vitamin B12 / E colicin / bacteriophage BF23 outer membrane porin BtuB). The second insertion event (for the cassette containing cat and bsh) occurred between chromosomal bases 1,886,038–1,887,917, which covers ydcM (putative transposase), ybhB (putative kinase inhibitor), and ybhC (outer membrane lipoprotein).

For the construction of EcAZ-2 containing IL-10 (EcAZ-2IL10+), EcAZ-1 was exposed to a lysate trained on MG1655 containing chloramphenicol resistance (cat) and human Il10. The successful transductants were selected for via IL-10 gene detection by PCR and chloramphenicol resistance. Insertion occurred in the yfgG (metal ion stress response protein) gene. Verification of IL-10 expression was performed by growing a overnight cultures of 6 isolates per mouse in Super Optimal Broth (SOB), 12.5 ug/mL of Kanamycin and 10 ug/mL of chloramphenicol. The OD600 of the cultures were read and the lowest value was used to normalize the amount of bacteria used on the ELISA. The normalized cultures were centrifuged and and resuspended in Assay diluent (10% FBS in 1× PBS). The samples underwent four freeze-thaw cycles and the cell lysates were tested on a human IL-10 detection ELISA (Catalog 430601, Biolegend). The supernatant that was drawn off each sample before normalization was also tested on a human IL-10 detection ELISA (Catalog 430601, Biolegend).

Overnight cultures of SOB, supplemented with no antibiotic for EcAZ-1, 12.5 ug/mL of kanamycin for EcAZ-2, and 10 ug/mL of chloramphenicol for EcAZ-2BSH+ and EcAZ-2IL10+, were back diluted 1:100 in the same media described and loaded in triplicate in a 96-well plate. Blanks for each media were also loaded in triplicate. Incubation and measurements were done in an Infinite M Nano+ plate reader (Teacn, Morrisville, NC) at 37°C. OD600 measurements were performed every 10 minutes for 18 hours directly after 5 seconds of shaking. OD was determined by subtracting out the average blank for the media type for each time point.

Human bacterial isolates were assessed for susceptibility to commonly used laboratory antibiotics chloramphenicol, kanamycin, and carbenicillin. Overnight cultures of each strain were grown in LB broth. Antibiotics were diluted in Mueller Hinton broth to the following working concentrations: (1) 10 ug/mL, 5 ug/ml, and 2.5 ug/mL of chloramphenicol, (2) 25 ug/mL, 12.5 ug/mL, and 6.25 ug/mL of kanamycin, (3) 100 ug/mL, 50 ug/mL, and 25 ug/mL. Overnight cultures were back diluted 1:1000 into Mueller Hinton broth with antibiotics in a 96-well plate and incubated at 37°C for 18 hours. OD600 measurements were performed at the beginning and end of the 18 hour incubation directly after 5 seconds of shaking. OD was determined by subtracting out the average blank for the media type for each time point.

Human strains were tested for susceptibility to transformation via electroporation. Electrocompetent cells were prepared in 1mM MOPS buffer. Three plasmid sizes were assessed included pTrcHisC (4.4kb), a modified version of pNCM (pNCM[ΔccdB::aadA Δrep::[cat gfp]], roughly 70kb), and an additionally modified version of pNCM (pNCM[traMJ::[aph FRT] Δtra ΔfinO202::[N25-gfp]], roughly 35kb). All plasmid transformations were assessed at 1800 V, 200 ohms, and 25 uF. Strains were recovered in SOC for 1.5 hours and plated on selective and non-selective LB plates. After overnight incubation at 37°C, colonies were counted and CFU/mL was determined for successful transformants and viable cells present. Efficiency was determined as CFU/mL on selective plates divided by CFU/mL on non-selective plates. Due to complications with antibiotic selection for the modified version of pNCM, some transformation efficiencies could not be calculated. In these instances, the limit of detection is reported.

Human bacterial isolates were assessed for susceptibility to conjugation using a 2,6-diaminopimelic acid dependent donor strain containing a modified F-plasmid, pNCM, containing a kanamycin resistance marker and green fluorescent protein with a deletion in finO to promote conjugation. The human and donor strains were grown to mid-log phase growth (OD600 0.4–0.6) in SOC. The human strains were each mixed 1:1 with the donor strain and incubated in SOC with no shaking for 4 hours. Successful conjugates were selected on LB plates for the ability to grow without DAP, and for a gain of GFP and kanamycin resistance. After overnight incubation at 37°C, colonies were counted and CFU/mL was determined for successful conjugants and viable cells present. Efficiency was determined as CFU/mL on selective plates divided by CFU/mL on non-selective plates.

For stool, we collected 3–5 stool pellets from individual mice and weighed them. 1 mL of sterile deionized water was added to each sample along with one sterile chrome bead (Neta Scientific, Hainesport, NJ). Samples were homogenized for 2 min. at 3500 rpm in Mini-Beadbeater-24 (Biospec, Bartlesville, OK). For control samples, homogenized stool was plated on kanamycin and chloramphenicol to check for bacterial contamination. For EcAZ-2 colonized mice, samples were plated on chloramphenicol to check for unintended bacterial contamination and diluted and plated on kanamycin to calculate CFU/gram of stool. The EcAZ-2BSH+ and EcAZ-2IL10+ stool was diluted and plated on kanamycin and chloramphenicol.

For each region of the GI tract, verification of IL-10 expression was performed by growing an overnight culture of isolates in SOB, 12.5 ug/mL of Kanamycin and 10 ug/mL of chloramphenicol. In order to lyse the bacteria, the cultures were centrifuged, and the resulting pellet was resuspended in Assay diluent (10% FBS in 1× PBS). The samples were then flash frozen and defrosted for 4 rounds to lyse the cells and used on a IL-10 detection ELISA (Catalog 430601, Biolegend).

Three pairs of 6-month-old male C57BL/6 mice were co-housed in a low barrier facility (where food and bedding were not autoclaved). From each cage, one mouse was gavaged with 200 μL of PBS while the other was gavaged with 200 μL ~1×1010 cfu/mL EcAZ-2. After gavage, mice were single housed for a week. Five days post-gavage, baseline stool was collected from each mouse. The pairs were then reunited with their cage mate. Initial stool collection demonstrated coprophagia but no persistent colonization. After 19 days, the protocol was modified so that mice were separated and individually housed one day prior to stool collection. After stool collection, each mouse was reunited with their cage mates until the next stool collection. Thus, with the revised protocol, coprophagic incidents would no longer appear and only incidents of horizontal transfer/colonization would be detectable.

20 mice were singly housed with 5 mice per condition. All mice were house in the low barrier facility. Mice were gavaged with 200 μL of either ~1×108 cfu/mL, 1×106 cfu/mL, 1×104 cfu/mL, or 1×102 cfu/mL of EcAZ-1. Stool collections were performed 2 days, 5 days, 1 week, 2 week, and 20 days after gavage as described above.

Germ-free C57BL/6 mice were bred and maintained in sterile flexible film isolators and screened for bacterial, viral, and fungal contamination as described (https://doi.org/10.30802/AALAS-JAALAS-18-000130). Mice were fed autoclaved chow (Envigo) and transferred into the Sentry SPP cage (Allentown). Mice were inoculated with corresponding bacteria oral gavage. Stool was collected for bile acid analysis 7 days later. Mono-colonization was confirmed upon euthanasia of the gnotobiotic mice.

For sample preparation, cell pellets from vehicle, EcAZ-2, and EcAZ-2BSH+ E. coli were analyzed by quantitative multiplex proteomics at the UCSD Collaborative Center for Multiplexed Proteomics (https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020.07.040). EcAZ-1, EcAZ-2, and EcAZ-2BSH+ were grown overnight in LB with their respective antibiotics in replicate then back diluted 1:20 into 10mL LB broth and grown to mid-log phase (OD600 0.4–0.6). Samples were resuspended in equal volumes of lysis buffer (6M urea, 7% SDS, 50 mM TEAB, titrated to pH 8.1 with phosphoric acid) and sonicated. Disulfide bonds were reduced in 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 56 °C for 30 min and free cysteines were alkylated in 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in a darkened environment for 20 min. The alkylation reaction was quenched for 15 min at room temperature through the addition of an equivalent volume of DTT as in the reduction reaction. Proteins were then trapped using ProtiFi S-Trap columns, digested with trypsin (Promega, V5113), and eluted according to manufacturing protocols. Eluents were desalted on C18 columns using instructions provided by the manufacturer (Waters). Desalted samples were dried under vacuum. Samples were subjected to peptide quantification using a Pierce Colorimetric Peptide Quantification Assay kit per the manufacturer’s instructions. 50 μg of each sample was separated for further processing, with four samples aliquoted twice to reach a total of 16 samples.

For data processing and normalization, raw files were searched using the SEQUEST algorithm in Proteome Discoverer 2.5 against the reference proteome for E. coli strain NGF-1 with the BSH1 sequence added (Uniprot Accession Q1WR93). Data were searched using a precursor mass tolerance of 50 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.6. Static modifications were specified as follows: TMTpro on lysines and N-termini and carbamidomethylation of cysteines. Dynamic modifications were specified to include oxidation of methionines. Resulting peptide spectral matches were filtered at a 0.01 FDR by the Percolator module against the decoy database. Peptide spectral matches were exported, summed to the protein level, and batch corrected as previously described (https://doi.org/10.1074/mcp.M116.066019). Following batch correction, each sample normalized using Box-Cox power transformation (MASS R package, version 7.3–55), abundances were scaled between 0–1 (reshape R package, version 0.8.8), and each sample was standardized by its mean (https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2517-6161.1964.tb00553.x). Sample duplicates were averaged at this step. Final values represent normalized relative protein abundances.

Overnight cultures of LB, supplemented with no antibiotic for EcAZ-1, 12.5 ug/mL of kanamycin for EcAZ-2, and 10 ug/mL of chloramphenicol for EcAZ-2BSH+ were back diluted 1:20 in 1mL LB with the appropriate antibiotics and grown to mid-log phase (OD600 0.4–0.6). Cultures were centrifuged and the cell pellet was resuspended in 1mL of 0.1M sodium phosphate buffer, pH 6.0. Bacteria underwent freeze-thaw lysis and spun to pellet cell debris. Supernatant was mixed with 50uM TDCA and aliquots were removed and quenched in equal volume of 0.5M HCl at each time point. Samples were stored at −80°C until mass spectroscopy analysis.

Bile acids were extracted from samples as described before (https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-05336-9, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00216-016-0048-1). Briefly, stool samples were homogenized and extracted in methanol (10 mg of sample/100 μL) containing heavy internal standards. Serum samples (25 μL) were extracted with 75 μL of methanol containing heavy internal standards. After vortexing for 10 minutes and centrifuging (16,000 × g, 4 C, 10 min), supernatants were transferred to glass vials for injection. Bile acids were analyzed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 LC system (Thermo) coupled to a TSQ Quantiva mass spectrometer (Thermo) fitted with a Kinetex C18 reversed phase column (2.6 μm, 150 × 2.1 mm i.d., Phenomenex). The following LC solvents were used: solution A, 0.1 % formic acid and 20 mM ammonium acetate in water, solution B, acetonitrile/methanol (3/1, v/v) containing 0.1 % formic acid and 20 mM ammonium acetate. The following reversed phase gradient was utilized: at a flow rate of 0.2 mL/min with a gradient consisting of 25–29 % B in 1 min, 29–33 % B in 14 min, 33–70 % B in 15 min, up to 100 % B in 1 min, 100 % B for 9 min and re-equilibrated to 25 % B for 10 min, for a total run time of 50 min. The injection volume for all samples was 10 μL, the column oven temperature was set to 50°C and the autosampler kept at 4°C. MS analyses were performed using electrospray ionization in positive and negative ion modes, with spray voltages of 3.5 and −3 kV, respectively, ion transfer tube temperature of 325°C, and vaporizer temperature of 275°C. Multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) was performed by using mass transitions between specific parent ions into corresponding fragment ions for each analyte. Results were quantified using isotopically labeled internal standards. Data were averaged across samples.

The bile acids measured using this technique include CA, TCA, bMCA, TbMCA, α-muricholic acid (aMCA), tauro-α-muricholic acid (TaMCA), chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA), taurochenodeoxycholic acid (TCDCA), DCA, TDCA, hyocholic acid (HCA), taurohyocholic acid (THCA), ω-muricholic acid (oMCA), tauro-ω-muricholic acid (ToMCA), ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) and lithocholic acid (LCA). Glycine conjugated bile acids were not detected. Of note, no UDCA was detected in the stool. Total bile acid measurements was the sum of all bile acids measured using mass spectrometry. Primary bile acids included CA, TCA, aMCA, TaMCA, bMCA, TbMCA, CDCA, and TCDCA. Secondary bile acids included DCA, TDCA, oMCA, ToMCA, UDCA, and LCA.

16S rRNA gene amplicon sequences were processed using Qiime2 (version 2020.6) using default parameters (https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-019-0209-9). ASVs were generated by the Deblur method, trimmed to 120bp (https://doi.org/10.1128/mSystems.00191-16). Taxonomy was assigned via the sklearn plugin (https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.05.326504; https://doi.org/10.1186/s40168-018-0470-z) against the Silva v123 model (https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gks1219), and ASVs were filtered to remove Eukaryotic, Mitochondrial, Plastid, and unassigned taxa. The phylogenetic diversity metrics and PCoA were then calculated on samples rarefied to 4000 reads.

The livers and terminal ileum from control and EcAZ-2BSH+ mice were flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. The frozen tissues were homogenized and RNA was extracted using TriZol reagent according to manufacturer’s instructions. 1ug of RNA was reverse transcribed using quanta biosciences qScript cDNA supermix (Cat# 95048–025). The samples were diluted 1:50 and qRTPCR was run using FastStart Universal SYBR Green Master (Rox) (Cat# 4913850001) on an Applied Biosystems QuantStudio 5. The data were analyzed and gene expression was expressed relative to mrpl46.

Blood was collected from fasted (16 h) or re-fed animals (30 min). Re-feeding was performed by oral gavage of Ensure (Abbott, Columbus, Ohio). In male mice, serum insulin was performed using the Bio-Plex Pro Mouse Diabetes 8-Plex Assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) as per the manufacturer’s protocol.

Glucose tolerance assays were performed on fasted mice (16 h, Pur-O-Cel bedding) by monitoring glucose levels after a glucose bolus (10 uL of 20% glucose/kg of body weight (BW)) via oral gavage. Glucose concentration was measured from a tail snip using a OneTouch Ultra glucometer. Tail tips were anesthetized with a topical anesthetic (Actavis, Parsippany-Troy Hills, NJ) prior to snip.

10-week old female mice were fasted (5 h, Pur-O-Cel bedding) and then bled from the tail vein to collect fasted plasma. Two days later, mice were again fasted (14–16 h, Pur-O-Cel bedding) and then orally gavaged with 0.5g glucose/kg body weight of Ensure (Abbott, Columbus, Ohio) to measure insulin response to a mixed meal. 30 minutes after the gavage, blood was collected through a submandibular bleed. Serum insulin from fasted and fed blood was measured using a mouse ELISA (Crystal Chem Ultra Sensitive Mouse ELISA Kit).

All comparisons of EcAZ-2 to EcAZ-2BSH+ were calculated using Mann-Whitney U test or Kruskal-Wallis test with post-hoc Dunn’s multiple comparison test as specified with the exception of Figures 1E,
1F,
4D, and S3A–S3C, which used a student’s t-test due to low sample size. When student’s t-test was used, normality of data was confirmed with a Q-Q plot prior to the test. For qualitative 2×2 comparisons (Figures 2B and S2B), a Fisher’s exact test was used to determine significance.

For proteomics data, statistical tests assuming normalized data with equal means and unequal variances were used. To compare all three groups, Brown-Forsythe and Welch one-way ANOVA was used. A p-value of < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Protein abundances were graphed using GraphPad Prism software (version 9.3.1).

DECLARATION OF INTERESTS

A.Z. and S.D.B. are co-founders and equity-holders in Endure Biotherapeutics. They have filed a provisional patent based on the work described here (US Provisional Patent No. 16/604,138).

INCLUSION AND DIVERSITY

One or more of the authors of this paper self-identifies as an underrepresented ethnic minority in science. One or more of the authors of this paper self-identifies as a member of the LGBTQ+ community. One or more of the authors of this paper received support from a program designed to increase minority representation in science.

SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION

Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2022.06.050.

