Metagenomics: a path to understanding the gut microbiome

The gut microbiome is a major determinant of host health, yet it is only in the last 2 decades that the advent of next-generation sequencing has enabled it to be studied at a genomic level. Shotgun sequencing is beginning to provide insight into the prokaryotic as well as eukaryotic and viral components of the gut community, revealing not just their taxonomy, but also the functions encoded by their collective metagenome. This revolution in understanding is being driven by continued development of sequencing technologies and in consequence necessitates reciprocal development of computational approaches that can adapt to the evolving nature of sequence datasets. In this review, we provide an overview of current bioinformatic strategies for handling metagenomic sequence data and discuss their strengths and limitations. We then go on to discuss key technological developments that have the potential to once again revolutionise the way we are able to view and hence understand the microbiome.

The ability to sequence, assemble, and analyse whole genomes has sparked a genomic revolution that began with the completion of the human genome and continues today (Choudhury et al. 2020; Lander et al. 2001; Weinstock 2007). However, it is increasingly apparent that the human genome does not operate in isolation, rather it is part of a holobiont; a co-existing and co-evolving collection of host and microbial genomes that encompasses not just all three domains of life, but also viruses (Zilber-Rosenberg and Rosenberg 2008).

Applying the same high-throughput sequencing technologies that revolutionised human genomics to the microorganisms “that literally share our body space” (Lederberg and McCray 2001) has resulted in a genomic revolution of its own. While characterising bacteria on the basis of single genes, such as the 16S ribosomal RNA gene, is a long-established technique (Fox et al. 1977) that has been successfully carried over into the modern genomic era, more recent shotgun sequencing approaches have proved revolutionary because they enable the capture of entire microbial genomes. In the context of this review, the collective term for these genomes is the metagenome (Handelsman et al. 1998), which may be thought of as the microbial genomic contribution to the mammalian holobiont (Bordenstein and Theis 2015).

As genomes encode functional potential at the cellular, organismal, and holobiont level, accessing the metagenome through metagenomic whole genome shotgun sequencing (mWGS) holds the key to understanding the multifaceted roles that microorganisms play in determining host health.

The fact that bioinformatics has moved beyond the preserve of specialists, towards being a ubiquitous presence within most research groups is testament to the success of this movement. The purpose of this review is to give genome biologists unfamiliar with the microbiome an introduction to current computational approaches for handling mWGS data, with a specific focus on exemplary methods, the challenges they overcome, and the insights they can yield.

Assuming the ultimate goal of most human and mouse microbiome studies is to understand the mechanisms by which microbes influence host health, there are, broadly speaking, two approaches that can be taken with mWGS data. The first is to ask ‘what’s there?’. Establishing the taxonomy of microbes present in a sample and quantifying their relative abundance enables correlative association between taxa (or community-level characteristics such as diversity) and host traits of interest. The second approach is to ask ‘what does it do?’. Detecting and quantifying genes present in the metagenome and inferring their function enables insight into higher-order biological processes encoded by the metagenome.

Two challenges, however, are fundamental to both taxonomic and functional characterisation of the gut metagenome. The first, as discussed, is the continued increase in the size of sequence datasets. The second is what is increasingly referred to as the ‘dark matter’ of the metagenome. In spite of massive efforts to sequence and analyse the human and mouse metagenomes, both remain incompletely characterised, largely due to their sheer size and complexity. The human microbiome has been estimated to contain in excess of 30 million microbial genes (Lloyd-Price et al. 2016) across all body sites, and recent meta-analyses have identified 22 million and 4.6 million unique genes in human and mouse guts, respectively (Lesker et al. 2020; Tierney et al. 2019). In the case of humans, inter-individual variability is also a key characteristic, with a meta-analysis of 2182 gut metagenomes by Tierney et al. (2019) indicating that up to half of detected microbial genes were unique to a single individual.

The growth in volume and diversity of published sequence data is reflected in the number of reference databases that exist to curate these data and make them publicly available (see for example www.oxfordjournals.org/our_journals/nar/database/cap/), with new compendiums appearing yearly to meet evolving biological interests (Rigden and Fernández 2021). Many of the databases that underpin metagenomic analysis are not specific for the purpose. They tend to be joint genome curation projects involving multiple major funding bodies in order to sustain the hands-on maintenance required to keep information current.

Such integration is a key feature of metagenomic reference databases, as extensive interrelation and sharing of genomes allows for varying degrees of curation within different resources. For example, GenBank (Sayers et al. 2020) is the INSDC-supported database from which the NCBI RefSeq database (Haft et al. 2018; O'Leary et al. 2015) is curated to provide a non-redundant set of high-quality genomes with established taxonomy and comprehensive annotations. The Genome Taxonomy Database Base (GTDB, Parks et al. 2020, 2018) and proGenomes (Mende et al. 2017) are examples of two subsequent databases built upon these NCBI resources, which further seek to standardise taxonomic annotation of bacterial and archaeal genomes. Both GTDB and proGenomes assign genomes to species clusters and curate non-redundant sets of genomes for different taxa. Curating standardised databases streamlines database query results based on taxonomy, which provides marginal advantages due to the size and scale of these metagenome databases. For example, GTDB and proGenomes have ~ 150 000 and ~ 84 000, bacterial and genomes, respectively, which span tens of thousands of species clusters. Efficient data mining, effective database management and integration, and scalable comparative genomic analyses are major priorities in metagenome reference databases.

While there has been an historical emphasis on bacterial members of microbiome, there are a growing number of reference databases that specifically support study of non-bacterial taxa. This includes fungi (mycobiome, Lai et al. 2018), viruses (virome, Carding et al. 2017), archaea (archaeome, Moissl-Eichinger et al. 2018), nematodes (Harris et al. 2019), and eukaryotic parasites (Dheilly et al. 2017). Metagenome resources for more targeted questions, such as pathogen genomics, are also available. For example, the Virus Pathogen Resource (ViPR, Pickett et al. 2012), and Eukaryotic Pathogen, Vector and Host Informatics Resource (VEuPathDB, Aurrecoechea et al. 2010). Given their more clinical focus such databases frequently also incorporate sample or clinical metadata relevant to each submission, either internally, or linked in related database resources such as Clinical Epidemiology Database Resources (ClinEpiDB, Ruhamyankaka et al. 2020).

In spite of huge efforts to curate high-quality references and maximise their accessibility, a fundamental limitation of existing databases is that they are missing the ‘dark matter’ of the global metagenome. While gauging the extent of this problem is not trivial, it has been attempted. For example, Zhang et al. (2020) matched all unique taxa identified by the Earth Microbiome Project (EMP) using 16S gene sequencing to all available reference genomes in the RefSeq database. A median of 62% of EMP taxa present in host-associated microbiomes could be matched to an existing RefSeq genome at a threshold of 97% similarity. This enables the crude estimate that up to ~ 40% of mammalian holobiont bacterial species may be missing from reference genome databases. It is less clear what proportion of eukaryotic, viral or archaeal data may be missing. However, similar issues are likely to exist, particularly, as databases specialised in non-bacterial organisms tend to be comparatively small. For example, eukaryotic databases such as WormBase and VEuPathDB have in the range of 1–200 unique species for each family.

An unfortunate consequence of both these limitations is that potentially important biological associations may be lost in the proportion of mWGS reads that are returned as ‘unclassified’ in metagenomic studies. This risk is greater when considering microbial clades that are comparatively understudied, or human populations that are historically not well represented. While these limitations do not preclude use of reference databases as an essential means of taxonomic classification, they need to be accounted for when interpreting metagenomic analyses and represent a challenge that needs to be overcome if we are to improve our understanding of the microbiome contribution to host health.

Quality control is a fundamental upstream process in all sequenced-based analysis, involving steps such as the removal of likely PCR duplicates, removal of sequencing adapters, trimming of low-quality bases from reads, and the masking or removal of low complexity regions. One fundamental pre-processing step is the removal of sequences originating from contaminant-DNA (i.e. DNA that is not the focus of the study). While this is an important consideration in single genome studies (Goig et al. 2020), it represents a particular challenge in mWGS, where host DNA likely to be highly prevalent in samples and hence constitute a significant fraction of the sequenced reads.

Removal of host reads is fundamentally a case of matching sequences to a reference database (albeit one containing only the host reference genome), as such the approaches reviewed below (local alignment, alignment-free sequence classification) are applicable to this problem.

The earliest published attempts to shotgun sequence the human gut metagenome employed de novo sequence assembly, before matching reassembled genes and genomic fragments to in-house protein reference databases using BLASTP (Gill et al. 2006; Kurokawa et al. 2007). Since these landmark studies, local alignment of query sequences to reference databases with previously ascribed taxonomy has remained a cornerstone of metagenomic characterisation.

Current state-of-the art short-read alignment approaches, such as BWA, have also been adapted for alignment of the longer reads typically produced by third-generation sequencing platforms (Li 2013). However, aligners such as BLASR (Chaisson and Tesler 2012) and Minimap2 (Li 2018) have also come to the fore, having been specifically designed to overcome the sequencing errors encountered on these platforms. More recently, for ONT, these approaches have been further improved by the ability to predict and model the structure of errors inherent to nanopore sequencing (Joshi et al. 2020).

The speed at which reads can be aligned using state-of-the-art short and long-read aligners means such approaches remain viable for searching increasingly large numbers of query reads against ever-growing references databases. However, when the exact location of a specific read within a reference genome is not important, as is the case when the primary goal is to estimate taxonomic origin, precise alignment represents an unnecessary computational cost.

The relative computational efficiency of matching exact kmers, rather than long, potentially ambiguous reads, means matching query sequences to reference databases based on the overall similarity their respective kmer compositions is an extremely rapid way to achieve alignment-free classification of metagenomic sequences (Ren et al. 2018). For example, Kraken—one of the most widely used metagenomic taxonomic profiling tools—divides reference genomes (by default, derived from RefSeq) into kmers, then assigns each unique kmer to the lowest taxonomic rank that represents all the genomes in which it can be found (a so-called lowest common ancestor (LCA) approach). Kmers from query sequences can then be matched to this taxonomy. The taxonomic origin of a complete read can then be inferred from the distribution of its constituent kmers within the underlying taxonomic tree.

Not only it is possible to use the LCA to infer the taxonomy of a read based on the classification of its constituent kmers, it is also possible to use this approach to classify aligned reads that ambiguously align to multiple references. For example, MEGAN (Huson et al. 2007) provided an early implementation of this method to assign taxonomy to locally aligned microbial sequences, which has recently been adapted to work with third-generation sequence data (Huson et al. 2018).

One potential solution to this problem is to probabilistically reassign ambiguously classified reads to their most likely taxon of origin. Such an approach has been implemented for aligned reads in the PathoID module within the PathoScope pipeline (Hong et al. 2014). An analogous approach has also been developed for Kraken (Lu et al. 2017), which, rather than reassigning individuals reads, provides species-level abundance estimates based on LCA read assignments. Such approaches are likely to become increasingly relevant due to both the growing interest in understanding the microbiome at high taxonomic resolution, as well as the increasing levels of sequence homology within taxonomic reference databases.

Increasing the speed with which query sequences can be matched to sequences in reference database with known taxonomy is one way to overcome challenges inherent in taxonomic profiling of metagenomic sequence data. A second is to curate reference databases to remove redundant information that either does not discriminate between taxa, unnecessarily lengthens search times, or both.

The concept of restricting databases to discriminatory markers is not limited to microbial gene sets. Tu et al. (2014) introduced a method for identifying and selecting unique, discriminatory regions from reference genomes (termed genome specific markers—GSMs). They subsequently matched query reads to these GSMs using BLAST-like approaches. More recently, CLARK (Ounit and Lonardi 2016; Ounit et al. 2015) is a kmer-based classifier, comparable to Kraken, that not only seeks to exploit the speed of kmer-based searching, but also to reduce the size of the reference database by storing and searching only discriminatory kmers. This has the advantage of minimising the amount of information that needs to be stored to quickly and accurately discriminate reads. However, it also means that the taxonomic level at which reads are to be classified (i.e. at which a single kmer is unique to a clade) needs to be specified prior to building a reference index and hence that an LCA approach to read classification cannot be taken.

As discussed, a fundamental problem of assigning taxonomy to metagenomic sequences by matching them to reference databases is that these databases are almost certainly incomplete. While LCA approaches, such as Kraken, may be able to classify reads originating from unknown microbes at higher taxonomic levels, detecting and quantifying and characterising these microbes at low taxonomic resolution remains a major challenge.

Discriminatory marker gene databases, such as those curated by MetaPhlan, allow users to quantify the unclassified proportion of reads in an mWGS dataset. However, they provide no additional insight into reads originating from taxa missing from the reference genome databases from which they are derived. Other approaches based on sets of universal marker genes offer a potential solution to this problem. In mOTU (Milanese et al. 2019; Sunagawa et al. 2013), the authors curate a database of single-copy marker genes identified as present in all sequenced microbial genomes. They then use a hidden Markov model (HMM)-based approach to generate a profile for each marker gene, based on its sequence properties across known reference genomes (reviewed in Eddy 1996). Such profiles can be used to search for all homologs of each marker gene within de novo assemblies of metagenomic samples. All detected copies of each marker gene are clustered in a step analogous to the generation of operational taxonomic units (OTUs) from 16S gene sequence data. The relative abundance of each ‘meta-OTU’ (mOTU) is then determined, and mOTUs originating from the same genome are identified based on correlation in their relative abundance across samples. While this innovative approach relies on the computationally challenging step of de novo metagenome assembly, the use of HMM profiles enables detection of marker gene homologs that may be absent from existing genome reference databases, thereby enabling what the authors refer to as a reference-extended community profiling. In a recent study, the authors concluded that more than half the mOTU species detected in 1693 human gut samples were absent from the proGenomes reference database (Milanese et al. 2019).

While reference-extended approaches offer the ability to define and quantify previously uncharacterised taxa, it is also possible to compare metagenomes entirely on the basis of sequence composition, without the need to define taxonomic units. The utility of such an approach reflects the fact that changes in the composition of the gut metagenome, such as dysbiosis, are often characteristic of disease states. Tracking such changes is therefore informative, in spite of the fact it contributes little to our understanding the mechanisms by which microbes impact host health (Olesen and Alm 2016). With this goal in mind Kmer-based approaches once again represent a computationally efficient method by which to compare the composition of metagenomic samples. MASH (Ondov et al. 2016) is an implementation of the MinHASH algorithm (reviewed in Rowe 2019), which provides an extremely fast method for approximating the proportion of kmers shared between two metagenomes. The utility of this type of approach has since been extended to account for the relative abundance of kmers when assessing samples, and to enable signatures to be searched as well as compared (Pierce et al. 2019).

The ability to re-assemble complete, high-quality microbial genomes from shotgun sequence data is arguably the apotheosis of computational metagenomic analysis as it obviates the need to isolate and culture in order to understand the genomic potential of individual organisms. Genomes that may never be cultured can be retrieved, their phylogeny can be established and taxonomy inferred (Almeida et al. 2019; Almeida et al. 2020), and their functions predicted through genome annotation. Ultimately, these genomes can be added to public databases (Almeida et al. 2020; Mukherjee et al. 2021), leading to the improved performance of other, reference-dependent analysis tools (Milanese et al. 2019).

While the potential for genome-resolved metagenomics is great, recent reviews have highlighted the challenges in this field, and in particular, the difficulties of producing high-quality assemblies of complex microbial communities where strain-level divergence may be important (Chen et al. 2020). The appearance of incompletely resolved, composite MAGs in public databases has already been reported (Shaiber and Eren 2019), and ensuring accurate and high-quality genome discovery remains a key bioinformatic challenge for this emerging field (Bowers et al. 2017).

The ability to map genes to functions and ultimately to higher-level biological processes that reflect mechanisms of host–microbiome interaction is a crucial step in metagenomic analysis. While a similar challenge exists for all genome-level research, it is arguably greater for metagenomics, where the proportion of uncultured and undescribed microbial genomes reflects a comparable proportion of novel microbial genes whose function is also unknown (Tierney et al. 2019).

Another exemplary database that provides a sequence-level resource for functional annotation of metagenome samples is eggNOG (evolutionary genealogy of genes: Non-supervised Orthologous Groups, Huerta-Cepas et al. 2019). Protein sequences are again derived from selected representative eukaryote, prokaryote, and viral genomes. However, in this instance, they are grouped in a manner that distinguishes true orthologs (homologous sequences that have diverged due to speciation) from paralogs (homologous sequences diverged due to duplication) on the basis that the latter do not necessarily retain the same function. eggNOG does not manually curate functional annotations, but inherits broad functional categories from other ortholog databases (Galperin et al. 2015) and, like UniProt, provides extensive mapping to other functional annotation databases (http://eggnog5.embl.de/#/app/methods).

As first steps towards functional characterisation of mWGS samples, it is common to perform de novo metagenome assembly (a topic not covered here, but comprehensively reviewed in Ayling et al. 2020) followed by gene annotation. Metagenomic assemblies typically result in vast numbers of genomic fragments (contigs) rather than fully resolved genomes. While they are often far from complete, the assembly of short reads into such contigs enables full or partial gene sequences to be computationally predicted, extracted, and matched to reference databases containing genes of known function.

Gene prediction from metagenomic assemblies presents additional challenges when compared to gene prediction in individual genomes. Highly fragmented assemblies increase the likelihood of partial annotations. Additionally, common features that may unite (and hence help distinguish) genes within a single genome may not be shared across a metagenome. Well-established metagenome annotation tools such as MetaGeneMark (Zhu et al. 2010) and Prodigal (Hyatt et al. 2010) account for this, but potentially at the cost of their ability to make accurate novel gene predictions within the dark matter of the metagenome. In consequence, more recent tools seek to take advantage of the recent massive expansion in the number of annotated prokaryote genomes in order to improve the specificity of novel gene annotations from metagenome assemblies (Sommer and Salzberg 2021).

As functional reference databases tend to curate homologous groups of genes, which are assumed to share a common function (for example, KEGG KOs or EggNOG orthologous groups), functional annotation can be performed by matching query sequences to groups, as well as alignment to individual reference sequences. HMM profiles are a powerful way to formally represent the sequence properties of a group (Eddy 1996). As such, they have the potential to improve metagenome functional annotation by matching of query sequences that bear strong similarity to the properties of a group, but limited similarity to each of its constituent members.

The annotation approaches discussed so far are primarily intended for the classification of complete or partial gene sequences. One alternative that allows direct quantification of function from unassembled reads is HUMAnN (HMP Unified Metabolic Analysis Network). The latest release version (HUMAnN3, Beghini et al. 2020) curates a custom database, combining protein sequences and functional annotations from UniProtKB with associated genome sequence and taxonomy information from GenBank. It subsequently performs a tiered search involving both nucleotide and translated alignment in order to maximise chances of successful read classification. One valuable consequence of this mapping approach is that, by retaining details of the original genomes to which reads map, HUMAnN is able to quantify the extent to which different taxa contribute to higher-order functions in databases such as MetaCyc and KEGG.

While the relative abundance of functionally annotated genes or orthologous groups within a metagenome may in some cases be informative, often higher-level biological processes are better represented by groups of genes (henceforth pathways) reflecting microbiome functions of interest (e.g. all genes contributing to the biosynthesis of secondary bile acids). Unfortunately, the quantification of such pathways in metagenomic samples is not trivial: individual genes may contribute to more than one pathway and the genes comprising a particular pathway may vary across taxa. In consequence, the number of tools that attempt to estimate a single measure of microbial pathway abundance from metagenomic data is limited. HUMAnN3 once again offers this utility through careful mapping of gene annotations to MetaCyc reactions and subsequently to higher-order pathways (Franzosa et al. 2018).

GSA and pathway abundance measures offer invaluable insight into important biological processes encoded by mWGS data. However, the inherent difficulty in representing the millions of functionally and taxonomically diverse microbial genes as discrete pathways leads us to advise researchers to consider carefully the specific genes driving trends observed at higher functional levels.

Extensive interrelation of sequence information across annotation databases is invaluable as a means of linking different complementary data sources. However, different routes to achieve the same information open up the potential for unappreciated biases due to differences in underlying bioinformatic algorithms. For example, HUManN3 aligned reads converted to estimates of KO relative abundance may not necessarily return the same results as quantifying the same KOs using the KEGG GhostKOALA server. Achieving the same ends via different means is not a problem per se, but the onus is on researchers to have a clear understanding of how they have derived the quantitative estimates of gene and pathway abundance they are working with.

Another issue facing functional annotation of metagenomic datasets is the dependency on manual curation for many of the higher-order biological pathways represented in databases. UniProtKB, KEGG, and MetaCyc are all to varying extents dependent on manual curation. Within UniProtKB the number of sequences with computationally predicted functions is growing at a greater rate than those with functions that have been manually annotated and reviewed. The contribution of MAG gene predictions to this database (UniProt Consortium 2019) is only likely to exacerbate this disparity. Again, the appearance of MAGs in databases used for functional annotation is not in itself problematic, but it rests on the assumption they are the result of high-quality assembly and highly stringent quality controls in order to maintain database integrity (Shaiber and Eren 2019). In databases such as KEGG and MetaCyc, the curation of pathways is heavily dependent on manual curation and pathway assignment is already restricted to a proportion of known genes: approximately 52% of KEGG genes are linked to a KO (Kanehisa et al. 2021), and approximately 50% of KOs are linked to pathways (Kanehisa and Sato 2019). In conclusion, ensuring functional annotation, in particular, curation of pathway-level information keeps pace with the growing number of newly discovered genes represents a major challenge for microbial informatics.

Current second and third-generation sequencing technologies have revolutionised our ability to dissect the composition and function of the gut microbiome. It is likely that future technological advancements will continue to provide similar step-changes in understanding and in doing so, present new bioinformatic challenges. One particular shortcoming of current metagenomic sequencing strategies is that the process of extracting and sequencing metagenomic material results in data that may not be easily mapped back to its original microenvironment. We end this review by briefly discussing exciting new technologies are emerging to address this limitation by preserving some of the contextual information of the metagenome.

IgA is the primary antibody produced at gut mucosal surfaces, where it has been shown to bind different members of the gut microbiome with varying affinity. Identifying the IgA bound fraction of the microbiota can reveal taxa that are critical effectors of immune–microbiome interaction and likely to induce intestinal inflammation. This approach was first introduced by Palm et al. (2014) who used fluorescence-activated sorting (FACS) or magnetic-activated cell sorting (MACS) to determine IgA-binding, and subsequently 16S rRNA gene sequencing to determine taxonomy. It has since been successfully applied to examining host–microbiome interaction in IBD (Palm et al. 2014; Shapiro et al. 2021). For example, Shapiro et al. correlated IgA-coating with factors such as relative abundance, IBD treatment, and disease progression to describe the immunostimulatory effect of various taxa in different conditions. This study revealed that low IgA-coating in the genus Oscillospira was associated with worse disease progression. While early studies such as these coupled cell sorting with 16S sequencing, more recently it has been used in conjunction with shotgun sequencing (James et al. 2020).

The spatial environment surrounding microbiota imparts biologically important context for understanding metagenomic snapshots of the microbiome. This is particularly true in the gut where the microbiome composition has been shown to vary at fine scale between the gut lumen and the intestinal mucosal barrier (Duncan et al. 2020).

Such quantitative spatial mapping creates opportunities to study microbe interactions with their surroundings. For example, the authors applied HiPR-FISH to spatially map microbiota in mouse colonic tissue and quantify spatial associations of bacterial taxa. The authors found that spatial association between pairs of bacteria, such as Oscillibacter-Veillonella, were disrupted with antibiotic treatment. In doing so, they demonstrated the potential for complex microbial communities to be studied at the single-cell resolution while addressing spatial orientation of microbiota.

Single-cell sequencing has revolutionised host genomics by providing the ability to describe discrete cell populations that would be lost to bulk transcriptomic approaches. The application of analogous approaches to the microbiome involves physically separating microbes into groups of either individual cells, or a few hundred cells—sometimes termed mini-metagenome. Several different technologies have been applied for this purpose, including flow-sorting cells, gel microdroplet cultivation (Fitzsimons et al. 2013), single droplet multiple displacement (Hosokawa et al. 2017), and microfluidic hydrogels (Chijiiwa et al. 2020). Chijiwa et al. (2020) used gel microfluidic hydrogels to compartmentalise individual cells. Cell DNA was then enzymatically lysed so that genomes could be amplified within each hydrogel, resulting in what they referred to as a Single-Amplified Genome (SAG). While SAGs had limited genome completeness, the authors were able to produce enough quality draft genomes to produce complete or composite genomes of SAG strains.

One notable advantage of this approach is that genomes of rare taxa can be assembled without having to dramatically increase sequencing depth. Additionally, SAGs only require tens of thousands of reads, allowing genomes to be multiplexed and mini-metagenomic sequencing to be performed on relatively modest platforms such as the Illumina MiSeq.

Progress in gut microbiome research over the last two decades has been saltatory. In particular, the availability of affordable, second-generation sequencing technologies, coupled with easily accessible, open-source bioinformatic software has enabled researchers in many different disciplines to study the metagenome in order to understand the impact of the microbiome within their respective fields. This recent interest has led to an explosion in the amount of publicly available mWGS data.

Continued advancement of novel and existing sequence-based technologies may contribute to solving these and other problems, enabling ever greater understanding of the microbe–microbe and host–microbe interactions that are relevant to host health.

Publisher's Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

