APOE genetics influence murine gut microbiome

Apolipoprotein E (APOE) alleles impact pathogenesis and risk for multiple human diseases, making them primary targets for disease treatment and prevention. Previously, we and others reported an association between APOE alleles and the gut microbiome. Here, we evaluated effects of APOE heterozygosity and tested whether these overall results extended to mice maintained under ideal conditions for microbiome analyses. To model human APOE alleles, this study used APOE targeted replacement (TR) mice on a C57Bl/6 background. To minimize genetic drift, homozygous APOE3 mice were crossed to homozygous APOE2 or homozygous APOE4 mice prior to the study, and the resulting heterozygous progeny crossed further to generate the study mice. To maximize environmental homogeneity, mice with mixed genotypes were housed together and used bedding from the cages was mixed and added back as a portion of new bedding. Fecal samples were obtained from mice at 3-, 5- and 7-months of age, and microbiota analyzed by 16S ribosomal RNA gene amplicon sequencing. Linear discriminant analysis of effect size (LefSe) identified taxa associated with APOE status, depicted as cladograms to show phylogenetic relatedness. The influence of APOE status was tested on alpha-diversity (Shannon H index) and beta-diversity (principal coordinate analyses and PERMANOVA). Individual taxa associated with APOE status were identified by classical univariate analysis. Whether findings in the APOE mice were replicated in humans was evaluated by using published microbiome genome wide association data. Cladograms revealed robust differences with APOE in male mice and limited differences in female mice. The richness and evenness (alpha-diversity) and microbial community composition (beta-diversity) of the fecal microbiome was robustly associated with APOE status in male but not female mice. Classical univariate analysis revealed individual taxa that were significantly increased or decreased with APOE, illustrating a stepwise APOE2-APOE3–APOE4 pattern of association with heterozygous animals trending as intermediate in the stepwise pattern. The relative abundance of bacteria from the class Clostridia, order Clostridiales, family Ruminococacceae and related genera increased with APOE2 status. The relative abundance of Erysipelotrichia increased with APOE4 status, a finding that extended to humans. In this study, wherein mice were maintained in an ideal fashion for microbiome studies, gut microbiome profiles were strongly and significantly associated with APOE status in male APOE-TR mice. Erysipelotrichia are increased with APOE4 in both mice and humans. APOE allelic effects appeared generally intermediate in heterozygous animals. Further evaluation of these findings in humans, as well as studies evaluating the impact of the APOE-associated microbiota on disease-relevant phenotypes, will be necessary to determine if alterations in the gut microbiome represent a novel mechanism whereby APOE alleles impact disease.

Apolipoprotein E (APOE) alleles impact multiple facets of the human condition, ranging from Alzheimer’s disease (AD) to cardiovascular disease, metabolic syndrome, obesity, fertility and longevity (reviewed in Ref.1). The three primary APOE alleles include APOE3, which has a 78% minor allele frequency, as well as APOE4 and APOE2, with minor allele frequencies of 14 and 8%, respectively. Regarding AD, APOE2 reduces AD risk while APOE4 strongly increases AD risk, both relative to APOE3 (reviewed in Ref.2). This association has prompted intense evaluation of possible mechanism(s) underlying APOE effects in AD, resulting in APOE allelic association with amyloid-beta (Aβ) clearance, Aβ aggregation and astrocyte stress3–8. In the periphery, APOE2 is associated with decreased low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, whereas APOE4 is associated with increased LDL cholesterol, relative to APOE3. While this may account for APOE association with cardiovascular disease, the mechanisms underlying APOE allelic effects on glucose metabolism, inflammation and innate immunity are less clear2. The effects of APOE alleles in heterozygous individuals are generally intermediate for phenotypes ranging from cholesterol to AD1,2. Elucidating these differential actions of APOE alleles may provide insights to these processes.

To begin to evaluate whether APOE allelic effects are dominant, co-dominant, or recessive, we compared animals heterozygous and homozygous for APOE alleles. Additionally, we improved our study design for rigor and reproducibility by backcrossing the APOE-TR mice to obviate possible genetic drift, maintaining mice with mixed genotypes in the same cages to minimize possible cage effects, and mixing used bedding between cages to ensure a homogenous microbial environment among cages.

APOE3-TR23,24 male mice were crossed to APOE4 and APOE2 female mice to produce APOE2/E3 and APOE3/E4 heterozygous offspring. These mice were then crossed to generate 76 experimental mice that included APOE2/E2 (N = 6), APOE2/E3 (N = 12), APOE3/E3 (N = 5), APOE3/E4 (N = 8), and APOE4/E4 (N = 4) female mice and APOE2/E2 (N = 5), APOE2/E3 (N = 7), APOE3/E3 (N = 13), APOE3/E4 (N = 11), and APOE4/E4 (N = 5) male mice. Genotypes were determined by TaqMan SNP assays (Thermo). At weaning, mice were separated by sex and housed as mixed genotypes, 2–5 mice per cage (average of 3.7 ± 1.4 (mean ± SD)). Mice were maintained on Teklad Global 18% Protein Rodent Diet. To minimize potential confounding effects of coprophagy (mice feeding partially on cage-mate feces)25, approximately 20% of the new bedding was a mixture of used bedding from all the cages. Feces were obtained from this cohort of mice at 3-, 5- and 7-months of age. To obtain feces, mice were temporarily removed from their cage and placed into a clean Styrofoam cup. Fresh fecal pellets were stored at − 80 °C until DNA isolation. All methods were approved by University of Kentucky Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. This study was carried out in compliance with ARRIVE guidelines.

Fecal DNA was isolated by using a QIAamp PowerFecal Pro DNA Kit (QIAGEN). Genomic DNA was polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplified with primers CS1_515F and CS2_806R (modified from the primer set employed by the Earth Microbiome Project (EMP; GTGYCAGCMGCCGCGGTAA and GGACTACNVGGGTWTCTAAT) targeting the V4 regions of microbial small subunit ribosomal RNA genes were generated using a two-stage PCR amplification protocol as described previously26. The primers contained 5′ common sequence tags (known as common sequence 1 and 2, CS1 and CS2). First stage PCR amplifications were performed in 10 µl reactions in 96-well plates, using MyTaq HS 2× mastermix (Bioline). PCR conditions were 95 °C for 5 min, followed by 28 cycles of 95 °C for 30′′, 55 °C for 45′′ and 72 °C for 60′′.

Alpha-diversity was assessed using the Shannon H diversity index35 with APOE statistical significance determined by Kruskal–Wallis tests. Additional alpha-diversity tests included Margalef taxon richness, Pielou’s evenness and the Simpson index with APOE statistical significance determined by Jonckheere–Terpstra nonparametric tests. Beta-diversity was assessed using Principal Coordinates Analysis (PCoA) of Bray–Curtis matrices with statistical significance determined by Permutational Multivariate Analysis of Variance (PERMANOVA)36. Taxonomic levels that associate with APOE status were determined using a classical univariate analysis with a Kruskal–Wallis test. A false discovery rate (FDR) approach was used to correct for multiple testing31. Heatmaps of family-level bacterial relative abundances were generated for male and female mice as a function of APOE status by using the Ward analysis of variance clustering algorithm, which is based on Pearson Correlation Coefficient distance measures.

Animal studies were performed in compliance with the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at University of Kentucky.

Each of the authors have reviewed the manuscript and approved it for publication.

To investigate the hypothesis that APOE is associated with gut microbial community structure, we began with LefSe analysis and visualized the results with cladograms (Figs. 1,
2, Figs. S1, S2). This robust approach provides a visual means to identify statistically significant and phylogenetically-related taxa associated with APOE status34. These LefSe results are also presented as LDA histograms to provide a quantitative representation of the LefSe analyses (Fig. S3). Results are presented with APOE status stratified as APOE2 carriers, APOE3 and APOE4 carriers (pooled) (Figs.
1A,
2A) and with APOE status as separate genotypes (Figs. 1B,
2B). These two representations of the data provide insights into whether APOE allelic effects are dominant or co-dominant. Robust gut microbiome differences were observed in male mice compared to female mice at 3-months of age (Figs. 1,
2) with similar results found at 5- and 7-months of age (Figs. S1, S2). The microbiome of both male and female mice showed APOE4-associated increases in members of the Actinobacteria phylum (Figs. 1,
2). In contrast, only male mice showed APOE4-associated increases in the Erysipleotrichia and Gammaproteobacteria classes and APOE2-associated increases in the Cyanobacteria phylum. To gain further insights into these findings, we parsed the results into individual genotypes. This expanded our findings by showing that members of the Clostridia class were significantly associated with APOE2/E2 and APOE2/E3 (Fig. 1B). Overall, these results indicated that a subset of bacteria were consistently associated with APOE status, especially in males. The male population captured the majority of taxa significantly associated with APOE in the female population. In the following results, we present analyses of data from male mice at 3-months of age with analyses for all ages and sexes included within the Supplemental Files.

To discern whether the Clostridiales and Erysipelotrichiales phylogenetic branches associated with APOE in this murine APOE-TR model are also associated with APOE in humans, we turned to a recent genome wide association study (GWAS) that evaluated the relationship between the gut microbiome and human polymorphisms42. This meta-analysis included data from as many as 18,340 individuals42. The only genetic locus that reached genome wide statistical significance was rs182549, which is associated with lactose intolerance. Interestingly, this SNP is modestly associated with the risk of Alzheimer’s disease (p = 0.003, N = 445,779)43, consistent with the possibility that the gut microbiome may influence AD risk. Focusing on APOE, the alleles of APOE2, APOE3 and APOE4 are defined by two SNPs, rs7412 and rs429358. The minor allele of rs7412 defines APOE2 while the minor allele of rs429358 determines APOE4 status. The Clostridiales and Erysipelotrichiales phylogenetic branches were not significantly associated with rs7412 (APOE2) at any phylogenetic level. However, the class Erysipelotrichia, the order Erysipelotrichales and the family Erysipelotrichaceae were nominally associated with rs429358 (Table
3). For each of these taxa, the minor APOE4 allele was associated with an increase in the relative abundance of these bacteria, reproducing the findings observed in the murine APOE-TR model.

The primary finding reported here is that murine gut microbiome profiles are significantly associated with APOE status and APOE alleles appeared to act in a co-dominant fashion in heterozygous mice. These findings are strengthened given that the APOE-TR mice were maintained in an optimized fashion for microbiome analyses. The microbiome association with APOE was observed in alpha- and beta-diversity, encompasses multiple bacterial lineages and was predominately observed in male mice. Both LefSe and classical univariate analyses identified specific taxa that were associated with APOE. This association occurred in a stepwise fashion in the mice with the progression from APOE2-APOE3-APOE4. The stepwise association between indices of the gut microbiome and APOE2-APOE3-APOE4 reported here are reminiscent of APOE allelic association with other phenotypes ranging from LDL-cholesterol to AD risk1,2. Additionally, at least one of these associations, an increase in the relative abundance of Erysipelotrichia with APOE4, also has been observed in the human gut microbiome42. Moreover, the stepwise trends were also seen in the heterozygous mice, which reflected resulting intermediate effects of APOE on the gut microbiome. Overall, these findings confirm and extend prior reports that APOE genetics are associated with the gut microbiome14–16.

Although the cladograms depict these results as phylogenetic trees, and the relatedness of taxa could imply functional relatedness, a limitation of this study is that findings were not extended to a functionality analysis. A future extension of these findings would be an in-depth analysis of the functional phenotypes of the significantly associated taxa. Future metabolomic studies would provide information regarding differences in the gut as a function of APOE genetics.

In this study in which mice were maintained with optimized conditions for microbiome analysis, we report a significant association between APOE status and gut microbiome profiles in 3-month male mice that reproduces at 5- and 7-months of age. The Clostridia class, Clostridiales order, its related family Ruminococcaceae, as well as related genera Ruminoclostridium, and Acetifactor and Lachnoclostridium of the Lachnopsiraceae family, increase with APOE2, which may reflect an increase in resistant starch metabolism with APOE2, and a possible impact on SCFA levels. The Erysipelotrichia class, Erysipelotrichiales order, Erysipelotrichaceae family, and Turicibacter and Dubosiella genera increase with APOE4. The findings with the Erysipelotrichia phylogenetic branch appear to extend to humans. Both the dominant model representation and the co-dominant model representation of the data showed stepwise APOE effects on the gut microbiome, and the comparison of the two provides a more robust understanding of the allelic effects. Understanding the effects of APOE genetics on the gut microbiome may provide novel approaches to counter deleterious APOE genetic effects on human disease.



Publisher's note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41598-022-05763-1.

