NMR Metabolomics Reveal Urine Markers of Microbiome Diversity and Identify Benzoate Metabolism as a Mediator between High Microbial Alpha Diversity and Metabolic Health

Microbial metabolites measured using NMR may serve as markers for physiological or pathological host–microbe interactions and possibly mediate the beneficial effects of microbiome diversity. Yet, comprehensive analyses of gut microbiome data and the urine NMR metabolome from large general population cohorts are missing. Here, we report the associations between gut microbiota abundances or metrics of alpha diversity, quantified from stool samples using 16S rRNA gene sequencing, with targeted urine NMR metabolites measures from 951 participants of the Study of Health in Pomerania (SHIP). We detected significant genus–metabolite associations for hippurate, succinate, indoxyl sulfate, and formate. Moreover, while replicating the previously reported association between hippurate and measures of alpha diversity, we identified formate and 4-hydroxyphenylacetate as novel markers of gut microbiome alpha diversity. Next, we predicted the urinary concentrations of each metabolite using genus abundances via an elastic net regression methodology. We found profound associations of the microbiome-based hippurate prediction score with markers of liver injury, inflammation, and metabolic health. Moreover, the microbiome-based prediction score for hippurate completely mediated the clinical association pattern of microbial diversity, hinting at a role of benzoate metabolism underlying the positive associations between high alpha diversity and healthy states. In conclusion, large-scale NMR urine metabolomics delivered novel insights into metabolic host–microbiome interactions, identifying pathways of benzoate metabolism as relevant candidates mediating the beneficial health effects of high microbial alpha diversity.

An incredible wealth of research has highlighted the importance of the gut microbiome’s metabolic activity to health and disease [1,2,3,4,5]. Microbial metabolites, such as short-chain fatty acids or vitamin derivatives, are beneficial for health [6,7,8], while others, such as hydrogen sulphide [9,10], secondary bile acids [11,12,13], or trimethylamine-N-oxide [14,15], are involved in pathophysiological processes. Yet, our understanding of the complex interplay between the microbiome and host metabolism is incomplete, in particular because there is no bijection between gut microbiome composition and its metabolic activity. As metabolic functions widely overlap across the main bacterial phyla in the gut, two microbial communities may diverge strongly in their composition but be largely equivalent in their metabolic functions [16]. Moreover, since the gut microbiome acts within the unique ecosystem shaped by host factors, such as behaviour [17], genetics [18,19,20,21], and physiology [22,23], two gut microbiomes that are largely equivalent in metabolic function may lead to different health outcomes. Thus, the question arises regarding how alterations in composition translate into differences in metabolic host functions.

We herein report (1) the urine metabolite–genus association pattern, (2) the urine metabolome association pattern with measures of microbiome alpha diversity, (3) the results of machine learning modelling predicting the urine metabolites from microbiome abundances, and (4) the clinical association pattern of the microbiome-based hippurate prediction score in relation to the Shannon diversity. Finally, we explore the relationship between microbial benzoate metabolism and alpha diversity via functional annotations of an independent metagenomics dataset. In conjunction, our results highlight the usefulness of NMR metabolomics in exploring host–microbiome association patterns, while indicating that benzoate metabolism is one of the mediating metabolic functions underlying the association between alpha diversity and human health.

In SHIP-TREND, gut microbiome quantifications from stool samples using 16S sequencing were available for 3637 individuals, from which, 950 were additionally characterised using NMR urine metabolomics. The sample characteristics are given in Table 1. As known diabetes cases were excluded from NMR characterisation for reasons unrelated to the presented study, diabetes-related comorbidities and physiological traits were under-represented in the sample with NMR characterisation. Thus, the NMR analyses were performed on a predominantly healthy population. For more information on sample selection, see the Methods section.

a Diabetes is defined by either an HbA1c > 6.5% or intake of antidiabetic medication. b Hypertonia is defined by the intake of antihypertensive medication or blood pressure higher than 140/90 mmHg; SHIP—Study of Health in Pomerania, SD—standard deviation, CRP—C-reactive protein, TC—total cholesterol, HDL-C—high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, HbA1c—glycated hemoglobin, GGT—gamma-glutamyl-transferase, ALAT—alanine-amino-transferase, ASAT—aspartate-amino-transferase.

The utilised panel of metabolite quantifications contained 60 metabolites, from which, 42 were included in analyses after excluding all metabolites with more than 50% missing quantifications. All metabolite concentrations were log-transformed after regression-based normalisation [36], and outliers, as defined using the 4-SD rule, were excluded from analyses. The final panel of metabolites included a wide range of metabolites known to be implicated in host–microbiome interactions. Descriptive statistics for all metabolites measured can be found in Supplementary Table S1.

After correction for multiple testing, we found three genus presence metabolite associations (Figure 1A,B), with urinary hippurate being positively associated with the presence of Catabacter and Barnesialla and urinary succinate being positively associated with Eisenbergiella. In the domain of genus abundances, we detected ten associations after correction for multiple testing (Figure 1C,D). Hippurate was associated with nine different genera, while formate was additionally negatively associated with the Clostridium XIVa cluster and indoxyl sulfate was positively associated with Escherichia/Shigella. Both sets of associations remained stable upon full covariate adjustments (Figure 1B,D). In the sensitivity analyses, by utilising non-parametric bootstrapping for p-value calculation, all abundance metabolite associations stayed significant. However, the p-value of the indoxyl sulfate Escherichia/Shigella association dropped to nominal significance, indicating that this specific result may need further validation. The summary statistics of the corresponding association analyses can be found in Supplementary Tables S2 and S3.

Next, we screened the urine metabolome for markers of alpha diversity to investigate species richness and the Shannon entropy following the same regression methodology as above.

After correction for multiple testing, we retrieved two associations regarding Shannon entropy and three associations regarding species richness. The top hit of the analyses was hippurate (Figure 2A,B). Additionally, we found two additional markers of microbiome diversity: formate was positively associated with both species richness and Shannon entropy, while 4-hydroxyphenylacetate was negatively associated with species richness. Complete results on metabolite diversity associations can be found in Supplementary Tables S4 and S5.

Then, we generated prediction scores for each metabolite using the genus abundance data as input for elastic net regressions (see the Methods section for details), assessing the model validity via internal cross-validations. However, the machine learning approach only led to substantial R-squared values for hippurate (Figure 2C), reaching 12.7% of the explained variance, whereas, for all other metabolites, the explained variance was below 3%, as determined in cross-validations (Supplementary Table S6). Therefore, we focused on the microbiome-based hippurate prediction score in further analyses.

* Estimates from multivariable (mixed-effect b) linear regressions including age (nonlinear), sex, age–sex interaction terms, waist circumference (nonlinear), smoking, hypertonia, years of education, kidney function (nonlinear), urinary pH, and alcohol intake. b—unstandardised regression coefficient, 95% CI—95% confidence interval, hs-CRP—high-sensitivity C-reactive protein, TC—total cholesterol, HDL-C—high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, HbA1c—glycated hemoglobin, GGT—gamma-glutamyl transferase, ALAT—alanine aminotransferase, ASAT—aspartate aminotransferase. Bold indicates statistical significance.

Thus, the microbiome-based prediction score for hippurate contained substantial information on markers of human health and mediated the corresponding effects of microbial alpha diversity.

Above, we show the results of the analysed association patterns between urinary metabolites and microbiome diversity via statistical screening approaches. To strengthen our findings, we used an independent public dataset with metagenomic gut microbiome characterisations from Yachida et al. (n = 616) [39] (see Table S7 for sample characteristics) to analyse the relationship between microbial benzoate metabolism and microbial diversity. Note that the study of Yachida et al. [39] was a case-control study investigating colorectal cancer (CRC).

In conclusion, our functional analyses of the published data from Yachida et al. indicated a direct relationship between microbial diversity and benzoate metabolisation. However, the indicated relationship was negative with highly diverse communities showing lower reaction abundances of reactions transporting, degrading, or producing benzoate.

Although immense research efforts have been undertaken, we are still at the beginning of understanding the multitude of effects the microbiome has on human health and disease. One key to understanding the relationship between the host and microbiome is to unravel the metabolic interplay between human metabolism and microbiome metabolism. This study contributed to the latter by investigating the urine metabolome via NMR technology [41] in conjunction with 16S rRNA gene sequencing of stool samples stemming from a large population-based study.

In conclusion, our study demonstrated the usefulness of NMR urine metabolomics in the assessment of host–microbiome interactions in the domain of metabolism. As NMR is inherently robust, reproducible, non-destructive, and involves minimal sample preparation, we believe NMR metabolomics will have a future in the emerging field of microbiome–host interaction in health and disease.

Data of SHIP-TREND (recruited 2008–2012, n = 4420) was used, consisting of individuals from the region of Pomerania, North-Eastern Germany. The SHIP cohorts were designed to investigate the prevalence and incidence of clinical and subclinical phenotypes and their risk factors. For detailed information on the design, biomaterials, and available data, see [35].

The institutional review board of the University of Greifswald approved the survey and methods of the SHIP studies and all analyses followed the Declaration of Helsinki. Written informed consent was provided by all participants.

The medical history and sociodemographic factors of each participant were evaluated using a computer-assisted face-to-face interview. Next, participants underwent extensive medical examinations, including measurements of the waist circumference, body height weight, and blood pressure. Waist circumference was used as an indicator of abdominal fat in all analyses. Participants were asked to bring their medication prescription sheets or packing containers of all medication they have been taken within the last seven days. By counting the number of alcoholic beverages that had been consumed on average per day over the last 30 days, alcohol consumption was estimated.

Blood samples were drawn between 07:00 a.m. and 12:30 p.m. Fasting time was assessed by asking for the last time the participants ate or drank beverages other than water. In SHIP-TREND, participants were explicitly asked not to eat or drink before blood sampling. Fasting time was an average of 13:28 h, standard deviation (SD) = 1:32 h. Blood samples were taken from the cubital vein and analysed directly or stored at −80 °C in the Integrated Research Biobank of the University Medicine Greifswald [69]. Spontaneous urine specimens were collected and immediately stored at −80 °C. White blood cell count (WBC), red blood cell count (RBC), and thrombocytes count (PLT) were measured on the XE 5000 from Sysmex (Sysmex Deutschland GmbH, Norderstedt, Germany). Glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) concentrations were determined using high-performance liquid chromatography (Bio-Rad Diamat, Munich, Germany). Highly sensitive CRP, triglycerides, total cholesterol (TC), high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C), low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), GGT, ASAT, ALAT, and creatinine (Jaffé) were determined on the Dimension VISTA 1500 according to the recommendations of the manufacturer (Siemens Healthcare Diagnostics GmbH, Eschborn, Germany). From the serum creatinine, the estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) was calculated using the Modification of Diet in Renal Disease equation, as described before [35]. All requirements of the corresponding guideline according to quality specifications were at least fulfilled. Plasma fibrinogen concentrations were assayed according to Clauss (BCS, Siemens Healthcare Diagnostics GmbH; Eschborn). Exocrine pancreatic function was determined using a pancreatic elastase ELISA (BIOSERV Diagnostics, Greifswald, Germany) based on faecal samples, as described before.

Stool sample sequencing followed established procedures, as outlined before in detail [70]. Briefly, study participants collected faecal samples at home and stored them in a tube containing a stabilising DNA buffer. Next, faecal samples were transported to our laboratory. Then, DNA from the faecal samples was extracted (PSP Spin Stool DNA Kit; Stratec Biomedical AG, Birkenfeld, Germany) and stored at −20 °C until analysis using 16S rRNA gene sequencing of the V1–V2 region utilising a MiSeq platform (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA). For taxonomic assignments, DADA2 16 (V.1.10) was employed for amplicon data processing, enabling single-nucleotide resolutions of amplicons. All samples were normalised to 10,000 16S rRNA gene read counts.

After thawing, urine specimens were centrifuged for 5 min at 3000× g, and the supernatant was used for spectroscopic analysis. To this purpose, we mixed 450 µL of urine with 50 µL of phosphate buffer to stabilise the urinary pH at 7.0 (±0.35). The buffer was prepared with D2O and contained sodium 3-trimethylsilyl-(2,2,3,3-D4)-1-propionate (TSP) as a reference. Spectra were recorded on a Bruker DRX-400 NMR spectrometer (Bruker BioSpin GmbH, Ettlingen, Germany) at a 1H frequency of 400.13 MHz. The instrument was equipped with a 4 mm selective inverse flow probe (FISEI, 120 µL active volume) with a z-gradient. Specimens were automatically delivered to the spectrometer via flow injection. The acquisition temperature was set to 300 K. A standard one-dimensional 1H-NMR pulse sequence with suppression of the water peak (NOESYPREAST) was used: RD − P(90°) − 4 µsec − P(90°) − tm − P(90°) − acquisition of the free induction decay (FID). The non-selective 90° hard pulse P(90°) was adjusted to 9.4 µsec. The relaxation delay (RD), mixing time (tm), and acquisition time were set to 4 s, 100 msec, and 3.96 s, respectively, resulting in a total recycle time of ~8.0 s. Low-power continuous-wave irradiation on the water resonance at a field strength of ~25 Hz was applied during RD and tm for pre-saturation. After the application of 4 dummy scans, 64 FIDs were collected into 65,536 (64 K) complex data points using a spectral width of 20.689 parts per million (ppm). FIDs were multiplied with an exponential function corresponding to a line broadening of 0.3 Hz before Fourier transformation. Spectra were processed within TOP-SPIN 1.3 (Bruker BioSpin, Billerica, MA, USA).

The NMR spectra were analysed by Chenomx Inc. (Edmonton, AB, Canada) and manually annotated by spectral pattern matching using the Chenomx Worksuite 7.0 (Chenomx Inc., Edmonton, Canada) to deduce absolute urinary metabolite concentrations. The method of Chenomx’s patented NMR-based metabolomics platform is based on software and an extensive reference database that contains a compound list of over 300 metabolite models and was used for the analysis. Manual phasing, baseline correction, and targeted metabolic profiling using the Chenomx library were performed. This resulted in a list of 60 identified metabolites (including creatinine, which was used for normalisation) and their concentrations in millimoles per liter (mM). The spectrum regions of water (δ = 4.6–5.0) and the regions below δ = 0.0 and above δ = 10.0 were removed from the analysis for all groups in order to prevent variation in each sample. Each NMR variable was normalised to the total area in order to allow for a spectrum-to-spectrum comparison.

For statistical analyses, regression-based normalisation was performed on the log-transformed urinary concentrations based on probabilistic quotient normalisation using restricted cubic splines, as described in [36]. Regression-based normalisation leads to slightly higher statistical power, and it accounts for potential metabolite-specific dilution–concentration dependencies [36]. Details on regression-based normalisation can be found in Hertel et al. [36]. After the regression-based normalisation, outliers based on the 4-standard-deviation rule were excluded.

For descriptive statistics, metric variables were described using means and standard deviations, while categorical and ordinal variables were described using proportions. All reported p-values were two-tailed, and multiple testing correction was performed via applying the false discovery rate (FDR). All major routes of analysis were performed through multivariable regressions from the class of generalised linear models. All regression analyses included a basic set of covariates if not specified otherwise, consisting of age, sex, age–sex interaction terms, and waist circumference. Furthermore, we included smoking, hypertonia, HbA1c, years of education, the eGFR, urinary pH, and alcohol intake as covariates for the full adjustment. Age, waist circumference, and eGFR were introduced as restricted cubic splines using four knots at the 5% percentile, the 33% percentile, the 66% percentile, and the 95% percentile of the respective distributions. Nonlinear modelling for these variables was chosen, as previous analyses indicated nonlinearity in respect to basic covariates [71].

As only the microbiome-based prediction score for urinary hippurate explained the substantial proportions of variance, we explored the information encoded in this prediction score further. To this end, we utilised linear mixed-effect regressions with either the normalised urinary hippurate concentrations, the Shannon entropy, or the microbiome-based hippurate prediction score as a response variable, the full set of covariates, and one additional clinical parameter as a predictor of interest. In this way, we screened inflammation markers (high sensitivity CRP, fibrinogen, white blood cell counts), markers of metabolic health (triglycerides, ratio of total cholesterol and HDL cholesterol, HbA1c), and markers of liver injury (GGT, ASAT, ALAT) on the association with urinary hippurate concentration, the Shannon entropy, and the microbiome-based hippurate prediction score. Finally, we performed mediation analyses following the procedure of Hicks et al. [73] to test whether the microbiome-based hippurate prediction score mediates the effects of microbiome diversity on markers of human health.

To enlighten the relation between microbial benzoate metabolism and microbial alpha diversity further, we went on to analyse a public metagenomics dataset (n = 616, see Yachida et al. [39] for details) with functional annotations based on the AGORA2 platform [40]. In brief, species abundances were retrieved via the MetaPhlaN2 pipeline and then mapped onto AGORA2. AGORA2 is a collection of semi-automatically derived and manually curated genome-scale reconstructions of microbes that was curated against known experimental data reflecting the true metabolic capacities of the microbes [40]. We utilised the genome-scale reconstructions to analyse which microbes were able to secrete benzoate, formate, and 4-hydroxyphenylacetate. Moreover, we calculated reaction abundances for all reactions involving benzoate based on the AGORA2 functional annotations using established pipelines [74] for all metagenomes measured in Yachida et al. [39]. Then, we regressed the reaction abundances via fractional regressions on the Shannon entropy including age, sex, body mass index, and the case–control status as covariates.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

