Personal microbiome analysis improves student engagement and interest in Immunology, Molecular Biology, and Genomics undergraduate courses

A critical area of emphasis for science educators is the identification of effective means of teaching and engaging undergraduate students. Personal microbiome analysis is a means of identifying the microbial communities found on or in our body. We hypothesized the use of personal microbiome analysis in the classroom could improve science education by making courses more applied and engaging for undergraduate students. We determined to test this prediction in three Brigham Young University undergraduate courses: Immunology, Advanced Molecular Biology Laboratory, and Genomics. These three courses have a two-week microbiome unit and students during the 2016 semester students could submit their own personal microbiome kit or use the demo data, whereas during the 2017 semester students were given access to microbiome data from an anonymous individual. The students were surveyed before, during, and after the human microbiome unit to determine whether analyzing their own personal microbiome data, compared to analyzing demo microbiome data, impacted student engagement and interest. We found that personal microbiome analysis significantly enhanced the engagement and interest of students while completing microbiome assignments, the self-reported time students spent researching the microbiome during the two week microbiome unit, and the attitudes of students regarding the course overall. Thus, we found that integrating personal microbiome analysis in the classroom was a powerful means of improving student engagement and interest in undergraduate science courses.

One area of rapid scientific progress and interest is the human microbiome. All organisms, including humans, exist within a sea of microbial communities (termed the ‘microbiome’) [1]. The human gut microbiome consists of trillions of microorganisms and it is increasingly clear that the diversity and composition of this community of microorganisms has a profound effect on human health and disease [1–3]. Recent pedagogy studies have found integration of current technologies and issues into the classroom can improve the relevance of the course and student learning [4–7]. We determined to see if integration of personal microbiome analysis into the classroom would be an effective means of improving student interest and engagement in undergraduate science classes.

Personal genomics is an established field in which the data for each individual is fixed, whereas personal microbiome analysis is a newer field based off of personal data that can fluctuate depending on diet, lifestyle, and use of antibiotics. We wondered if these differences in the nature of this personal data would alter the motivation of undergraduate students to learn so they could better analyze their own data. In this study, we examined whether analysis of personal microbiome data improves student engagement and interest in three undergraduate science courses at Brigham Young University (Advanced Molecular Biology Laboratory, Immunology, and Genomics). Of note, we found that students who analyzed their personal microbiome data reported significantly enhanced engagement and interest, increased self-reported time spent researching microbiome material, and significantly improved attitudes regarding the course overall.

Subjects for this study were undergraduate students enrolled in one of three undergraduate science courses at Brigham Young University (Advanced Molecular Biology Laboratory, Immunology, or Genomics) during the Winter 2016 and 2017 semesters. Students enrolled in these three courses had all previously completed an introductory molecular biology course. During the 2016 semester students could submit their own personal microbiome kit or use the demo data, whereas during the 2017 semester students were given access to microbiome data from an anonymous individual. In 2016 students were given the option to use a five-site uBiome kit (https://www.uBiome.com) which allowed for sampling of the nose, mouth, skin, gut (stool), and genitals (or alternative site). The five-site microbiome kits were purchased using funds from a Brigham Young University Teaching Enhancement Grant incurring no cost to the students. Sixty-five students completed both the pre- and post-surveys and received personal microbiome kits; eighty students completed both the pre- and post-surveys and used demo data. Students who did not complete both the pre- and post-surveys were not included in the data analysis (Forty students total; fifteen in 2016 and 25 in 2017). The survey contained a written consent form that was documented in each completed survey and the Brigham Young University Institutional Review Board approved the study methodology (Study # E16071).

The three courses in this study had a two-week focus on the microbiome at the end of the semester. Before starting the microbiome unit, students were asked to read articles on what is known and unknown regarding the microbiome and complete a homework assignment on the reading. Students in the 2016 courses were given the option to decide whether or not they wanted a personal microbiome kit (sixty-five students opted to receive a kit and five students opted to not receive a kit). A classroom discussion reviewing the same material of what was known and what was not known regarding current analysis of the microbiome was led by the instructors (K.S.W. for Immunology and Advanced Molecular Biology laboratory and S.M.J. for Genomics; discussions led by the same instructor for these classes both years) [38, 39]. Students in the 2016 courses who opted to receive a microbiome kit collected their own samples, sent them for testing, and were the only people with access to their microbiome data.

During the two-week microbiome unit, a classroom discussion on how the data were obtained and what could and could not be concluded from these data was led by the instructors (K.S.W. and S.M.J). The instructors also demonstrated how to analyze microbiome data using the demo data from an anonymous individual. Students in all three courses were asked to complete an online module with four assignments that required analysis of their data or the demo data provided.

At the start and conclusion of the two-week microbiome emphasis, a survey was administered to measure the student attitudes, understanding of personal microbiome analysis, and the classroom learning experience. Assessment of student attitudes was measured by agreement with statements on a 5-point Likert scale (1 = strongly disagree, 2 = disagree, 3 = neither agree or disagree, 4 = agree, 5 = strongly agree), and results are displayed as the mean. We also assessed student behavior and attitudes as they answered questions while completing four online modules. In the pre-survey we assessed the biological training of the students to control for potential group non-equivalence using a 17-question multiple-choice quiz (S1 Fig) taken from the 24-item Introductory Molecular and Cellular Biology Assessment (IMCA) [40]. The IMCA is a published biology concept inventory that includes questions on molecular biology, cellular biology, genetics, and gene expression. Validity and reliability of the full IMCA has been established [40]. In the post-survey, we assessed student understanding of the microbiome by scoring a 10-question multiple-choice quiz created by researchers based on the learning outcomes of the course. Expert validity was established by a team of researchers familiar with the content and the project. Several iterative rounds were made to match the test to course learning outcomes as agreed upon by the researchers. The responses and scores of students given the personal microbiome kits (2016) were compared to students who were not given the kits (2017) but had access to the demo microbiome profile of an anonymous individual.

Data analysis was performed on responses from students who had completed both the pre- and post-surveys and had not previously completed microbiome testing and analysis. Any students enrolled in more than one of the three courses in the study (either in 2016 or 2017) were only counted once (Data for a student enrolled in two of these courses was included with the class in which they did the survey first). A 5-point Likert scale was used to access student attitudes and data comparisons between groups (kit and no kit) were performed using a Mann-Whitney U-test. For categorical survey questions, statistical analysis of student answers was performed using a chi-square test and all values are shown as stacked bars (percentages of the categories chosen). Statistics were performed using Prism 7 software (GraphPad).

These students were all undergraduates taking either the Advanced Molecular Biology Laboratory, Immunology, or Genomics courses at Brigham Young University during winter semester of 2016 or winter semester of 2017. For the online module Sixty-five students received personal microbiome kits and eighty students used demo data. Only students who completed both the pre- and post-surveys were included in this study. For the post-survey students waiting to receive their data were grouped with the no kit cohort.

Before starting the study and to test for group non-equivalence, we wanted to determine whether the groups being compared had significantly different levels of basic biology background prior to the microbiome unit in our classes. As part of the microbiome pre-survey students were given a 17-question quiz on basic biological topics to evaluate the prior biological preparation of students in the classes (S1 Fig). There were no significant differences on the basic biology quiz between the students who received the microbiome kits compared to those who did not (Fig 1; p = 0.11).

After taking the pre-survey and completing a reading assignment and homework on the basics of the microbiome, students were assigned an online module as homework that included four different research tasks using their own or the demo microbiome data (S2 Fig). The first assignment asked the students to determine their most abundant microbiome phylum and then hypothesize the function of this microbe in the gut. They performed an online search and researched websites describing the health effects of this microbe. Students then reported their search engagement, search time, number of websites visited, and the quantity of evidence they found for or against their original hypothesis of the microbe health function. Students evaluating their own microbiome data reported significantly higher levels of search engagement (Fig 2A; p<0.05), spent equivalent time searching for evidence (Fig 2B; p = 0.08), visited more websites (Fig 2C; p<0.05), and collected more evidence (Fig 2D; p<0.05) than those evaluating demo data.

The second assignment asked the students to compare their overall microbiome diversity to a database containing data from 14 sub-groups of people with different lifestyles (i.e. omnivore, vegans, antibiotics, weight loss, gluten free, heavy drinkers, low carb, etc.), determine which group their microbiome diversity most closely resembled, and see if this made sense based on their lifestyle (S2 Fig). They performed an online search and researched websites describing microbiome diversity and lifestyle. Students then reported their search engagement, search time, number of websites visited, and the quantity of evidence they found for or against whether the similarities and differences between their data and the lifestyle sub-groups made sense based on their own lifestyle. Students evaluating their own microbiome data reported significantly higher levels of search engagement (Fig 3A; p<0.001), spent equivalent time searching for evidence (Fig 3B; p = 0.18), visited more websites (Fig 3C; p<0.05), and collected more evidence (Fig 3D; p<0.05) than those evaluating demo data.

The third assignment asked the students to evaluate the reliability of the microbiome metabolic conclusions inferred from the microbiome analysis (S2 Fig). While sequence data enabled identification of different microbes, the entire genomes of all of the microbes have not been completed, and the analysis performed did not look at gene expression. Students were asked to evaluate the metabolic data and they performed an online search and researched websites describing methods of inferring function from taxonomic sequencing data. Students then reported their search engagement, search time, number of websites visited. In case the websites they visited had similar sources, students were also asked for the number of sources they consulted regarding the metabolic conclusions from sequence data. Students evaluating their own microbiome data reported significantly higher levels of search engagement (Fig 4A; p<0.01), spent equivalent time searching for evidence (p = 0.08) (Fig 4B), visited more websites (p<0.01) (Fig 4C), and consulted more sources (p<0.05) (Fig 4D) than those evaluating demo data.

The fourth assignment asked the students to evaluate the taxonomy of the most abundant microbe in the microbiome and generate one hypotheses as to why this specific species might be the most abundant (S2 Fig). They performed an online search and researched websites regarding the most abundant species and then reported their search engagement, search time, number of websites visited, and the number of hypotheses they generated regarding why this species might be the most abundant. While students were only asked to come up with one hypothesis, they were given the option to report how many they actually came up with to see if their personal interest resulted in them thinking more in depth than just the required assignment. Students evaluating their own microbiome data reported significantly higher levels of search engagement (Fig 5A; p<0.001), spent more time searching for evidence (Fig 5B; p<0.05), and visited more websites (Fig 5C; p<0.05) than those evaluating demo data. They did not generate more hypotheses regarding the reason why a bacterial species might be more abundant than those evaluating demo data (Fig 5D; p = 0.40).

At the end of the online assignment (S2 Fig), students were asked to evaluate their overall experience with the online microbiome module using a 5-point Likert scale. Students who were given kits and evaluated their own data reported significantly higher levels of engagement (p<0.0001), enjoyment (p<0.0001), interest (p<0.001), and learning (p<0.0001) compared to the students evaluating demo data (Fig 6A). While there was a trend towards students with a kit to spend more time working on the microbiome module, the self-reported time spent on the microbiome module was statistically equivalent (p = 0.07) with students evaluating demo data (Fig 6B).

As part of this study, student attitudes towards personal microbiome testing were surveyed after our two-week focus on the microbiome (Fig 7). This survey measured their confidence in microbiome data analysis, their classroom learning experience, and their engagement with the microbiome section as well as with the course overall.

In the post-survey students were asked to rate their level of agreement on topics regarding microbiome profiling using a 5-point Likert scale (Fig 7). Those who received a kit and evaluated their own data reported a significantly higher level of agreement that they “knew enough about microbiology to understand microbiome profiling results” compared to students evaluating demo data (p<0.05), while there was no difference in the level of agreement between groups that “microbiome profiling companies provide accurate analysis and interpretation of genotype data” (Fig 8A; questions 1 and 2).

Students rated their agreement towards microbiome profiling and their classroom learning experience using a 5-point Likert scale (Fig 7). Those who received a kit and evaluated their own data had significantly higher levels of agreement that “class discussion and assignments about the strengths and weaknesses of microbiome profiling and interpretation of those results has been helpful for me in evaluating this service” (p<0.01) than those evaluating demo data (Fig 8B; question 3). Those students who analyzed their own microbiome data also had significantly higher levels of agreement that they are “more interested in topics we are covering in class because we are doing this microbiome profile emphasis” than those analyzing the demo data (p<0.001) (Fig 8B; question 4). Students were also asked to rate their level of agreement regarding their attitudes towards microbiome profiling and their classroom learning experience. Students who analyzed their own microbiome data had a higher level of agreement that the course was personally applicable than those evaluating demo data (p<0.0001) (Fig 8B; question 5) and that having an emphasis on microbiome profiling had improved their overall learning in the course (p<0.05) (Fig 8B; question 6).

As part of survey at the end of the two-week focus on the microbiome, students were asked questions regarding their engagement in the course overall due to the two-week microbiome focus (Fig 7). To measure student engagement, students were asked in the survey to report their level of agreement that they spent more time “studying and learning class material because I want to know enough to interpret microbiome profiling,” and to estimate the time they spent using or researching personal microbiome products at the end of our two-week microbiome unit. Students analyzing their own microbiome data had significantly higher level of agreement that they had spent more time studying and learning to prepare to interpret the microbiome profiling compared to those evaluating demo data (p<0.05) (Fig 8C; question 7). Students analyzing their own microbiome data reported spending significantly more time researching the microbiome, almost 1 hour more on average, than students who did not receive a kit (p<0.0001) (Fig 8D; question 8). We also examined student familiarity with the human microbiome (i.e., measured learning, rather than self-report) in the post-surveys with a 10-question microbiome-based quiz (S3 Fig). Comparison of the scores between the groups showed no significant difference on actual learning whether or not they received a kit (Fig 8E).

In order to improve the effectiveness of instruction, finding relevant ways to apply active learning in the classroom has become important in all disciplines [41]. As sequencing costs have decreased and genetic tests have become more common, science and medical educators have increased the frequency of implementation of personal data analysis in the classroom [42–44]. Implementation of personal genomics analysis into the classroom has occurred at numerous schools including Stanford, Pennsylvania State University, University of Pennsylvania, Duke and others [20, 45, 46]. Analysis of genetics and race using next generation sequencing has recently been used successfully in high school classrooms to improve student learning [47]. While personal genomics is now a mature field, personal microbiome analysis is a much younger field with less known regarding data interpretation. A recent review article addressed the potential value of using the microbiome in the classroom to teach cutting edge technologies such as high throughput sequencing and bioinformatics in a personally relevant manner [48]. To our knowledge, our study is the first that has actually evaluated the benefits of incorporating personal microbiome kits into undergraduate science courses and the effect of personal microbiome data analysis on student engagement and interest. Our study is also unique from previous personal data studies in its extensive quantification of motivation both of the course overall and while students worked on an online module, providing in depth analysis of numbers of websites visited, hypotheses generated, and engagement and interest.

It is critical to find engaging and practical means to improve science education and integration of personal microbiome data analysis represents a potentially effective means of doing this. It should certainly be taken into consideration that our effects with this treatment are modest and that overall motivation, although improved, was less than optimal when weighing the costs of incorporating personal microbiome analysis in the classroom. However, this is certainly a promising place to start thinking about engaging students personally in upper division biology courses. This topic could certainly apply to other disciplines such as having nutrition students analyze their own dietary patterns, having genetics students analyze their personal genomic information [25, 51], or having exercise physiology students design and test a personal physical fitness regimen. Just as all of these would, the incorporation of microbiome analysis into the classroom provides a means of initiating relevant discussions about current medical, ethical, and privacy issues and enables students to be better prepared to contribute to future policy discussions. While further evaluation of personal microbiome analysis in undergraduate classrooms is necessary, we believe it is an effective tool that should be thoughtfully incorporated into life science education.

