The Gastrointestinal Microbiome: A Review

The gastrointestinal microbiome is a diverse consortium of bacteria, archaea, fungi, protozoa, and viruses that inhabit the gut of all mammals. Studies in humans and other mammals have implicated the microbiome in a range of physiologic processes that are vital to host health including energy homeostasis, metabolism, gut epithelial health, immunologic activity, and neurobehavioral development. The microbial genome confers metabolic capabilities exceeding those of the host organism alone, making the gut microbiome an active participant in host physiology. Recent advances in DNA sequencing technology and computational biology have revolutionized the field of microbiomics, permitting mechanistic evaluation of the relationships between an animal and its microbial symbionts. Changes in the gastrointestinal microbiome are associated with diseases in humans and animals including inflammatory bowel disease, asthma, obesity, metabolic syndrome, cardiovascular disease, immune‐mediated conditions, and neurodevelopmental conditions such as autism spectrum disorder. While there remains a paucity of data regarding the intestinal microbiome in small animals, recent studies have helped to characterize its role in host animal health and associated disease states. This review is intended to familiarize small animal veterinarians with recent advances in the field of microbiomics and to prime them for a future in which diagnostic tests and therapies will incorporate these developments into clinical practice.

All mammals are inhabited by communities of microorganisms essential to the normal form and function of the host. In terms of cellular composition, genetic diversity, and metabolic capacity, the host animal should be regarded as a multispecies hybrid organism composed of host and microbial cells operating in dynamic and symbiotic equilibrium. The diverse consortium of bacteria, archaea, fungi, protozoa, viruses, and their collective genome found on and within the body comprises the microbiome.1, 2 The microbiome makes vital contributions to energy homeostasis, metabolism, gut epithelial health, immunologic activity, and neurodevelopment.1, 2, 3 The microbiome is dynamic and subject to important changes during the life of the host in response to a variety of factors including diet, environment, medical interventions, and disease states.

To date, there are limited comprehensive reviews of the intestinal microbiome that integrate recent developments from studies in humans into the existing literature regarding the importance of the intestinal microbiome in dogs and cats. Notably absent in existing reviews is a discussion of the acquisition of the neonatal microbiome and its impact on host health and development. Given the importance of the microbiome in normal host physiology and its role in association with a variety of diseases, a thorough review of this rapidly evolving topic is warranted. This review is intended to update the veterinary community on recent advances in knowledge from studies in humans and other mammals, and to summarize the current state of microbiomics in small animal medicine, with an emphasis on the bacterial inhabitants of the gastrointestinal tract.

Before birth, all mammals were thought to be sterile with inoculation with microbes occurring at the time of birth. There is some evidence supporting the vertical transfer of microbes before birth, but these findings are controversial and more research will be required to verify these claims.7, 8, 9 Most studies in human neonates suggest that the early colonizers of the infant intestine are acquired through contact with maternal and environmental microbes.10, 11 This concept is supported by studies demonstrating an association between the composition of the infant intestinal microbiome and the route of delivery in humans. Infants delivered vaginally harbor microbial communities, dominated by Lactobacillus spp. and Bifidobacterium spp., which are similar to their mother's vaginal canal.11, 12 Conversely, infants delivered by cesarean section are colonized by microbial communities composed of common skin microbes with Staphylococcus as the predominant genus.11 These studies suggest that neonatal acquisition of the intestinal microbiome is dependent on the organisms encountered in the first hours and days of life from the mother and environment. These early colonizers are enriched for genes governing the metabolism of sugars found in milk as well as those involved in the de novo synthesis of folate, representing critical metabolic functions in the developing host gut.13, 14 Partial restoration of the microbiome was accomplished in a pilot study of newborns delivered via C section that were exposed to the maternal vaginal fluids at birth.15 The gut, oral, and skin microbiomes in these infants were enriched with bacterial communities that resembled vaginally delivered babies.15 These, and other studies in humans, show that the early stages of colonization are characterized by profound interindividual and temporal variation and limited intra‐individual taxonomic diversity in the composition of the intestinal microbiome.10, 14, 16, 17, 18

Studies in humans and small animals suggest that the patterned maturation of the gut microbiome is a conserved feature of mammalian development. The findings summarized here are suggestive of a critical developmental window, during which long‐term host developmental trajectories are set in association with age, environment, illness, and diet‐related changes in the gastrointestinal microbiome. However, there is a paucity of longitudinal studies of the developing microbiome in small animals and fundamental questions regarding its maturation, and impact on host physiology, remain unanswered. Additional longitudinal studies are needed to characterize the origin, structure, and functional characteristics of the neonatal gut microbiome in veterinary patients. The compositional and temporal patterns by which these features evolve toward a mature configuration are unknown. The long‐term impact of events that alter maturation of the microbiome in small animals during the developmental window is also undescribed and deserves further investigation.

In contrast to the infant, the mature human intestinal microbiome is characterized by profound compositional and functional diversity, and long‐term temporal stability.48 These essential features of the adult human microbiome appear to be mirrored in adult dogs and cats. A variety of factors influence the gut microbiome's composition as well as its long‐term stability and resilience to change (Fig 2). Several studies describe the gastrointestinal microbiome in healthy, mature dogs and cats. Additionally, there are reports describing the impact of heredity, diet, and medical interventions on its compositional structure, diversity, and functional capacity. The predominant bacterial phyla in the intestinal tracts of adult dogs and cats are Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, Proteobacteria, Fusobacteria, and Actinobacteria (Fig 3). The relative abundances of these phyla vary between the existing published reports, likely a result of differences in individual host genetics, diet, age, sample collection method and source, DNA extraction techniques, and analytic methodology. As in humans, the majority of studies in dogs reveal that the predominant bacterial phyla in the canine feces are Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes.26, 49, 50, 51, 52 Clostridium is the dominant genus with a relative abundance ranging from 7–22%.51, 52 In contrast with humans and other animals, Fusobacteria appears to be relatively abundant in canine feces, and some studies have found that Fusobacteria was either the most abundant phylum, or that it was codominant with Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes.53, 54, 55 The relevance of the increased proportion of Fusobacteria in dogs relative to humans is unclear, although members of the phylum have been associated with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and colorectal cancer in humans.56, 57 Conversely, dogs with IBD tend to have lower relative abundances of Fusobacteria, compared with healthy dogs.58 Although cats are obligate carnivores with no strict requirement for complex carbohydrates, their colonic microbiome is similar in composition to dogs and other mammals. Most studies indicate that Firmicutes are the predominant phylum in cats with a relative abundance ranging from 36 to 92%.52, 59, 60, 61 Within Firmicutes, Clostridiales is the most abundant order and Clostridium the most abundant genus.52, 59, 60 In contrast with dogs, Proteobacteria comprise a substantial proportion of the feline colonic microbiome, with a relative abundance of 7.9–14%.59, 60, 61

The studies reviewed here suggest that the adult intestinal microbiome of humans, dogs, and cats is characterized by long‐term stability and profound compositional and functional diversity. It is also clear that vital host physiologic processes are governed by interactions between the host and resident microbiome and that conditions which affect the structure of the microbiome may impact host health. The long‐term stability and susceptibility to change during pathologic and aberrant metabolic states make the gut microbiome a viable diagnostic and therapeutic target. The following sections of this review will explore host‐microbiome relationships in more detail, while reviewing diseases associated with alterations in the intestinal microbiome.

The ancient maxim, “All disease begins in the gut,” apparently stated by Hippocrates in the 3rd Century B.C.E, has, in principle, held up to modern scientific scrutiny. The microbiome participates in vital physiologic and immunologic processes including energy homeostasis and metabolism, the synthesis of vitamins and other nutrients, endocrine signaling, prevention of enteropathogen colonization, regulation of immune function, and metabolism of xenobiotic compounds.27, 28 Indeed, many gastrointestinal and systemic diseases have been associated with aberrant gut microbial communities. It is unclear whether the microbiome participates directly in the pathogenesis of these disease states. However, a growing body of evidence implicates the microbiome directly in pathogeneses of disease via complex interactions between the microbiome and host metabolic and immune systems. Here, we will review the current state of knowledge regarding the role of the intestinal microbiome in conditions affecting gastrointestinal and systemic health, with an emphasis on obesity and chronic enteropathies.

In humans and laboratory animals, a diverse array of other systemic diseases including immune‐mediated conditions (rheumatoid arthritis, atopy, and asthma) and neurodevelopmental disorders (autism spectrum disorder) have been linked to intestinal dysbiosis.32, 33 These associations have not been identified in small animals and are beyond the scope of this review. Despite the paucity of data, and lack of clarity regarding the microbiome's role in the pathogenesis of the conditions reviewed here, there are clear links between the intestinal microbiome and systemic health. Therefore, the intestinal microbiome should be considered a viable diagnostic and therapeutic target in future studies designed to assess the clinical impact of these findings.

Therapeutic manipulation of the intestinal microbiome is generally achieved through modification of the diet, administration of prebiotics, probiotics, or antibiotics, and more recently, fecal microbiome transplantation (FMT).b , c , d The therapeutic targets of these interventions and their efficacy are not well established and have only recently been described in the literature. These therapies are meant to shift microbial community steady states associated with dysbiosis to those associated with health. Several studies have reported amelioration of clinical signs after treatment with various microbial concoctions, as will be discussed in this section. Interpretation of these findings is challenging as changes in the microbiome might not necessarily translate into clinical improvements, clinical improvements can occur without detectable changes in the microbiome, and clinical signs might be unaffected, or transiently affected by alterations in the microbiome.

Although fewer studies exist, the potential benefits of prebiotic supplementation, especially by the addition of plant‐derived polysaccharides, is a mainstay of treatment directed at modification of the intestinal microbiome. Referred to as prebiotics, these include inulin, nonstarch polysaccharides found in some cereal grains and seaweed or algae, disaccharides (lactulose), and polysaccharides including fructooligosaccharides (FOS) and galactooligosaccharides. Prebiotics are fermented by colonic bacteria, generating end‐products such as SCFAs that provide essential nutrients for the enteric epithelium. They also induce anti‐inflammatory Tregs, and lower luminal pH.137, 138, 139 Induction of Tregs maintains an anti‐inflammatory milieu and the acidic pH prevents specific pathogens from gaining a foothold. Prebiotics are also speculated to protect the gut epithelium by increasing the mucus layer, elongating the microvilli, increasing numbers of epithelial cells, and by preventing adherence of pathogenic strains to the epithelial cells.140, 141 Other SCFAs such as propionate appear to induce de novo generation of Tregs in the peripheral immune system.142 A newly published study in mice revealed that when deprived of fiber, commensal bacteria will degrade the protective mucosal mucus layer, permitting invasion by commensals and pathogens alike.143

Several studies have evaluated the effects of prebiotics in dogs. In 1 study, chicory root, a source of inulin, improved fecal scores, increased Bifidobacteria, and decreased C. perfringens in the feces of healthy dogs.144 Meta‐analysis of 15 studies including 65 different treatment conditions showed that fecal SCFAs concentrations increase linearly with prebiotic dose.145 This analysis also revealed that fecal Bifidobacteria and Lactobacillus increase with prebiotic dose, although no changes were observed for pathogenic C. perfingens or E. coli. The impacts of prebiotics were not related to the composition of the dog's diet, suggesting that prebiotic therapies can provide benefits independent of diet. The potential benefits of prebiotic supplementation are also evident in cats. In 1 study, pectin administration increased levels of Lactobacilli and fecal SCFA concentrations, while supplementation with FOS led to increased Bifidobacteria and decreased E. coli as well as increased concentrations of fecal butyrate.146

Probiotics are formulations of live organisms that confer beneficial effects on the recipient when delivered in adequate amounts. Proposed mechanisms through which probiotics improve host health include reducing intestinal permeability by upregulation of tight junction proteins, increasing mucin secretion by goblet cells, increasing secretion of defensins which prevent pathogen colonization, production of SCFAs, stimulation of IgA secretion, decreasing luminal pH, and enhancing and directing immune cells to promote tolerance to commensals while maintaining protection against pathogens.147 Even nonviable organisms might confer health benefits by adhering to the mucus layer and stimulating immune function in dogs.148, 149 Capsular polysaccharide from Bacteroides fragilis, for instance, activates Tregs and decreases severity of colitis in mice.150 The most commonly used probiotic organisms include Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium. Additional bacteria used include Bacillus and Streptococcus as well as the yeast, Saccharomyces boulardii. It is essential to remember that probiotic organisms are often strain specific.b In order to remain viable, probiotics must survive the acidic environment of the stomach and bile acid to colonize the intestines. One study detected probiotic species in 11 of 12 dogs during probiotic administration but was not able to detect the probiotic species before or after completion of the trial.151 However, probiotics appear to confer benefits without changing the microbiome permanently and transient colonization is still associated with beneficial effects in the host.152

Probiotic supplementation benefited small animals in several clinical trials. A small clinical trial with a probiotic strain of Saccharomyces boulardii improved clinical signs in dogs with IBD and protein losing enteropathy.a In dogs with food‐responsive diarrhea treated with lyophilized Lactobacillus for 21 days along with diet change, there were increased Lactobacilli and decreased Enterobacteria in the feces accompanied by improved clinical signs.161 In another study of 36 dogs with acute gastroenteritis, a probiotic combination improved clinical signs compared to a placebo.162 Enterococcus faecium SF68 is a lactic acid‐producing strain that has been shown to increase antibody secretion in mice with Giardiasis as well as decrease fecal shedding of Giardia.163 When administered to puppies, E. faecium SF68 was associated with increased serum IgA levels.163 In a shelter‐based study, this probiotic, administered with metronidazole, improved fecal scores compared to dogs treated with metronidazole alone.164 In kittens from a shelter, E. faecium SF68 significantly decreased the incidence of diarrhea.165 Only 9.5% of the probiotic group developed diarrhea compared with 60% of kittens that were not given probiotics. There was also a decrease in fecal C. perfringens and an increase in Bifidobacteria associated with probiotic administration. In another large trial of 217 shelter cats, E. faecium decreased episodes of diarrhea compared with a placebo.166 A multispecies synbiotic containing Enterococcus faecium, Bacillus coagulans, and Lactobacillus acidophilus, along with prebiotics, improved fecal scores and reduced the incidence of diarrhea in healthy Alaskan sled dogs.167 In dogs with IBD, VSL#3 improved clinical signs and increased immune‐histochemical staining for FoxP3+ cells, a marker for Tregs, compared with a control group that was treated with metronidazole and prednisolone.168

Therapeutic manipulation of the microbiome can also be achieved through the administration of select antibiotics. In several human studies, metronidazole was associated with disease remission in patients with Crohn's disease.169, 170, 171 Metronidazole is a nitroimidazole antibiotic and antiprotozoal that is commonly used in small animals with acute and chronic gastrointestinal disorders. A recent study in healthy dogs revealed that metronidazole decreases fecal bacterial diversity but increases the proportions of putatively beneficial bacteria such as Bifidobacterium.172 Tylosin is a macrolide antibiotic that is typically used to treat chronic enteropathies in dogs, especially a variant of antibiotic‐responsive diarrhea termed tylosin‐responsive diarrhea (TRD). One study evaluating its effect in healthy dogs revealed that it causes a reduction in jejunal bacterial diversity and increased the proportion of putatively beneficial Enterococcus species.83 Interestingly, it also caused an increase in potentially pathogenic bacteria such as C. perfingens, E. coli, and Pasteurella, although no dogs in this study developed any new clinical signs of gastrointestinal disease during treatment. Clinical signs in dogs with TRD resolve within the first 3 days of therapy. Additionally, tylosin administration is associated with increases in Enterococcus species in dogs with TRD.173 Rifaximin, a semisynthetic rifamycin with broad‐spectrum activity which undergoes minimal systemic absorption, was found to significantly improve clinical signs in a cohort of dogs with IBD, suggesting potential manipulation of either pathogenic strains (decreased), beneficial commensals (increased), or a combination of the 2.174, 175

Fecal microbiome transplantation entails the transfer of feces from a healthy donor into the intestinal tract of a diseased recipient. The first modern record of FMT, for treatment of humans with pseudomembranous colitis, was reported in 1958 and all 4 patients that were treated survived.176 The route of delivery varies between studies and includes oral capsules, nasogastric, nasoduodenal and colonoscopic administration, and via enema.177 It is unclear whether the benefits of FMT are derived from the transfer of viable commensals, or via the delivery of viruses, proteins, bile acids, vitamins, SCFAs, and the myriad of other substances not yet identified in feces, or some combination of these. The first condition where the FDA has granted investigational new drug status for FMT in the United States was Clostridium difficile infection. Patients with recurrent C. difficile (RCDI) have decreased proportions of fecal Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes, and an ~90% cure rate is expected after FMT.178, 179 In patients with RCDI after FMT, the recipient's fecal microbiome mirrors that of the donor, up to 24 weeks after FMT.180, 181, 182 There are also reports of clinical improvement after FMT in humans with IBD, multiple sclerosis, myoclonus dystonia, and refractory ulcerative colitis.23, 183 A double‐blind, randomized controlled trial of FMT in 18 men with metabolic syndrome used autologous feces as the control and donor feces from lean men for the treatment arm.184 The treatment group had improvement in insulin sensitivity and increases in butyrate‐producing bacteria after 6 weeks of weekly infusion compared with the control group.

Two recent abstracts provide information from case reports of FMT in dogs. One dog with eosinophilic IBD improved substantially after an FMT enema, and remained free of clinical signs for 3 months afterward.c Sequencing of 16S rDNA revealed that 2 days after FMT, the dog's fecal microbiome was more similar to the donor that its own pretreatment sample. Additionally, the post‐FMT fecal sample had higher microbial diversity than the pre‐FMT sample. Another report documented successful FMT in 8 dogs with refractory C. perfingens‐associated diarrhea.d In this report, FMT was also administered by enema and diarrhea resolved in all dogs after treatment. These results, as well as those from studies in humans, indicate that FMT is a highly successful treatment for Clostridium‐associated diarrhea in humans and dogs, although the efficacy in the treatment for other gastrointestinal diseases such as IBD and systemic diseases associated with dysbiosis is unclear. Although reports suggest that FMT is a safe therapeutic approach, some humans with ulcerative colitis developed a fever and increased C‐reactive protein after FMT.185 Given the paucity of data demonstrating its safety and efficacy, indications for its use, and uncertainty in regard to selection of appropriate donors, preparation of the donor fecal samples, and delivery methods, the authors do not recommend FMT except for cases of Clostridium‐associated diarrhea and other chronic enteropathies that are refractory to standard therapies. A recent commentary provides a thorough review of FMT in veterinary medicine.186

The gastrointestinal microbiome is an essential contributor to mammalian health that participates in vital physiologic processes and guides host development. Abnormalities in gut microbial populations have been associated with a variety of gastrointestinal and systemic diseases, making the intestinal microbiome a viable diagnostic and therapeutic target. While recent advances in DNA sequencing and computational technology have revolutionized the field of microbiomics, many fundamental questions remain unanswered. Future directions for research should aim to elucidate the mechanisms underlying interactions between the microbiome and host, describe the process of microbiome maturation during host development and its impact on early‐life and adult health outcomes, clarify its role in the pathogenesis of disease states, and assess the viability of diagnostic tests and therapies designed to assess and treat conditions associated with intestinal dysbiosis.

All of the authors have received research funding from corporations that manufacture prebiotic and probiotic supplements and prescription veterinary diets.

Authors declare no off‐label use of antimicrobials.

