Iron Reshapes the Gut Microbiome and Host Metabolism

Compelling studies have established that the gut microbiome is a modifier of metabolic health. Changes in the composition of the gut microbiome are influenced by genetics and the environment, including diet. Iron is a potential node of crosstalk between the host-microbe relationship and metabolic disease. Although iron is well characterized as a frequent traveling companion of metabolic disease, the role of iron is underappreciated because the mechanisms of iron's influence on host metabolism are poorly characterized. Both iron deficiency and excessive amounts leading to iron overload can have detrimental effects on cardiometabolic health. Optimal iron homeostasis is critical for regulation of host immunity and metabolism in addition to regulation of commensal and pathogenic enteric bacteria. In this article we review evidence to support the notion that altering composition of the gut microbiome may be an important route via which iron impacts cardiometabolic health. We discuss reshaping of the microbiome by iron, the physiological significance and the potential for therapeutic interventions.

The gut microbiome is a complex ecosystem comprising of over 1,000 different species of bacteria, viruses, fungi, parasites and eukarya.1 While it was previously thought that microorganisms outnumbered human cells by 10-to-1,1,2 new estimates state that there is appoximately an equivalent number of bacterial cells to human cells with bacteria contributing up to 0.2 kg in a 70 kg human.3 Based on molecular studies using 16S rDNA analysis, it was found that the microbiota that resides in the intestines of humans is mainly composed of Bacteroidetes (i.e., Bacteroides spp.), Firmicutes (i.e., Clostridium, Roseburia, Ruminococcus, or Lactobacillus spp.), Actinobacteria (i.e., bifidobacteria), and Proteobacteria (i.e., enterobacteria).4,5,6 Of these types of bacteria the most common phyla within the human gut is that of Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes.7,8

While many of the roles of the gut microbiome have yet to be elucidated, several beneficial effects have been discovered.7,8 The gut microbiome plays an important role in digestion and vitamin synthesis.19 However, while some species of the gut microbiome are beneficial, enteric pathogenic bacteria exist such as Shigella flexneri, Citrobacter rodentium, Listeria monocytogenes and Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium.20,21,22,23 Changes in the gut microbiome can significantly impact human health. For example, patients with Crohn's disease exhibit a significant decrease in microbial diversity compared to control individuals.24,25 Additionally, differences in the specific gene content due to strain specific differences can also greatly impact human health by altering the contribution of genes and metabolites to the host.26,27

Many factors impact the composition and function of the gut microbiome including ethnicity, geographic location, age, gender, genetic background, and diet.28,29 In a study investigating the specific ethnic differences amongst individuals who live in the same geographic location it was found that individuals of the same ethnic background had a more similar gut microbiome composition than individuals from different ethnic backgrounds with Dutch individuals exhibiting the largest α-diversity and the South-Asian Surinamese exhibiting the smallest α-diversity. However all individuals had 21 microbial taxa that were present regardless of their ethnicity.30 In another study in which 7,000 individuals from across Guangdong province in China were surveyed, it was found that differences in composition of the microbiome between individuals could be explained based on the individuals geographic location.31 Other studies have also found that both age32 and gender33,34,35 can significantly impact the composition of the gut microbiome. For example, the newborn microbiome can be dramatically effected by birthing method and diet, and this microbiome has a considerably different composition compared to the microbiome observed amongst adult individuals.36,37 Additionally, studies have shown that there are gender specific differences in the composition of the gut microbiome, but the full extent and significance of these changes is unclear.38,39

Genetics may also play a role in the composition of the gut microbiome. One study using 31 female monozygotic pairs, 23 dizygotic twin pairs and 43 of their mothers found that the gut microbiome was similar amongst family members, but each individual had specific bacterial lineage differences. The type of twin did not significantly impact the gut microbiome with both monozygotic and dizygotic twins displaying a similar degree of co-variation.40 In contrast, a separate study investigating fecal samples from the TwinsUK population found that there was more similarity in composition between monozygotic twins than dizygotic twins, additional operational taxonomic unit relative abundances were more highly correlated in monozygotic twins.41 Therefore, whilst genetics can impact the composition of the microbiome, the full extent of the impact of conserved microbial profiles on host physiology remains an area where more research is needed.42 Recently studies have suggested that diet may have a more substantial impact on the gut microbiome than genetic factors43 and can significantly influence and alter its composition.44,45 This mainly depends on macronutirents such as fat and carbohydrate content,44,46 but also on metals such as iron, copper and zinc.47,48,49,50,51

Diet is an important factor that can rapdily alter the composition of the gut microbiota, and since mammals are constantly eating, diet continiously shapes the alpha and beta diversity of intestinal bacterial communities.44,52 Ingested foods provide not only nourishment to the host, but also supply fermentable substrate for gut bacteria, which is required to sustain specific enteric microbes. In response to ingested substrates that enter the intestinal lumen, gut bacteria produce metabolites from digested food components influencing host health.53 Studies demonstrate that diet can have both acute and long-term effects on the composistion of the gut microbiome. The impact of single dietary compounds and widely used dietary patterns like vegetarian, Mediterrean, and Western diets on gut bacteria and host health have been assessed in humans.54

Dietary components associated with these diets, specifically fiber, fat, and sugar, can affect the gut microbiota and host health, which have been reviewed elsewhere.44,53,54,64 The source of dietary carbohydrates and lipids is a key factor that can differentially affect enteric bacteria. Non-digestible carbohydrates like fiber are generally fermented in the colon.83 Fiber supplementation in both healthy and specific patient populations enhance the abundance of Bifidobacterium spp. and Lactobacillus spp. when compared to lower fiber diets or placebo.84,85 Also, increased consumption of resistant starches can induce phylum shifts, and increase proportions of bacterial species dependent on the type of carbohydrate studied.86 Other carbohydrate sources, like simple sugars specifically fructose which is highly prevalent in ultraprocessed foods, are easily absorbed in the upper gastrointestinal tract, can alter the gut microbial profile and can promote aspects of metabolic disease.87,88 Lastly, ingestion of saturated lipids, in a Western diet, compared to unsaturated lipids common in Mediterranean and vegetarian diets, have distinctive effects on the gut microbiota.44,89 Women supplemented with dietary omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids increased both the microbial alpha diversity and increased relative abundance of the Lachnospiraceae family, independent of fiber intake.90 In addition, mice fed saturated fats gained weight, were insulin resistant, had incrased low grade circulating endotoxin levels, and higher white adipose tissue inflammation, which correlated to a distinctive bacterial profile compared to mice fed unsaturated fats protected from these metabolic impairments.91 Altogether, these studies demonstrate diet and dietary components are critical factors that can contribute to the gut microbiota and host health.

Initial findings highlighting the role of gut microbes in metabolic disease development arose from observations using germ-free mice. These mice accumulate less visceral fat compared to conventional colonized mice over time, and are protected against diet-induced obesity when fed a western-style diet.92,93,94 This lean phenotype observed in germ-free mice devoid of gut bacteria is largely attributed to defective nutrient absorption.95 In addition, germ-free mice have improved insulin and glucose tolerance compared to colonized counterpoints, likely both attributed to their lean phenotype, possibly due to lower bacterial induced pathogen recognition receptor activation by gut microbial compounds.93,95 Altogether, these observations support a link between the gut microbiota and host metabolism.

Importantly, the microbiota contains factors, including unknown molecules, that are positioned to influence host metabolism.108 There are now wide-scale efforts to determine how the microbiota can be measured and manipulated to improve host metabolism. The gut microbiota contains a huge amount of genetic diversity and novel chemical compounds that are ripe for developing new therapies. Current approaches focus on measuring bacterial nucleic acids (DNA/RNA), proteins (proteomics) and metabolites (i.e., metabolomics) in order to define how bacteria associated with important disease related pathways to uncover new drug candidates.

Iron is an essential nutrient for both the host and the microbiome. The host requires iron for oxygen transport, cellular respiration, immune responses, catalytic activities and other metabolic functions. Likewise, most bacteria require iron for growth and for essential electron transfer and catalytic reactions. The impact of iron on the microbiome has received considerable attention and this is highlighted in recent reviews111,112,113; nevertheless, there are still many outstanding questions.

Hereditary hemochromatosis is caused by inactivation of the iron hormone hepcidin.156 Interestingly, men are at higher risk of developing hemochromatosis.157 These patients exhibit a high frequency of diabetes with evidence for both destruction of pancreatic β cells and insulin resistance.158 Several mechanisms have been shown to potentially contribute to various clinical metabolic manifestations in hemochromatosis,159 with an emphasis on hepatic consequences. In addition to currently available evidence, we also believe that the contributory role of iron-induced dysbiosis must be more carefully examined. In support of our proposal, a very recent study has demonstrated that hereditary hemochromatosis causes gut dysbiosis.160 This study in Hfe−/− mice, a model of mild hemochromatosis, documented profound changes in the colonic microbiome in favor of the pathogenic bacteria belonging to phyla Proteobacteria and TM7, together with loss of function of the intestinal/colonic barrier. Nevertheless, another study in Hfe−/− mice found increased adiponectin expression and improved glucose tolerance which was explained via reduced iron content specifically in adipose tissue, despite systemic iron overload.161 We must also be careful in translating studies in mouse models to clinical relevance since in mouse models of hemochromatosis excess iron accumulates in pancreatic acinar but not β cells, yet this is dissimilar to findings in human hemochromatosis patients.161 This is an intriguing area of research that will require further investigation to clarify under which circumstances hemochromatosis and the consequent reshaping of the gut microbiome is associated with adverse, or favourable, outcomes.

Previous research studying the impact of iron on the gut microbiome has produced conflicting conclusions. Within bacteria iron can play a crucial role in growth and proliferation, for example iron can be required for the proper functioning of some bacterial proteins and enzymes. Additionally iron can modulate expression of some virulence factors.162,163,164 Therefore, iron has been shown to be an important element required for the growth of some but not all gut bacteria including Bacteroides spp.165,166 and Enterobacteriaceae,167 whilst Lactobacilli species do not require iron for growth.7,8 Interestingly, Lactobacillus plantarum 299v, and a probiotic (containing Bifidobacterium bifidum W23, B. lactis W51, B. lactis W52, Lactobacillus acidophilus W37, L. brevis W63, L. casei W56, L. salivarius W24, Lactococcus lactis W19, and L. lactis W58) have been shown to increase host iron absorption.168,169 Various proteins and enzymes involved in bacterial replication and growth require iron as a cofactor to function. Iron is a cofactor involved in the synthesis of DNA (i.e., ribonucleotide diphosphate reductase),170,171,172,173 electron transfer and generation of ATP (i.e., cytochromes), and the neutralization of harmful oxidative species (i.e., superoxide dismutase). Iron deficiency can inhibit these bacterial cell processes, which can impair bacterial growth. Microbes that require iron for growth and survival have evolved processes to prevent nutrient deficient states. During iron deficiency, bacterial iron acquisition gene programs are de-repressed by the ferric uptake regulator family (FUR) proteins. FUR proteins act as an iron-dependent repressor that controls numerous iron-regulated genes by binding free ferrous (2+) iron to prevent transcription when bacteria are exposed to sufficient iron. During iron deficiency, FUR proteins de-repress gene programs that enhance iron acquisition from their hosts to promote growth.164 Mechanisms to acquire iron include: (i) siderophores formation, (ii) cell surface ferric reductases to reduce free ferric (3+) iron to ferrous (2+) iron for bacterial utilization and (iii) production of cytotoxins and haemolysins to release iron stores from host cells.174,175,176

The majority of the research on the effects of iron on the gut microbiome has focused on changes either during anemia or the effects of iron supplementation in these patients. Iron supplementation in pregnant women was not associated with changes in the gut microbiome.177 Another study investigating the effects of iron on obese and overweight pregnant women found that while there was no significant alteration in the composition of the gut microbiome, women receiving low iron supplementation (<60 mg/d iron) had a higher prevalence of SCFA producing bacteria than women taking a higher dosage of iron.177 In a study conducted to investigate the impact of iron supplementation on rat pups, no effect on growth or weight gain was observed.178 However, supplementation did slightly alter the composition and diversity of the gut microbiome profile. Specifically there were changes in the abundance of strict anaerobic bacterial species like Bifidobacterium and Bacteroides.178 Similarly iron supplementation amongst South African children did not significantly alter the composition of the major bacterial groups, or faecal SCFA concentration.48

Under normal conditions pathogenic bacteria must overcome resistance from commensal microbial communities in order to colonize. Commensal microorganisms activate immune responses which can lead to the elimination of pathogenic bacterial species. However, the level of immune activation is important, as instead of leading to elimination of pathogenic bacteria, alternatively intestinal inflammation can promote the colonization of pathogens.179 One of the hallmarks of intestinal inflammation-induced dysbiosis (Fig. 1) is that of increased abunance of enterobacteria species. Due to the differing microbial profile in the inflammed gut there is also an association with an altered siderophore profile. As siderophores are responsible for metal ion abundance, this altered profile can further influence the type of bacteria which survive and grow.180 As such, because iron is an essential element for most bacteria to thrive, one key role of the intestinal immune response is to limit the availability of iron to pathogenic bacterial species.181

The principal conclusions arising from this review article are summarized in the accompanying Figs. 2 and
3. Specifically, the illustration in Fig. 2 highlights the main concept of iron-mediated modification of the gut microbiome being a potentially important determinant of metabolic consequences in the host. Fig. 3 depicts the various ways in which iron overload or deficiency can occur and subsequently re-shape the gut microbiome and alter barrier function. The impact of these changes on the host is dictated via cross talk mediated by gut-derived factors as shown in the figure. Ultimately, the clinical manifestation of this is the syndrome of dysmetabolic iron overload.

The gut microbiome is now well recognized as a driver of metabolic health status. Well established yet less recognized is the strong correlation between iron overload or deficiency with adverse cardiometabolic outcomes. As indicated in this review, it is now understood that iron can have important effects on reshaping gut microbiome composition and on gut barrier function. For example, excess levels of iron can enhance the prevalence of pathogenic bacteria. The consequences of these changes are likely to be partly responsible for the association of iron status with MetS. This is an intriguing area of research which holds much promise and further studies are poised to add new mechanistic knowledge and identify suitable interventions.

Funding: Related work in GS lab is funded by Canadian Institutes of Health Research and Thalassemia Foundation of Canada. GS also acknowledges Career Investigator Support from Heart & Stroke Foundation (Ontario) and Tier 1 York Research Chair in Mechanisms of Cardiometabolic Disease. AB received support via a CIHR Postdoctoral and York Science Fellowship. JDS is supported by a CIHR Foundation Grant (FDN-154295) and a Tier 2 Canada Research Chair in Metabolic Inflammation at McMaster University.

Conflict of Interest: The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.

Author Contributions:

