Effects of ursodeoxycholic acid on the gut microbiome and colorectal adenoma development



It has been previously reported that ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA), a therapeutic bile acid, reduced risk for advanced colorectal adenoma in men but not women. Interactions between the gut microbiome and fecal bile acid composition as a factor in colorectal cancer neoplasia have been postulated but evidence is limited to small cohorts and animal studies. Using banked stool samples collected as part of a phase III randomized clinical trial of UDCA for the prevention of colorectal adenomatous polyps, we compared change in the microbiome composition after a 3‐year intervention in a subset of participants randomized to oral UDCA at 8‐10 mg/kg of body weight per day (n = 198) or placebo (n = 203). Study participants randomized to UDCA experienced compositional changes in their microbiome that were statistically more similar to other individuals in the UDCA arm than to those in the placebo arm. This reflected a UDCA‐associated shift in microbial community composition (P < 0.001), independent of sex, with no evidence of a UDCA effect on microbial richness (P > 0.05). These UDCA‐associated shifts in microbial community distance metrics from baseline to end‐of‐study were not associated with risk of any or advanced adenoma (all P > 0.05) in men or women. Separate analyses of microbial networks revealed an overrepresentation of Faecalibacterium prausnitzii in the post‐UDCA arm and an inverse relationship between F prausnitzii and Ruminococcus gnavus. In men who received UDCA, the overrepresentation of F prausnitzii and underrepresentation of R gnavus were more prominent in those with no adenoma recurrence at follow‐up compared to men with recurrence. This relationship was not observed in women. Daily UDCA use modestly influences the relative abundance of microbial species in stool and affects the microbial network composition with suggestive evidence for sex‐specific effects of UDCA on stool microbial community composition as a modifier of colorectal adenoma risk.

Western diet and lifestyle account for up to 80% of colorectal cancer (CRC) incidence.1 Several factors have been proposed to explain these associations including an influence of diet and lifestyle on the gut microbiome and effects of colonic bacteria in tumor development.2 The interplay between gut bacterial composition and host epithelium is established as an important determinant of local immune function, metabolism, and host health. This includes strong experimental evidence for an important role of the gut microbiome in susceptibility to gastrointestinal cancers.3, 4 In human studies, reported differences in the gut microbiome between healthy and colorectal tumor tissues, including microbial community composition, support disturbances in intestinal bacteria in association with CRC.5 This includes findings of dense colonies of bacteria (ie, biofilms) invading the mucus layer in association with colorectal adenomas and cancers, particularly in patients with right‐sided neoplasia, which in vitro exhibit tumor‐promoting effects.6 However, establishing a causal relationship between gut bacteria and colorectal neoplasia in humans has been elusive.

Despite the preclinical and clinical promise of UDCA, in a large phase III placebo‐controlled, randomized trial of UDCA for the prevention of colorectal adenomatous polyps, no overall effect of UDCA on adenoma risk was demonstrated. However, there was evidence for reduced risk for development of adenomas with high‐grade dysplasia.17 Subsequently, it was shown that UDCA significantly reduced risk for large and advanced adenoma in men with a positive trend toward larger and more advanced adenoma in women; findings that implicate sex as a modifier of UDCA activity in the colon.18 More recently, evidence for sexual differences in bile acid metabolism in mice19 and bile acid effects on gut bacterial composition20 have emerged. This prompted us to consider UDCA effects on the microbiome with specific attention to differences between men and women that might explain the gender disparity observed in secondary analyses of the adenoma prevention trial. Here, we present findings of UDCA effects on the fecal microbiome and results of exploratory analyses relating microbiome changes with UDCA to adenoma outcomes using data derived from archival paired stool specimens.

Microbiome analyses were conducted on the fecal samples of a subset of subjects who consented to stool collection during their participation in the Phase III Chemoprevention Trial of Ursodeoxycholic Acid (UDCA) for the prevention of colorectal adenomatous polyps. Details of the trial are reported elsewhere.21, 22 Briefly, eligible individuals had at least one colorectal adenoma with a diameter of ≥3 mm removed during a colonoscopy performed no longer than six months prior to registration. In total, 1285 individuals were randomized to UDCA in a daily dose of 8‐10 mg/kg of body weight (n = 661) or matching placebo (n = 624); 1192 (613 UDCA and 579 placebo) participants completed the trial. Use of low‐dose aspirin was permitted up to 81 mg daily, for which randomization was stratified. The primary trial endpoint was colorectal adenoma, defined as the occurrence of one or more adenomas at colonoscopy performed at least 6 months after the initial qualifying colonoscopy. Advanced adenomas were defined as those with high‐grade dysplasia, villous/tubulovillous histology, or a diameter ≥1 cm.18 All stools passed over a 72‐hour period were collected in a single metal container on ice. Pooled 72‐hour samples were transported at 4°C to the laboratory where fecal solid was separated from fecal water as previously described.21, 22 Separated fecal water and solid stool were stored at −80°C for an average of 15 years until processing for microbial DNA.

For the current study, only participants with paired baseline (preintervention with UDCA or placebo) and end‐of‐study microbiome sequence data and adenoma outcome data were included. A total of 401 participants (198 UDCA and 203 placebo) with paired samples generated 802 samples for analysis.

DNA was extracted from thawed stool samples using the QIAamp DNA Stool Mini Kit protocol (Qiagen Inc, Valencia, CA) according to the manufacturer's instructions without modifications. Briefly, 200 mg of feces was placed in a sterile, round‐bottom 2 mL tube containing 1.4 mL ASL lysis buffer. The homogenate was pelleted and incubated with InhibitEX to adsorb inhibitors. Proteinase K and Buffer AL were added to the supernatant to digest proteins. The DNA was bound to a spin column filter, and impurities were washed from the sample using 96%‐100% ethanol and proprietary Buffer AW2. All samples were eluted in 200 μL AE buffer and stored at −80°C until use in PCR.

PCR of the V4 region of the 16S rRNA gene and sequencing were performed on the Illumina MiSeq platform following the original Earth Microbiome Project protocols (http://www.earthmicrobiome.org/protocols-and-standards/) originally described by Caporaso et al23 Sequencing was performed using paired‐end 150 base reads. Data presented are based on forward reads only, as 150 base paired‐end reads are too short to assemble for many organisms, and therefore can result in systematic bias against detecting taxa with shorter 16S rRNA gene sequences (since reads that cannot be assembled are not included in current paired‐end bioinformatics workflows). The choice of paired‐end vs single‐end analysis has been shown to result in little practical difference for human microbiome studies.24

Microbiome bioinformatics were performed with QIIME25 2 2017.4, a plugin‐based system that, in some cases, wraps other microbiome analysis methods. Briefly, raw sequence data were demultiplexed and quality filtered using the q2‐demux plugin followed by denoising with DADA226 (via q2‐dada2) to identify all observed amplicon sequence variants (ASVs)27 (ie, 100% operational taxonomic units [OTUs]). All ASVs were aligned with mafft28 (via q2‐alignment) and used to construct a phylogeny with fasttree229 (via q2‐phylogeny). Alpha‐diversity metrics (observed OTUs and Faith's Phylogenetic Diversity30—measures of microbiome richness), beta diversity metrics (weighted UniFrac,31 unweighted UniFrac,32 Jaccard distance, and Bray‐Curtis dissimilarity—measures of microbiome composition dissimilarity), and Principle Coordinate Analysis (PCoA) were estimated using q2‐diversity after samples were rarefied (ie, subsampled without replacement) to 900 sequences per sample. A total of 900 sequences per sample were chosen as our rarefaction depth to retain all paired samples, as samples with fewer sequences than the rarefaction depth are excluded from downstream diversity analyses (Table S2 for details on the number of sequences obtained per sample). To ensure that this rarefaction depth was not too low, for each of our four beta diversity metrics, we tested distance matrices derived from feature tables rarefied at 900 sequences per sample and 10 000 sequences per sample for correlation using Mantel tests. We observed that these were significantly correlated for all metrics, suggesting that downstream conclusions should be robust to this rarefaction depth (Jaccard: ρ = 0.51, P < 0.001; Bray‐Curtis: ρ = 0.99, P < 0.001; unweighted UniFrac: ρ: 0.73, P < 0.001; weighted Unifrac: ρ: 0.99, P < 0.001; n = 675 pairwise comparisons for each test). We therefore opted to retain more samples (and therefore subjects) in our analysis, rather than more sequences. Taxonomy was assigned to ASVs using the q2‐feature‐classifier33 classify‐sklearn naïve Bayes taxonomy classifier against the Greengenes 13_8 99% OTUs reference sequences.34 This classifier was recently shown to achieve similar precision and recall to the RDP classifier35 at the genus level on 15 mock community data sets.

The subjects included in this analysis were those who self‐selected to provide stool samples pre‐ and posttreatment. Differences in baseline characteristics between the subset of participants whose stools were analyzed in the current study and the parent trial, or between treatment arms, were tested using chi‐square tests for categorical variables and t tests or Wilcoxon rank‐sum tests for continuous variables. The difference between the freezer storage time in each treatment arm was tested using a linear mixed effects model, to account for the correlation induced by the baseline and end‐of‐study samples from the same subject. The association between freezer storage time and microbiome composition was tested using a Spearman correlation coefficient for baseline and end‐of‐study samples separately.

Associations between change in each microbiome measure and adenoma outcome (any adenoma or advanced adenoma) were tested in each arm separately using Poisson regression, adjusted for sex, age, aspirin use, baseline microbiome measure, and an indicator for whether a participant's paired baseline, and end‐of‐study DNA samples were processed in different batches. Potential interactions between microbiome measures and UDCA on recurrence were tested using likelihood ratio tests. These statistical tests were performed with Stata 14.2 (StataCorp, College Station, TX).

Characteristics of the 401‐participant subgroup with complete sequence data and adenoma outcome status were compared to participants in the parent trial not included in the microbiome study, by treatment assignment (Table
1). Placebo arm participants in the microbiome study subgroup had fewer aspirin users (chi‐square test, P = 0.004), greater mean diameter of their largest adenomas (Wilcoxon rank‐sum test, P = 0.040), and greater numbers of adenomas at baseline (Wilcoxon rank‐sum test, P = 0.004) than placebo participants who were not included in the microbiome study. Microbiome study participants receiving UDCA included more men than parent‐trial participants not included in the microbiome study (chi‐square test, P = 0.016). Among participants in the microbiome study, the UDCA arm included more males (chi‐square test, P = 0.024) and more aspirin users (chi‐square test, P = 0.003) than the placebo arm.

Missing data: race, n = 24 (1.9%); education, n = 29 (2.3%); ever smoker, n = 37 (2.9%); BMI, n = 29 (2.3%); previous polyp, n = 76 (5.9%); largest adenoma, n = 1 (0.1%); proximal adenoma, n = 3 (0.2%); villous histology, n = 2 (0.2%).

After separation from fecal water, solid stool samples were stored at −80°C for varying lengths of time before microbiome sequencing. Baseline samples were stored for an average of 17.2 ± 1.1 years, and end‐of‐study samples were stored for an average of 14.6 ± 1.1 years. There was no significant difference in storage time by treatment arm (P = 0.22). Furthermore, no significant correlations were observed between storage time and any of the diversity metrics at baseline or end‐of‐study. Lack of evidence for storage‐time effects on these measures is in agreement with published studies supporting long‐term freezing as an effective preservation method for studies of microbiome composition.41

Principle coordinate analysis based on unweighted UniFrac distance between samples showed no clear differences between baseline and end‐of‐study microbial communities in either treatment group (Figure
1A). Distances between paired samples from the same subject were smaller than distances between samples from different subjects in both treatment groups (Figure
1B). Intraclass correlation coefficients estimated separately for each of the four beta diversity metrics ranged from 0.50 to 0.68 for the placebo group, and from 0.39 to 0.73 for the UDCA group (Figure
1B). There was no clear pattern of change between the UDCA and placebo arms by these four broad measures of microbial community composition (U = 19 292.00, P = 0.244; Figure
1C), suggesting that both treatment groups experience changes in their microbiomes between baseline and end‐of‐study.

With the observed changes in community composition in response to UDCA treatment, we were interested in identifying bacterial taxa that exhibited abundance changes. ANCOM tests indicated that no bacterial genera or ASVs consistently differed between baseline and end‐of‐study measurements in the placebo group, or when comparing posttreatment samples across the placebo and UDCA groups. In the UDCA treatment arm, ANCOM tests on all ASVs showed that the relative abundance of Faecalibacterium decreased between baseline and end‐of‐study. Paired Wilcoxon signed‐rank tests were additionally performed on 18 individual bacterial taxa that contain species or strains previously associated with CRC42 (Table S1). Of these, Streptococcus (FDR‐corrected P = 0.003), Escherichia (FDR‐corrected P = 0.003), and Bilophila (FDR‐corrected P = 0.012) were found to have increased significantly, while Fusobacterium (FDR‐corrected P = 0.049) decreased in relative abundance between baseline and end‐of‐study in UDCA‐treated subjects. There were no significant changes for these genera in the placebo arm (all FDR‐corrected P > 0.05). We additionally tested whether the ratio of the Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes phylum abundances changed with treatment using Wilcoxon signed‐rank tests, but did not find evidence for this in either treatment group (UDCA: W = 10 369.5, FDR‐corrected P = 0.57; placebo: W = 9081.0, FDR‐corrected P = 0.13).

While PCoA is powerful for reducing complex microbiome data to a few structure‐based dimensions, intra‐microbiome interactions and their associations with explanatory variables can be difficult to uncover as statistical testing is generally conducted using one microbiome feature (eg, ASV) at a time. As a result, discovery of more complex dynamics between the microbiome and factors like UDCA can be obscured. To address this, network analysis (or graph theory) offers a methodological framework to represent pairwise associations among microorganisms and provide insight into interactions among species that may be distinct from those involving their constituent members. We used the SparCC package to compute the correlation coefficient between every pair of ASVs that was observed in at least 33% (n = 264) of the samples. We employed this threshold to reduce data sparsity, a known issue with network analysis of microbiome data.43 We next used the resulting correlation coefficients as edge weights to construct microbial networks across all subjects before and after intervention. We then applied ALPACA,38 a method for comparing two networks to find clusters of nodes which interact more in one context than another. A cluster represents a set of nodes that have stronger connections between themselves than with other nodes in the network. Comparing the postplacebo and post‐UDCA networks using ALPACA, we found one group of ASVs that are more strongly interacting (ie, exhibit a higher absolute value of correlation) after UDCA treatment than after placebo treatment (Figure
4). The top ten of these ASVs are annotated to several different genera, including Ruminococcus, Blautia, and Faecalibacterium (Table S3). We observed an overrepresentation of Faecalibacterium prausnitzii among the top‐ranked ASVs in the module (P = 0.011, Wilcoxon rank‐sum test).

It is evident that both the placebo and UDCA networks contain a mix of positive and negative correlations, showing that different microbes play different roles in the ecosystem (Figure
4). To examine the effect of UDCA on a more granular level, we created a “differential network” where each edge represents the increase in the absolute value of the SparCC correlation coefficient (suggesting stronger interactions) upon UDCA treatment. The second biggest hub in the differential network is a member of F prausnitzii, reinforcing a potentially important interactive role for this species, with a positive correlation with the other F prausnitzii ASVs and negative correlations with Ruminococcus gnavus and many other members. We then used the Louvain method to partition the differential network into three communities (Figure
5A).39 Differential Community 1 (DC1) contains three ASVs of F prausnitzii that are positively correlated with other members of DC1. These F prausnitzii ASVs (and other members of DC1) are negatively correlated with DC3 which includes Blautia and R gnavus.

We next assessed whether UDCA‐associated changes in community composition or network structure, when controlled for the baseline value, were associated with adenoma development. We found no evidence that change in any of the four microbial community distance metrics from baseline to end‐of‐study was associated with adenoma risk in either treatment arm (all P > 0.05) even after considering effects by sex separately. For the specific ASVs that were found to increase or decrease with UDCA treatment (ie, Streptococcus, Escherichia, Bilophila, and Fusobacterium), we found no evidence of association between any of these ASVs and adenoma outcome in either the placebo or UDCA arm (all P > 0.05).

This prompted us to test the association between change in R gnavus or F prausnitzii and adenoma development across the intervention groups, controlling for potential confounders. After adjusting for age, aspirin use, and the baseline level of the species, a positive change (increase) in R gnavus was significantly associated with higher adenoma risk in men in the UDCA arm (log binomial regression, P = 0.009). Conversely, in a similar model for men in the UDCA arm, a positive change (increase) in F prausnitzii was significantly associated with lower adenoma risk (log binomial regression, P = 0.034). Men in the placebo arm had a significantly greater increase in R gnavus between the two time points than men in the UDCA arm (Wilcoxon rank‐sum test, P = 0.015), but no significant difference in the degree or direction of change in F prausnitzii (Wilcoxon rank‐sum test, P = 0.130). Within the UDCA arm, and similar to the community composition, we did not observe any differences in R gnavus or F prausnitzii change in men when compared to women (both P > 0.2), though small sample sizes in each of these analyses limit our ability to detect such differences. Overall, there were no significant associations between R ganvus or F prausnitzii in the placebo arm and adenoma outcomes for men or for women.

Our initial analysis of community composition revealed changes over time for both the UDCA and placebo treatment groups, but no overall posttreatment community similarities (Figure
1). However, paired analysis of microbial composition changes illustrated significant similarities in the community shifts in the UDCA but not the placebo group (Figures
2and
3). This suggests that nonrandom changes occurred in the microbiomes of individuals in the UDCA group, but not placebo. Changes in microbial richness were not seen in either group, implying that compositional microbiome changes associated with UDCA treatment reflected alterations in the relative abundance and presence of microbial taxa, but not significant changes in the total number of taxa that were present.

Longitudinal variation of the gut microbial community within individuals is expected,49 and the degree of variation differs between individuals.50, 51 This variation, along with the high intraclass correlation coefficients observed in our study and evidence that components of the microbiome are highly individualized,52 is a significant limiting factor for the detectability of subtle but potentially important effects of medical treatment on the microbiome. Nonetheless, treatment with the therapeutic bile acid UDCA, for three years led to demonstrable changes in the fecal microbiome that, in men, are plausibly related to UDCA action to inhibit adenoma development.

The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

This project was funded by the Partnership for Native American Cancer Prevention (NIH/NCI U54CA143924 and U54CA143925). The microbiome bioinformatics work was supported in part by NSF Award 1565100 to JGC. The fecal archive for this study was supported in part by R01 CA151708 (to PAT and PL). Research in this manuscript was directly supported by the Biostatistics and Tissue Acquisition and Cellular/Molecular Analysis Shared Resources Funded by the NCI Award P30CA023074.

Raw sequence data are currently being deposited in the Qiita microbiome meta‐analysis repository, and the ENA sequence read archive. Accession numbers will be included in the final version of this manuscript, after they have been generated. Software and data are available under open source/open access licenses via https://github.com/caporaso-lab/crc-udca2.

