Mediterranean diet consumption affects the endocannabinoid system in overweight and obese subjects: possible links with gut microbiome, insulin resistance and inflammation

To investigate whether a Mediterranean diet (MD) affected the plasma concentrations of endocannabinoids (ECs), N-acylethanolamines (NAEs) and their specific ratios in subjects with lifestyle risk factors for metabolic diseases. To identify the relationship between circulating levels of these compounds and gut microbiome, insulin resistance and systemic inflammation.

A parallel 8-week randomised controlled trial was performed involving 82 overweight and obese subjects aged (mean ± SEM) 43 ± 1.4 years with a BMI of 31.1 ± 0.5 kg/m2, habitual Western diet (CT) and sedentary lifestyle. Subjects were randomised to consume an MD tailored to their habitual energy and macronutrient intake (n = 43) or to maintain their habitual diet (n = 39). Endocannabinoids and endocannabinoid-like molecules, metabolic and inflammatory markers and gut microbiome were monitored over the study period.

The MD intervention lowered plasma arachidonoylethanolamide (AEA, p = 0.02), increased plasma oleoylethanolamide/palmitoylethanolamide (OEA/PEA, p = 0.009) and OEA/AEA (p = 0.006) and increased faecal Akkermansia muciniphila (p = 0.026) independent of body weight changes. OEA/PEA positively correlated with abundance of key microbial players in diet–gut–health interplay and MD adherence. Following an MD, individuals with low-plasma OEA/PEA at baseline decreased homeostatic model assessment of insulin resistance index (p = 0.01), while individuals with high-plasma OEA/PEA decreased serum high-sensitive C-reactive protein (p = 0.02).

We demonstrated that a switch from a CT to an isocaloric MD affects the endocannabinoid system and increases A. muciniphila abundance in the gut independently of body weight changes. Endocannabinoid tone and microbiome functionality at baseline drives an individualised response to an MD in ameliorating insulin sensitivity and inflammation.

Clinical Trial Registry number and website NCT03071718; www.clinicaltrials.gov

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1007/s00394-021-02538-8.

The Mediterranean diet (MD) is a healthy dietary pattern, while the Western diet is not. This idea is strongly supported by epidemiological evidence pointing out inverse associations of the two dietary patterns with the incidence of metabolic diseases, obesity and related health consequences [1, 2]. However, in the context of clinical practice the health effects that occur over a duration that is reasonable to improve intermediary clinical outcomes are not obvious. Different responses to similar diets often occur and reflect the actual status of body systems, the cross-talk ability of the involved systems and their flexibility to react to environmental (dietary) factors [3]. Randomised clinical trials (RCTs) designed to monitor multiple systems, including the gut microbiome are mandatory to determine causal relationships between diet and health outcomes with the potential to unravel physiological mechanisms underpinning the effects and obtain indications for personalised nutrition and precision medicine [4–6]. Several microbiome-targeted studies showed that MD consumption boosts fibre-degrading species and anti-inflammatory responses in the human body [7–10].

In this study, we explore the impact of an isocaloric dietary shift from a Western diet to an MD on the circulating levels of ECs, NAEs, oleoylethanolamide/arachidonoylethanolamide (OEA/AEA) and oleoylethanolamide/palmitoylethanolamide (OEA/PEA) ratios. Further, by performing an intention-to-treat analysis of data, we shed light on the relationships of the endocannabinoid system with the gut microbiome, clinical data and adherence to MD.

This study is part of a randomised and controlled eight-week intervention trial whose primary outcome was to detect changes in fasting plasma lipids and faecal levels of short-chain fatty acids upon an intervention with MD, as described in a previous paper [9]. That paper also reported the details of the study design and protocol [9]. In this paper for the first time, we focused on secondary outcome, such as plasma ECs and NAEs, OEA/AEA and OEA/PEA ratios. Specifically, we analysed their changes in response to the dietary intervention, concomitant with gut microbiome changes and their correlations with variables related to diet (food categories, nutritional composition and adherence to the Mediterranean diet), insulin resistance (Homeostatic Model Assessment for Insulin Resistance, HOMA-IR [24] and systemic inflammation (serum high-sensitive C-reactive protein, hs-CRP). The study was conducted after the approval of the University of Naples Ethic Committee (Protocol number: 108/16). The trial was registered at www.clinicaltrials.gov (number NCT03071718). Recruitment was performed at the Department of Agricultural Sciences and at the Department of Clinical Medicine and Surgery of the University of Naples, Naples, Italy.

The 334 potentially eligible adults, interested in study participation, were screened on the basis of the inclusion/exclusion criteria considering medical and lifestyle conditions [9]. Briefly, subjects were included if they were healthy men or women aged between 20 ≤ age ≤ 65 years, with BMI ≥ 24 kg/m2, consuming a diet characterised by an intake of fruits and vegetables ≤ 3 servings/day, no consumption of probiotics, functional foods and/or food supplements, consuming no more than 2 portions a day of whole-grain food and/or enriched with dietary fibre, having a sedentary lifestyle (MET min/week < 700). Informed written consent was obtained prior to undertaking the study. Eighty-two participants were randomised between the two intervention arms of the parallel designed study and completed the study protocol. The characteristics of the participants and variations over the intervention of many clinical outcomes are reported in the Online Supplementary Table
1 by Meslier and co-workers [9].

MD participants received an isocaloric tailored MD diet based on their habitual energy and macronutrient intake assessed by a 7-day Food Diary, while CT volunteers were asked not to change their habitual diet during the 8-week intervention. Every 2 weeks, the individual compliance was assessed through food diaries, whereas adherence to the Mediterranean diet was assessed by Italian Mediterranean Index (IMI) [9].

A trained operator measured the waist circumference midway between the lowest rib and the iliac crest using an anthropometric tape. Hip circumference was measured around the widest portion of the buttocks, with the tape parallel to the floor. Weight from subjects wearing light clothes was measured, after voiding, to the nearest 0.1 kg on a digital scale (Model 703; Seca). Height of subjects was recorded to the nearest 0.5 cm with a stadiometer (Model 213; Seca). Body composition, including total body water, fat mass and fat-free mass, was determined at an ambient temperature after voiding and after being in a supine position for at least 20 min, through an electric impedance analysis with a single-frequency 50-kHz bioelectrical impedance analyser (BIA 101 RJL; Akern Bioresearch) as described in Meslier and co-workers [9]. Body mass index (BMI) was calculated as weight in kg divided by height in meters squared. According to the World Health Organisation (WHO) task force and the National Institutes of Health (NIH) guidelines, people whose BMI is between 18.5 and 24.9 kg/m2 are considered normal weight, between 25 and 29.9 kg/m2 are overweight and > 30 kg/m2 are obese.

Fasting blood samples were collected by venipuncture into a serum separator, EDTA-containing tubes and EDTA aprotinin-containing tubes. All EDTA blood samples were kept chilled/on ice before processing. Plasma samples were prepared by centrifugation at 3000 rpm for 15 min at 4 °C and within 15 min of collection. All biological samples were rapidly frozen and stored at − 80 °C until analysis. Plasma glucose, insulin and serum hs-CRP concentrations as well as HOMA index were assessed as described previously [9].

The analysis of ECs and NAEs was performed in EDTA plasma samples. All samples were thawed in the fridge at 4 °C before extraction and samples were kept chilled on ice during the specific extraction procedures. A solid-phase extraction (SPE) according to the method described by Marczylo and colleagues was carried out [25].

Oasis HLB cartridges (1 cc/30 mg Waters) were preconditioned with 1 mL of methanol and equilibrated using 1 mL of H2O. Samples were introduced onto the cartridges and were washed with 1 mL of aqueous methanol (40%), and the monitored compounds were eluted in 1 mL of acetonitrile. The eluate was dried under nitrogen flow and reconstituted in 100 µL acetonitrile/water (50:50) before the LC–MS/MS analysis.

Chromatographic separation was performed using an HPLC apparatus provided with two micropumps, Perkin-Elmer Series 200 (Norwalk, CT, USA). The compounds were separated on a Synergi Max RP 80 column (50 × 2.1 mm) (Phenomenex, USA) with a setting temperature of 30 °C and a flow rate of 0.2 mL/min. The injection volume was 10 μL. The monitored compounds were eluted by a linear gradient of H2O and 0.2% formic acid (solvent A) and CH3CN (solvent B). According to Mennella and co-workers [21], the eluting gradient was set as follows: 50–79% B (10 min), 79–95% B (1 min), constant at 95% B (2 min) and finally returning to the initial conditions within 2 min. The acquisition was performed in positive ion mode on an API 3000 triple quadrupole mass spectrometer (Applied Biosystems, Canada) in MRM (Multiple Reaction Monitoring). All the acquisition parameters are summarised in Supplementary Table
1.

The limit of detection (LOD) and limit of quantification (LOQ) of the identified molecules are reported in Supplementary Table 2.

A full description of the sampling, sequencing and data analysis procedures is reported in the online supplementary material by Meslier and colleagues [9]. Briefly, faecal DNA extraction was performed following IHMS SOP P7 V2 and purified DNA fragment libraries were sequenced using the Ion Proton Sequencer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, US) with a minimum of 20 million 150-bp high-quality reads generated per library. Metagenomic Species Pangenome (MSP) abundance profiles were determined and annotated as previously described [9, 26] and the in-house FAnToMet pipeline was used to assess the functional potential modules of the intestinal gut microbiome.

The abundances of A. muciniphila in each sample were further quantified and analysed through qPCR as described by Dao et al. [27]. Briefly, extracted DNA was quantified using Qubit Fluorometric Quantitation (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, US) and amplified using primers targeting the 16S rRNA for A. muciniphila (forward CAGCACGTGAAGGTGGGGAC and reverse CCTTGCGGTTGGCTTCAGAT). The total 16S rRNA gene was also quantified and used as reference gene in order to normalise the abundance of A. muciniphila in all samples tested (bacterial universal primers forward ACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAG and reverse ATTACCGCGGCTGCTGG). Amplifications were performed using the StepOne Real-Time PCR System (Life Technologies) with the following thermal cycling profiles: one cycle at 95 °C for 30 s, 40 cycles at 60 °C for 30 s and 72 °C for 30 s and using the SYBR Green PCR Master Mix Reagents Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Negative controls (H2O) were included in each qPCR run and each assay was performed in triplicate. The results of the amplifications were expressed as threshold cycle (Ct) values. The relative quantification of A. muciniphila in all samples was calculated using the comparative Ct method (ΔCt, the difference between the Ct value of A. muciniphila and the Ct of total 16S rRNA gene for each sample). Lastly, the concentration of A. muciniphila was carried out by comparing ΔCt measures with a standard calibration curve (Y = − 3.527 × log10(X) + 17.677, R2 = 0.97, PCR efficiency = 92.11%) and by relating such values to total faecal DNA concentration.

A power analysis using the mean plasma concentrations and variations of ECs and NAEs in previous studies was performed to estimate the sample size needed to detect an effect of diet on plasma concentrations of ECs and NAEs [19, 28]. We calculated that 39 participants per group was sufficient to detect a minimum inter-group difference of 23% and 13% in plasma concentrations of 2-AG and AEA, 10% and 14% in plasma concentrations of PEA and OEA as well as 10% and 9% in AEA/OEA and OEA/PEA ratios, respectively, with an α error of 0.05, 80% power and 2-sided testing. Therefore, 39 participants in CT and 43 in MD would be adequate to test the effect of MD on fasting circulating levels of ECs and NAEs.

The linear discriminant analysis (LDA) effect size (LEfSe) [30] was used to identify differentially abundant species between Q1 and Q4 groups, for a p < 0.05 after the Kruskal–Wallis test. Only discriminative features with an LDA score > 2.0 were plotted and ranked by effect size.

The 82 participants (43 F and 39 M, average body mass index (BMI) 31.1 ± 0.5 kg/m2, age 43 ± 1.4 years), of which 43 participants (22 F/21 M, average BMI 30.9 ± 0.6 kg/m2, age 43 ± 1.9 years) were in MD group and the 39 participants (21 F/18 M, average BMI 31.2 ± 2.0 kg/m2, age 42 ± 2.0 years) in CT group, showed high compliance with the intervention.

MD consumption lowered plasma AEA concentrations after 8 weeks compared to the baseline concentrations (-9.1%; p = 0.02), while it did not affect 2-AG, linoleoylethanolamide (LEA), OEA or PEA (Fig. 1a, b). Interestingly, significant increases in the OEA/PEA ratio (5.9%; p = 0.009) and the OEA/AEA ratio (14.6%; p = 0.006) were registered after 4 and 8 weeks of MD consumption, respectively (Fig. 1c, d). Moreover, negative associations of plasma OEA/AEA with waist circumference (Spearman’s rho = − 0.462, p  ≤ 0.001) and hip circumference (Spearman’s rho = − 0.200, p = 0.002) were observed.

Consistently with the results reported in our previous paper and obtained by analysing a per protocol selection of the population, the isocaloric MD dietary intervention led to gut microbiome changes in the overall population [9]. Indeed, we observed some MSP species, such as Roseburia faecis and R. hominis significantly enriched in MD as compared to CT group, after either 4 or 8 weeks, along with an increase in the fibre-degrading Faecalibacterium prausnitzii and several members of the Lachnospiraceae taxa, while Ruminococcus torques and R. gnavus were CT-related species (Supplementary Tables 3 and 4). Interestingly, significantly higher levels of Akkermansia muciniphila occurred in the MD as compared to CT group after 8 weeks of MD consumption (p < 0.05, Fig. 2), although this was not observed in the previous per protocol analysis [9]. Later, we further investigated and confirmed the identification of A. muciniphila through a quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) (Spearman’s Rho = 0.8, p value = 2.2e-16, Supplementary Fig. 1). Plasma concentrations of OEA (Spearman’s rho = -0.295, p =  < 0.001), PEA (Spearman’s rho = -0.341, p =  < 0.001), LEA (Spearman’s rho = -0.366, p =  < 0.001) and AEA (Spearman’s rho = -0.319, p value =  < 0.001) were negatively correlated with A. muciniphila, which was positively linked to the plasma OEA/PEA (Spearman’s rho = 0.180, p = 0.005) and OEA/AEA ratios (Spearman’s rho = 0.259, p < 0.001) (Fig. 3). Plasma AEA concentrations were negatively associated with Eggerthella sp. Furthermore, circulating levels of AEA and the OEA/PEA ratio showed opposite associations with the abundance of Intestinimonas butyriciproducens, Bifidobacterium longum, Roseburia hominis and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, Prevotella sp. and P. copri. All the correlations found are detailed in Fig. 3.

OEA/PEA ratio, but not OEA/AEA ratio, was positively correlated with IMI. OEA/PEA ratio also showed positive correlation with daily intake of vegetables and negative correlation with soft drinks, snacks, meat and refined-grain products intake (Fig. 4). In addition, OEA/AEA was correlated negatively with eggs, soft drinks, snacks, meat and refined-grain products, fish, dairy products and legumes intake. While plasma 2-AG concentrations showed negative correlations with meat, refined-grain products, fish, dairy products and legumes intake, which conversely, were positively correlated with plasma AEA and NAEs concentrations.

To test the hypothesis of whether the baseline OEA/PEA ratio affected the individual response to MD consumption, we grouped the population into quartiles of the baseline OEA/PEA ratio. MD participants in the lowest quartile (Q1) exhibited a significantly increased OEA/PEA ratio after 4 weeks (26.7%, p = 0.04), while those in the highest quartile (Q4) did not exhibit a change in the OEA/PEA ratio over the study period (Fig. 5a). Interestingly, Q1 participants in the MD group also exhibited a diminished HOMA index after 4 (− 26.2%, p = 0.01) and 8 weeks (-23.9%, p = 0.01) (Fig. 5b).

We further explored the functional and metabolic features of microbial communities in Q1 and Q4 participants at baseline (Supplementary Table 5). Q4 participants showed more abundant levels of glycocholate (MF0044), glucose (MF0057) and lactose (MF0048) degradation modules.

Q1 and Q4 participants at baseline showed no different intake of energy, dietary fibres, fats, saturated fatty acids, monounsaturated fatty acids, polyunsaturated fatty acids, carbohydrates, proteins, sugars and alcohol as well as anthropometric variables and body composition (Supplementary Table 6). In contrast, Q1 participants at baseline consumed more refined-grain products, meat, oils and fats, snacks than Q4 participants (Supplementary Table 7). During the MD intervention, Q1 participants significantly increased their fruit, vegetables, whole-grain products, legumes, fish intake and decreased the intake of refined-grain products, oils and fats, meat and snacks. Q4 participants in the MD group consumed more whole-grain products and less refined-grain products than those in the CT group and decreased snacks and eggs intake only after 4 weeks.

In this study, we showed that an isocaloric dietary shift from a Western diet to an MD lowered plasma AEA concentration and increased the OEA/PEA and OEA/AEA ratios. The increased total polyunsaturated fatty acid intake and decreased saturated fatty acid intake caused by increased consumption of fish products and nuts as isocaloric replacements of meat and dairy products might explain the changes in the circulating lipid mediators observed in MD participants [9, 31, 32]. No previous evidence of a food- or diet-induced change in the plasma OEA/PEA or OEA/AEA ratio is available. Interestingly, the OEA/PEA and OEA/AEA ratios are markers of blood cholesterol and insulin resistance [19], and their increase occurred concomitantly with the reduction in plasma cholesterol in our cohort [9].

Altogether our findings shed light on endocannabinoid system implication in the interplay between diet, gut and health, revealing opportunities for clinical practice in the context of personalised nutrition. Specifically, the data suggest that the measure of plasma OEA/PEA ratio and AEA concentration might mirror individual gut microbiome and intestinal barrier functionality determining the individual responsiveness towards metabolic and/or anti-inflammatory changes following a dietary intervention with an MD.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

