A meta-analysis study of the robustness and universality of gut microbiome-metabolome associations

Microbiome-metabolome studies of the human gut have been gaining popularity in recent years, mostly due to accumulating evidence of the interplay between gut microbes, metabolites, and host health. Statistical and machine learning-based methods have been widely applied to analyze such paired microbiome-metabolome data, in the hope of identifying metabolites that are governed by the composition of the microbiome. Such metabolites can be likely modulated by microbiome-based interventions, offering a route for promoting gut metabolic health. Yet, to date, it remains unclear whether findings of microbially associated metabolites in any single study carry over to other studies or cohorts, and how robust and universal are microbiome-metabolites links.

In this study, we addressed this challenge by performing a comprehensive meta-analysis to identify human gut metabolites that can be predicted based on the composition of the gut microbiome across multiple studies. We term such metabolites “robustly well-predicted”. To this end, we processed data from 1733 samples from 10 independent human gut microbiome-metabolome studies, focusing initially on healthy subjects, and implemented a machine learning pipeline to predict metabolite levels in each dataset based on the composition of the microbiome. Comparing the predictability of each metabolite across datasets, we found 97 robustly well-predicted metabolites. These include metabolites involved in important microbial pathways such as bile acid transformations and polyamines metabolism. Importantly, however, other metabolites exhibited large variation in predictability across datasets, suggesting a cohort- or study-specific relationship between the microbiome and the metabolite. Comparing taxonomic contributors to different models, we found that some robustly well-predicted metabolites were predicted by markedly different sets of taxa across datasets, suggesting that some microbially associated metabolites may be governed by different members of the microbiome in different cohorts. We finally examined whether models trained on a control group of a given study successfully predicted the metabolite’s level in the disease group of the same study, identifying several metabolites where the model was not transferable, indicating a shift in microbial metabolism in disease-associated dysbiosis.

Combined, our findings provide a better understanding of the link between the microbiome and metabolites and allow researchers to put identified microbially associated metabolites within the context of other studies.

Video abstract video file.(107M, mp4)

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s40168-021-01149-z.

The microbial communities that reside in the human gut wield a multitude of activities with pervasive effect on human health and disease. Among these activities, perhaps the most important and clinically relevant one is the microbiota’s metabolic activity. Indeed, metabolites of microbial origin or metabolites that undergo microbial transformation have been implicated in various host processes, including immune system development and activity, host metabolism, and even brain function [1–4]. Several recent studies have also established a causal link between microbially produced metabolites and various medical conditions (or benefits). One well-known example is that of trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO), a product of microbial metabolism of nutrients found in eggs and red meat, which accelerates atherosclerotic cardiovascular diseases [5, 6]. Other examples include imidazole propionate, a metabolite over-produced by Type 2 Diabetes-associated bacteria, which was found to impair glucose tolerance [7], Akkermansia muciniphila-associated nicotinamide, which was shown to improve motor symptoms in a mouse model of ALS [8], and microbially produced short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), which have a protective role against intestinal inflammation [9]. Other microbial metabolites protect from influenza [10] and even improve mental quality of life [11]. Moreover, microbiome-associated metabolites such as the organic acid taurine or some SCFAs have been studied as potential novel therapeutic agents, intended to “correct” negative effects of microbial dysbiosis [12].

In this study, we focus primarily on the third question above and attempt to characterize the landscape of gut metabolites that are consistently well-predicted by the gut microbiome, as captured in fecal microbiome-metabolome datasets. We hypothesize that some of the reported microbiome-associated metabolites are biologically meaningful, representing metabolites that are universally governed by the microbiome across different cohorts and biological backgrounds, and are robust to the variation in the technical settings used in each study. We accordingly aim to identify a set of gut microbiome-metabolite associations, consistent across multiple cohorts and settings, and explore the specific genera contributing to the predictability of each such metabolite. To this end, we obtained multiple paired fecal microbiome-metabolome datasets and focused on the healthy individuals in each dataset. For each dataset, we then trained and evaluated a machine learning model per metabolite, aiming to predict the metabolite level in each sample based on microbiota composition. We examined which metabolites were consistently well-predicted across multiple datasets, using rigorous statistical methods inspired by traditional meta-analysis techniques to define “robustly well-predicted” metabolites. Lastly, we analyze which genera contribute most to the predictability of each robustly well-predicted metabolite, and whether these too are consistent across datasets and in healthy vs. disease cohorts. We believe that this cross-study perspective on suspected microbial-governed metabolites in the human gut is crucial for prioritizing further research hypotheses and for enhancing interpretations of future microbiome-metabolome studies by providing relevant context.

We collected and processed data from 10 different human gut microbiome-metabolome studies, totaling 779 samples from 629 individuals in ‘healthy’ (‘control’) groups and 954 samples from 729 individuals in 7 ‘disease’ (‘case’) groups (Table
1, Fig.
1A, Additional file 1: Table S1). Notably, these studies spanned various ages, geographies, health conditions, metagenomics/metabolomics platforms, and 16S rRNA gene hypervariable regions, all of which are expected to introduce heterogeneity between datasets, as demonstrated in previous microbiome and metabolome meta-analysis studies in various fields [44–46]. Importantly, in case-control studies, we treated healthy and disease subgroups separately (considering only study groups with ≥ 40 samples) to avoid the confounding impact of the disease state on both the microbiome and metabolome compositions. Moreover, to first focus on robustly well-predicted metabolites in general population-like cohorts, in our analysis below we initially considered only the healthy datasets (Fig.
2A).

Clearly, the set of detected features in both microbiome and metabolome profiles (i.e., genera and metabolites, respectively) are expected to differ between studies due to both technical [2, 50, 51] and biological factors [20, 52, 53]. This limited overlap across datasets hinders in and of itself our ability to carry microbiome-metabolite links over different studies, and is discussed further in the “Discussion” section below. Here, in order to detect consistently well-predicted metabolites, we first examined which gut metabolites are shared between datasets, limiting our analysis to those that appear in 3 or more datasets. Out of 951 unique, non-rare, HMDB compound IDs found across all datasets, 273 (29%) were shared among 3 or more datasets (Additional file 3: Figure S1A). We additionally examined which genera are shared between datasets, to facilitate specific analysis of contributors to well-predicted metabolites. Out of 85 unique, none-rare genera found across all datasets, 55 (65%) were shared between 3 or more datasets (Additional file 3: Figure S1B). Pairwise comparisons between studies in terms of overlap in microbial and metabolic features further demonstrate the large variability and often limited overlap (Additional file 3: Figure S1C-D).

We implemented a machine learning pipeline to estimate how well genus-level profiles can predict metabolite levels in each dataset and for each metabolite (Fig.
1C). Specifically, for each HMDB-annotated metabolite that appeared in 3 or more datasets, we trained a random forest regression model to predict metabolite levels based on genera relative abundances. Alternative pipelines with either a different machine learning model or a different hyperparameter tuning process were examined as well (see Additional file 2: Supplementary Note 1). We evaluated each model’s performance using leave-one-out cross validation by calculating the Spearman’s correlation coefficient, ρ, between actual vs predicted left out metabolite levels. Spearman’s correlation P value was also recorded, and FDR-correction was applied to all metabolite-models in each dataset (see “Methods” section). Metabolites with a predictability of ρ > 0.3 and an FDR < 0.1 were referred to as ‘well-predicted’ metabolites.

We further validated that these predictability results cannot be attributed to statistical noise or other artifacts in the data by comparing the fraction of well-predicted metabolites in each dataset to the fraction of well-predicated metabolites obtained in a shuffled dataset (see “Methods” section). We found that in such shuffled datasets only 0.3% of the metabolites in each dataset were well-predicted on average, compared to 29.1% well-predicted metabolites in the real data. As an additional independent validation for our machine-learning pipeline, we confirmed that our set of well-predicted metabolites in one specific dataset exhibits marked overlap with the set of predictable metabolites found by another study that analyzed this same dataset (see Additional file 2: Supplementary Note 2 and Additional file 3: Figure S2A).

While the results reported above already demonstrate intriguing variation in predictability and highlight several metabolites that appear to be well-predicted across multiple datasets, we next applied a more rigorous statistical approach for synthesizing and combining the predictability results obtained for each dataset independently and for quantifying how robustly well-predicted is each metabolite. Specifically, we used random-effects models (REM)—a common meta-analysis statistical framework for integrating effect sizes from multiple studies with different sample sizes and study designs, and for calculating an estimate for the mean effect across studies and its associated P value [54] (see “Methods” section). We applied this framework to the predictability results obtained above for each metabolite, using the level of predictability (scored by Spearman’s ρ) as the measured effect size in each dataset. The resulting REM for each metabolite thus provides an estimation of the mean predictability of that metabolite across datasets, with an associated P value (that was FDR-corrected to account for multiple REMs). Finally, we defined metabolites with a REM predictability score > 0.3 and FDR < 0.1 as ‘robustly well-predicted’, resulting in a total of 97 robustly well-predicted metabolites (Fig.
3A, B and Additional file 1: Table S6). For comparison, only 87.7 ± 5.5 metabolites met the above threshold on average when applying our pipeline to datasets where metabolite labels were shuffled (see “Methods” section), suggesting that the number of robustly well-predicted metabolites in the original dataset is somewhat higher than expected by chance (P = 0.053).

Interestingly, we also found several robustly well-predicted metabolites that are only rarely considered in the context of the gut microbiota. One such example is medium-chain fatty acids (MCFAs), including specifically caproic acid (HMDB0000535), pentadecanoic acid (HMDB0000826), and heptanoic acid (HMDB0000666). MCFAs are highly abundant components in dairy foods and have an essential physiological role as efficient cell energy sources [56]. A recent study demonstrated a significant association between dairy foods intake and the microbiota’s composition, suggesting an intriguing interaction between gut microbes and these MCFAs [57]. Another example is dicarboxylic acids, including specifically malonic acid (HMDB0000691), undecanedioic acid (HMDB0000888), pimelic acid (HMDB0000857), suberic acid (HMDB0000893), sebacic acid (HMDB0000792), azelaic acid (HMDB0000784), and dodecanedioic acid (HMDB0000623). The clinical relevance of both metabolite classes, specifically in the context of type 2 diabetes [58, 59], and their relatively unexplored relation with the gut microbiome, suggest interesting directions for future research. Additional file 2: Supplementary Note 3 details additional intriguing information concerning the set of robustly well-predicted metabolites, their biological roles, and previously reported links to the microbiome.

So far, we have identified metabolites that are consistently well-predicted by the composition of the human gut microbiota across multiple datasets. We next sought out to examine whether the models trained for predicting these metabolites across the different datasets are in fact similar to one another. To this end, we first estimated the contribution of each genus feature to each model using the permutation-based approach from Altman et al. (2010) to assign a P value for each feature in each model (“Methods” section and Additional file 1: Table S7). We refer to genera with P < 0.1 as significant contributors. Comparing models trained on different datasets for the same metabolite, we observed substantial variation in the numbers of shared significant contributors (Fig.
4 and Additional file 3: Figure S4), suggesting that even robustly well-predicted metabolites may not necessarily be predicted by the same microbiota features in different datasets.

Notably, comparing the set of significant contributors across models and datasets can further provide intriguing and valuable insights. For example, we defined genera that contributed to over 50% of the metabolite models they participated in, “consistent contributors” to that metabolite (“Methods” section; Additional file 1: Table S8), and found that often such genus-metabolite links coincide with known metabolic capacities of certain gut bacteria. Bacteroides, for example, consistently contributed to models of several bile components, whereas Alistipes consistently contributed to various polyamine models, both in agreement with experimental findings [55, 60, 61] (see Additional file 2: Supplementary Note 3 for additional examples). We also note that even though genera more abundant in the gut were more likely to significantly contribute to more metabolite models (Spearman’s correlation 0.45, P value < 0.0001), some genera strongly contributed to the predictability of multiple gut metabolites even though their abundance in the gut is typically low. Odoribacter, for example, a member of the Bacteroidetes phylum whose mean relative abundance in our data was 0.4%, was a significant contributor in 94 of 223 models it participated in. This genus was also a consistent contributor to models of multiple bioactive metabolites such as l-phenylalanine, pimelic acid, linoleoyl ethanolamide, and l-tryptophan. Similarly, Haemophilus (mean relative abundance in our data of 0.4%), from the Proteobacteria phylum, was a significant contributor in 49 of 126 models. Finally, we note that the average number of significant contributors per metabolite ranged from 5.6 (l-Arginine) to 10.6 (Cholic acid and Dihomo-gamma-linolenic acid), suggesting an association with multiple different genera.

We eventually sought to determine whether various patterns identified above for the healthy datasets also hold in disease. To this end, we additionally considered the 7 disease datasets obtained from the same studies as described above (Table
1). These included 3 datasets of patients with colorectal adenomas or cancer, 2 of patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), 1 of patients with a history of gastric cancer, and 1 of patients with irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), totaling 954 samples (Table
1, Additional file 1: Table S1).

Finally, we examined whether metabolites that are well-predicted in both the healthy and disease datasets of a specific study, are well-predicted by similar models. As before, we compared models both by comparing their significant contributors and by testing how well the healthy-trained model transfers to the pertaining disease dataset. Notably, here we analyzed each case-control study independently, allowing us to eliminate potential heterogeneity between datasets, and focus on model-differences associated with the disease. Overall, we performed healthy vs. disease comparisons for 128 metabolites over 5 studies in which both healthy and disease datasets were available (covering 83 distinct metabolites). We observed that many metabolite models transferred well from healthy to disease in different studies, suggesting that microbiome-metabolite dynamics in these cases are not substantially altered in the disease state. Docosapentaenoic acid (22n-6), 12,13-DHOME, and phytosphingosine, for example, transferred well from healthy to disease in both an IBD cohort and a colorectal adenomas cohort. N-acetylputrescine, pimelic acid, taurine, and tryptamine similarly transferred well in two different colorectal adenomas/cancer cohorts, and sebacic acid transferred well in all 3 datasets analyzed (Additional file 3: Figure S6). In some of these cases, we additionally observed a substantial overlap in significant contributors between the healthy and disease models (Additional file 3: Figure S7). In contrast, several metabolite models did not transfer well even though the metabolite was well-predicted in both the healthy dataset and linked disease dataset independently, potentially indicating a shift in microbiome metabolism in disease (Additional file 3: Figure S6; Additional file 3: Figure S7). The full catalog of significant contributors to both the healthy and the disease models can be found in Additional file 1: Table S7.

In this study, we acquired data from several published studies of the human gut microbiome and metabolome. We focused on studies that included at least 40 individuals in each study group (or total, in non-case-control studies), for which both the microbiome and the metabolome were profiled from fecal samples. In case-control studies, cases and controls were treated as separate datasets to avoid the confounding impact of the disease state on the composition of both the microbiome and metabolome. Metabolomic datasets with only metabolite m/z info and without identification by name, KEGG IDs [62], or HMDB IDs [49] were discarded. For microbiome data, we considered both 16S rRNA gene sequencing and WGSS datasets. For 16S rRNA gene studies, we obtained raw fastq files and for WGSS datasets we obtained MetaPhlAn2 tables (see Additional file 1: Table S2 for additional information). For longitudinal datasets, where multiple samples were collected from each participant over time, we randomly chose up to 3 samples per subject, to avoid having a few subjects potentially dominating the dataset. Datasets were either downloaded from public repositories (e.g. NCBI Sequence Read Archive, Qiita [63]) or shared by the corresponding authors. As to June 2020, we identified over 70 published microbiome-metabolome studies of the human gut (reflected by fecal samples specifically), approximately 40 of which contained a sufficient number of samples as noted above. Of these, we were able to obtain the necessary data and metadata from only 10 datasets (either from online repositories or through the authors). Table
1 and Additional file 1: Table S1 describe the included datasets in detail and reference their corresponding publications. Since the difference between infants’ and adults’ microbiomes may introduce a particularly prominent source of heterogeneity, we also conducted a supplementary analysis, excluding the one infant dataset included in our study (the HE dataset). Overall, this exclusion did not markedly impact our findings and its results are reported in Additional file 2: Supplementary Note 4.

We obtained processed metabolomics datasets from each study. As metabolomics technology, processing method, and output differed substantially between studies (see Additional file 1: Table S1 and S4), we pre-processed the metabolome datasets to allow comparison of metabolite-related findings across datasets. Importantly, we focused on unifying metabolite identifiers, and did not attempt to unify the measured values themselves. Specifically, we mapped metabolite identifications in each dataset to HMDB IDs. In many datasets, metabolites in the obtained data were identified by their names only, and we mapped metabolites to HMDB identifiers using MetaboAnalyst’s compound ID conversion utility [64]. Additional manual curation was performed in order to map metabolite names that were not identified by MetaboAnalyst (due to, for example, typos or special characters in the name, or in cases where MetaboAnalyst found more than one match). In datasets where metabolite masses were available, manual curation of such metabolites was also validated by mass.

Finally, metabolites present in 10 or fewer samples in each cohort were discarded, missing or zero values were replaced with 90% of the minimal metabolite concentration observed across all other samples, and metabolite values were log-transformed and scaled to zero-mean and unit-variance, as commonly accepted for such data [65]. Additional file 1: Table S4 details which data was available in each dataset and how the mapping was conducted.

16S rRNA gene sequencing raw data was processed using QIIME2 version 2019-1 [48] as follows. When raw data was multiplexed, we demultiplexed the data using QIIME2’s demux plugin. We applied DADA2 [66] in order to denoise the data and extract amplicon sequence variants (ASVs). Whenever a sufficient high-quality overlap of forward and reverse reads was available, DADA2 was also used for merging paired end reads. We trimmed reads in each dataset to the first position with a median quality score under 30. In cases where this resulted in reads shorter than 100 base pairs, reads were trimmed according to the original publication.

To assign ASVs to taxonomy, we trained a Naive Bayes classifier per dataset using QIIME2’s feature-classifier plugin [67]. Classifiers were trained on reads extracted from the SILVA 99-OTU database [68], according to the specific 16S rRNA gene hypervariable region used in each dataset. We then collapsed the ASV table to genus-level counts, joining all reads without a genus-level annotation to an “Unclassified” category. This step was performed in order to make genera “entities” as comparable as possible between 16S-based and WGSS-based taxonomic profiles, given the substantial methodological gaps. In each dataset, samples with less than 1000 reads were removed. Read counts were normalized to sum to 1 in each sample, resulting in a table of relative abundances. Lastly, we removed rare genera, defined by either less than 25% non-zero values, or less than 10 non-zero values, or a mean relative abundance over samples of less than 0.1%. Further study-specific parameters and details about the 16S rRNA gene data processing of each dataset are detailed in Additional file 1: Table S2.

For WGSS datasets, we obtained taxonomic relative abundance tables precomputed by MetaPhlAn2 [69], with one exception where another detailed taxonomic profile was available (see Additional file 1: Table S2). In order to unify the WGSS and 16S rRNA-based taxonomic profiles, non-bacteria entities were discarded, all data was collapsed to genus-level relative abundances, and genera names were translated when necessary to the genera names used in the 16S rRNA gene processed data. Rare genera were removed from each dataset using the same criteria described above. All downstream analyses were performed on this unified genus-level relative abundance data. Further dataset-specific details about the processing of each WGSS data and unification of genus-level taxonomic annotations are detailed in Additional file 1: Tables S2 and S3.

We implemented a machine learning pipeline to estimate how well genus-level profiles can predict metabolite levels in each dataset and for each metabolite. We specifically tried 4 pipeline settings: Random forest (RF) regression with default hyperparameters, RF regression with hyperparameters tuning, elastic net (ENet) with default hyperparameters (effectively making it a lasso regression), and ENet with hyperparameters tuning. We intentionally focused on relatively simple and commonly used machine learning models (as opposed to top-performing and much more complex models such as XGBoost [70]) to avoid the risk of increased overfitting. A comparison of pipeline results and further details are presented in Additional file 2: Supplementary Note 1. We eventually focused on results from the first pipeline, as it yielded the overall highest number of well-predicted metabolites.

The above pipeline was implemented in R using the “tidymodels” package suite [71]. Specifically, we used “ranger” for RF [72] algorithm and “glmnet” for ENet [73].

Meta-analysis is a well-established statistical framework for synthesizing results from multiple studies addressing the same topic [54]. Here, in order to synthesize results (correlation coefficients of predicted vs. actual metabolite levels) from multiple datasets, we adopted a classic meta-analysis statistical method, namely, random-effects models (REMs). REMs consider the effect sizes from each study, weighed proportionally to the study’s sample size, and assume that in addition to within-study variance, there is true heterogeneity between trials (i.e., between-study variance), likely resulting from differences in study settings and cohort characteristics. True effects are further assumed to follow a normal distribution, with an average effect μ and variation τ2. In our case, we chose REMs as we assumed that multiple factors may be affecting the predictive power of microbiota composition on metabolite levels, ranging from technical factors such as sample collection, storage, sequencing, or metabolomics instruments and processing, to cohort characteristics such as ages, diets, geographic locations, health status, and others.

All REM computations were conducted using the “meta” [74] and “metafor” [75] R packages.

For each robustly well-predicted metabolite that was also well-predicted independently in 3 or more datasets, totaling 41 metabolites, we used two analysis approaches to explore how similar are metabolite models trained on different datasets. For all of the below analyses, we only considered datasets in which the metabolite was well-predicted according to the definitions above.

In the second analysis for assessing similarity between datasets, we tested how well a model trained on one dataset predicts metabolite levels in another dataset and vice versa, following previous microbiome-related meta-analysis studies [25, 77, 78]. We refer to this analysis as “cross-predictability analysis”. To overcome the differences between each pair of studies, we kept only genus features shared between both datasets, and additionally down-sampled the larger dataset to meet the sample size of the smaller dataset. After taking only the shared features, we re-normalized genus profiles to relative abundances. We then re-trained a RF regression model for the examined metabolite using the first dataset and evaluate its performance using LOOCV. If, due to down-sampling, the metabolite was no longer considered “well-predicted” by the new model, we discarded the specific comparison. Otherwise, we evaluated how well does the model perform on the second dataset and whether the performance meets the “well-predicted metabolite” definition used previously (i.e., the model transfers well). Due to the randomness presented by the down-sampling procedure and the RF itself, the final performance measures we report are averaged over 10 independent runs of the pipeline.

We identified genera that consistently contributed to the models of a specific metabolite by calculating the number of models in which a genus was a significant contributor (as previously defined). If a genus significantly contributed to over half of the metabolite models it appeared in, we referred to the genus as a consistent contributor to that metabolite.

Subgroup analysis is the process of comparing an effect (here, predictability of a metabolite) between two or more cohort “variants”. It is often used when some effect is suspected to differ between population subgroups (e.g., children vs. adults). Importantly, while large-scale studies often analyze these differences inherently, subgroup meta-analysis allows comparison of effect sizes between subgroups in smaller-scale studies and even when these subgroups appear in separate studies [54]. Here, we analyzed all metabolites with at least 3 healthy datasets and 3 disease datasets. We specifically used a REM for computing the average effect within subgroups and a fixed-effects model for estimating the between-subgroup differences. For each subgroup meta-analysis, we then recorded the mean predictability (and associated P value) within healthy datasets (as before), mean predictability (and associated P value) within disease datasets, and the Q statistic and P value for differences between subgroups. Sub-group meta-analysis was conducted using the “meta” [74] R package, based on code from the “dmetar” [79] package.

As described before for comparison of models across healthy datasets, we used two analysis approaches to explore how similar are metabolite models trained on healthy vs. disease datasets from the same study. First, we compared significant contributors as previously described. Second, we performed a cross-predictability analysis to examine how well the healthy-model predicts metabolite levels in the pertaining disease dataset. To account for different study group sizes, the larger group was down-sampled to match the size of the smaller group. If, due to down-sampling, the metabolite was no longer well-predicted in the healthy group, we discarded that specific comparison. We limited our analysis to 5 case-control datasets that also had at least 1 well-predicted metabolite, and ran the entire analysis pipeline 10 times, averaging the results over these runs.

Understanding how the gut microbiome shapes the gut metabolome is without a doubt crucial for any investigation of microbiota-related mechanisms affecting the host’s health and of microbiome-based therapy. Yet, the interaction between gut microbes and metabolites remains largely uncharacterized for various technical and methodological reasons [3, 13]. Microbiome-metabolome studies of the human gut aim to characterize these interactions using a data-driven approach, but the generalizability of reported associations is unclear given the substantial differences between studies and cohorts.

Our analysis clearly faced several important caveats. One major challenge of this study and of the need to unify data from multiple different studies is that we had to limit our analysis to metabolites with a shared annotation (here, HMDB identifiers) and that are present in multiple studies (using potentially different metabolomic approaches). With these limitations, we effectively focused on 273 metabolites out of approximately 97,000 (non-unique) raw metabolites identified in the 9 healthy datasets. These 273 metabolites constitute only a tiny fraction of gut metabolites, as most gut metabolites, and specifically those of microbial origin, are largely unidentified and poorly represented in metabolic databases [3, 17, 92]. Moreover, though for the main part of the analysis, we did not directly compare genus-level statistics between cohorts, a similar limitation is applicable for the microbiome data. Collapsing the taxonomic data into genus level profiles somewhat mitigated this problem, but also constrained our ability to capture associations at the species and strain level [93–95]. Our observation that some genera are consistently associated with metabolites while others demonstrate inconsistent patterns, for example, may be affected by the extent of metabolic diversification within each genera, which is known to vary dramatically [96]. This meta-analysis was also clearly limited by the number of cohorts included. Future work including significantly more cohorts could not only substantially expand the pool of analyzed metabolites but could also better account for technical and biological differences between studies, as noted above. Furthermore, expanding the analysis to multiple “disease” cohorts, perhaps even of the same disease, could uncover additional insights related to consistent shifts in metabolic activity of dysbiotic microbiota. This calls for both additional high-quality microbiome-metabolome studies and improved availability and standardization of such datasets.

The network of host-microbiota-metabolome interactions in the human gut is extremely complex and requires multiple research efforts in multiple complementary directions in order to be fully deciphered and characterized. Here, we identified metabolites consistently associated with the microbiota across diverse studies and cohorts, thus distinguishing between study-specific and robust or universal links. Our findings provide a better understanding of microbiome-metabolome interactions and allow researchers to put newly identified microbially associated metabolites within the context of other studies.



Publisher’s Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

