The Spanish gut microbiome reveals links between microorganisms and Mediterranean diet

Despite the increasing evidence of links between human gut and health, the number of gut microbiomes that have been studied to date at a country level are surprisingly low. Mediterranean countries, including some of the most long-lived and healthy countries in the world, have not been considered so far in those studies at a large scale. The main objective of this work is to characterize the gut microbiome of a healthy adult population of a Mediterranean, paradigmatically healthy country: Spain. Stool samples from 530 healthy volunteers were collected, total metagenomic DNA extracted, and the microbial profiles determined through 16S rRNA metataxonomic sequencing. Our results confirm the associations between several microbial markers and different variables, including sex, age, BMI and diet choices, and bring new insights into the relationship between microbiome and diet in the Spanish population. Remarkably, some of the associations found, such as the decrease of Faecalibacterium with age or the link of Flavonifractor with less healthy dietary habits, have been barely noticed in other large-scale cohorts. On the other hand, a range of links between microorganisms, diet, and lifestyle coincide with those reported in other populations, thus increasing the robustness of such associations and confirming the importance of these microbial markers across different countries. Overall, this study describes the Spanish “normal” microbiome, providing a solid baseline for future studies investigating the effects of gut microbiome composition and deviations in the adherence to the Mediterranean diet.

Human gut is one of the most diverse ecosystems on Earth. As a result of millions of years of co-evolution, gut microorganisms perform essential activities for human health and nutrition, from the digestion of vegetal fiber1 to the regulation of complex signalling pathways acting beyond our gut2,3. Since the development of metagenomic sequencing techniques, the human gut microbiome has been a recurrent object of study. In 2007, The Human Microbiome Project (HMP) was launched with two main objectives: (1) understanding the dimension of the microbial communities associated to the human body, regarding variability among individuals; and (2) shedding light on the interplay between gut microbiota and a range of diseases4,5. To date, nearly 6.000 gut microbiome samples (out of more than 31.000 corresponding to different body sites) have been analyzed in the framework of the HMP. These datasets originate from individuals of different sex, age, culture, geographic location, and health status, which implies multiple potential connections between the composition of the gut microbiome and a range of health issues and diseases6,7. In order to shed light on those correlations, the microbiome profiles of different cohorts (usually, healthy vs diseased) are often compared, and differences involving single microorganisms8,9, microbial consortia10, or dynamic behaviors of the community are identified11.

The objective of the present work is to shed light on the "normal" microbiome of the Spanish population, as a particular case of Mediterranean countries, in which gut microbiomes, at a epidemiological level, have surprisingly not been studied so far in a comprehensive way. In order to fill this gap, a representative cohort of individuals was selected according to demographic criteria (age, sex, and geographic location), and their stool microbiome was analyzed through 16S rRNA metataxonomic sequencing following the HMP standard guidelines. Our results depict the diversity and variability of the Spanish microbiome regarding sex, geography, and age range of healthy individuals, and confirm or unveil new microbiome-health correlations among particular microbial markers and a range of diet variables, most of which involve the consumption of food associated to the Mediterranean diet.

A total of 530 individuals (267 females and 263 males) across the Spanish territory (including the Canary and Balearic Islands, Ceuta and Melilla) joined the study (Supplementary Table 1). The sample was designed to be representative of the Spanish population in terms of sex, age and geographical distribution. All the samples were associated to basic metadata of the donor (age range, sex and region), while 528 participants provided extended metadata (weight, height, eating habits, medical conditions, etc.) via online questionnaires (Supplementary Table 2). Microbiome sequencing resulted in 36,441,101 joined reads after quality filtering and chimera removal, yielding a median of 71,402 reads per sample (Q1 = 41,271, Q3 = 93,216). Rarefaction curves indicated that all the samples reached the asymptote (Supplementary Fig. 1).

A total of 25,764 different ASVs were detected in the entire dataset. At the phylum level, the average Spanish gut microbiome was dominated by Firmicutes (~ 53.9%) and Bacteroidota (or Bacteroidetes) (~ 37.2%), followed by Proteobacteria (~ 5%), Verrucomicrobiota (or Verrucomicrobia) (~ 1.8%), and Actinobacteriota (or Actinobacteria) (~ 0.9%). The average Firmicutes/ Bacteroidota (F/B) ratio was 1.78 (CI 1.99–1.57).

A relatively high number of microbial markers were associated with age. Specifically, age significantly correlated with one phylum (Cyanobacteria) and 29 different genera (Fig. 2B and Supplementary Table 6) (p-value < 0.05; Spearman’s rank correlation). Eight of these genera (Faecalibacterium, Clostridia UCG-014, Phascolarctobacterium, Eubacterium eligens group, Dialister, Eubacterium siraeum group, an unassigned Muribaculaceae, and an unassigned Lachnospiraceae) were among the top 30 taxa with the highest average relative abundance (rel. abund. > 0.7%). Remarkably, Bifidobacterium relative abundance also decreased with age (Fig. 2C). Both alpha diversity metrics studied (richness & Shannon; ASV-level) were also age-dependent, and they increased linearly with age (p-value < 0.05; Spearman’s correlation) (Fig. 2D and Supplementary Fig. 3). When splitting the dataset by sex, a positive correlation between age and alpha diversity indices were found for males, but not for females (Fig. 2D and Supplementary Fig. 3). Although both richness and Shannon metrics were noticeably higher for young adult females, no significant results were obtained when comparing males and females aged below 40 years (p-value > 0.05; Wilcoxon rank-sum test).

The information on diet habits collected from 528 participants was used to establish correlations between microbiome data (at the phylum and genus level) and the monthly consumption of 43 different foods (e.g., bread, yogurt, milk, etc.) and food groups (e.g., nuts, sugar-sweetened beverages, etc.). Body mass index (BMI) was also included as a variable. In order to reduce the complexity and dimensionality of genus-level microbiome data, only genera with a relative abundance > 0.01% were tested (n = 171). No filtering was applied to the phylum-level data (n = 21). Spearman’s rank correlation was used to identify 63 genera associated with 19 variables (Fig. 3A), and 8 phyla associated with 11 variables (Fig. 3B) (p-value < 0.05; Spearman’s rank correlation). Verrucomicrobiota and both Eubacterium eligens group and Flavonifractor resulted in the highest number of significant associations at the phylum and genus level (five and seven associations, respectively). On the other hand, monthly consumption of nuts was associated with the highest number of microbial markers (23 phyla or genera) (Supplementary Table 7).

Finally, the relationship between age, sex and dietary habits was studied. The monthly consumption of sixteen different foods or food groups was associated to age (Supplementary Table 8), while seventeen diet variables were sex-dependent (Supplementary Table 9). Overall, the consumption of healthier foods (e.g., salad or citrus fruit) increased with age, while less healthy dietary habits (e.g., consumption of sugar-sweetened beverages or chips) presented a negative correlation with this variable. Regarding sex, females tended to adhere to healthier dietary patterns: they reported a lower consumption of beer, spirit drinks or sugar-sweetened beverages, and a higher consumption of fruits and vegetables.

We report here the analysis of the Spanish Microbiome, based on a total of 530 faecal samples, as a proxy of the "normal" gut microbiome of the Spanish population. Although similar studies have been carried out for other European countries, such as UK, Germany, Belgium or the Netherlands13,18,19,21, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first large-scale, country-wide gut microbiome analysis in a Mediterranean country.

Overall, the present work constitutes the first complete analysis of the gut microbiome of a Mediterranean country. Our findings clearly confirm the association between some of the foods that characterize the Mediterranean diet (vegetables and nuts, basically) with the abundance of bacterial taxa which, in turn, are associated with health benefits. Moreover, dietary habits have demonstrated to be sex- and age-dependent. In particular, females tended to adhere to healthier dietary patterns, while young individuals reported an increased consumption of less healthy foods or food groups. This suggests that adherence to MD in Spain is decreasing among young people, which could have a negative impact on the health condition and gut microbiome composition of the Spanish population. Despite the difficulties encountered when comparing our investigation with other studies because of methodological bias, our results demonstrate or point out the robustness of the associations between healthy lifestyle traits and particular microbial markers, some of which have not been deeply studied in previous nation-wide microbiome studies. Taken together, our results strongly suggest a double effect of the Mediterranean diet on the health of the Spaniards: direct ones (i.e. “inherent” nutritional values such as content in vitamins, fiber, healthy fats, etc.) and indirect ones through a not-yet fully understood, but yet strong association between specific foods, microbial markers and health.

This study targeted healthy citizens with an age ranging from 18 to 70 years, who did not meet any of the exclusion criteria summarized in the Supplementary Note. Briefly, the main exclusion criteria were related to a range of infections, diseases/syndromes, as well as to the intake of antibiotics in the last 6 months. A sample group of 530 individuals was designed in accordance with official demographic data (www.ine.es) in order to have a representative picture of the Spanish population in terms of age, sex, and geography (distributed in 17 autonomous regions and 2 autonomous cities). The number of individuals corresponding to each criterium is shown in Supplementary Table 1.

The selected participants signed an informed consent containing all the information on the objectives, general methodology, and data management and protection aspects of the study. Stool sampling was performed by each participant with the Stool Nucleic Acid Collection and Preservation Kit (Norgen Biotek), and the anonymized samples were processed at the facilities of Darwin Bioprospecting Excellence, SL (Valencia, Spain) following the IHMS (International Human Microbiome Standards).

Samples were received and processed in different batches from May 2019 to September 2020. Briefly, DNA was extracted from stool samples using the Stool Nucleic Acid Isolation Kit (Norgen Biotek) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Then, Qubit × 1 dsDNA HS Assay kit (Qubit 2.0 Fluorometer, Thermo Fisher, Waltham, United States) was used for DNA quantification. The amplicon sequencing protocol targeted the V3 and V4 regions (459 bp) of the 16S rRNA genes with the primers designed on surrounding conserved regions78. Following the Illumina amplicon libraries protocol, DNA amplicon libraries were generated using a limited cycle PCR: initial denaturation at 95 °C for 3 min, followed by 25 cycles of annealing (95 °C 30 s, 55 °C 30 s, 72 °C 30 s) extension at 72 °C 5 min, using a KAPA HiFi HotStart ReadyMix (KK2602). Then, Illumina sequencing adaptors and dual-index barcodes (Nextera XT index kit v2, FC-131–2001) were added to the amplicons. Libraries were normalized and pooled prior to sequencing. The pool containing indexed amplicons was then loaded onto the MiSeq reagent cartridge v3 (MS-102–3003) spiked with 10% PhiX control to improve base calling during sequencing, as recommended by Illumina for amplicon sequencing. Sequencing was conducted using a paired-end, 2X250pb and 2 × 300pb cycle runs on an Illumina MiSeq device.

Raw Illumina sequences were analysed using Qiime2 (v. 2020.8)79. Briefly, the quality of the reads was assessed with the Demux plugin, and primers were subsequently trimmed from the beginning of the reads via DADA2 (q2‐dada2)80. This plugin was also used for denoising and truncating the reads at 245 bp, and for clustering them into amplicon sequence variants (ASVs). The taxonomy of each sequence variant was assigned employing the q2‐feature‐classifier classify‐sklearn naïve Bayes taxonomy classifier81. SILVA (v. 138)82 was used as reference database for taxonomic assignment. SILVA taxonomy nomenclature was used for preparing the figures (i.e., Bacteroidota was used instead of Bacteroidetes).

Microbiome data was analyzed and visualized in R, mainly using phyloseq83 and ggplot2 packages. Rarefaction curves were constructed with the iNEXT and ggiNEXT functions (iNEXT)84. Correlations between quantitative variables (i.e., monthly consumption of foods or food groups, BMI, age, etc.) and the relative abundance of microbiome markers were evaluated using Spearman’s rank correlation test. Categorical variables (i.e., sex, region, etc.) were tested with DESeq2, using its built-in function for normalizing the raw microbiome counts85. All the p-values obtained in both cases were adjusted using p. adjust R function with the Benjamini–Hochberg procedure (FDR), and significance was defined at adjusted p-value < 0.05. Significant correlations were plotted into heatmaps using pheatmap package. Alpha diversity metrics (richness and Shannon) were calculated at the ASV level. For alpha diversity tests, all the samples were rarefied to 15.000 reads to mitigate uneven sequencing depth. Seventeen samples did not reach this threshold and, therefore, were discarded for alpha diversity analysis.

All the proceedings followed in this study (including data management and protection) were approved by the Ethics Committee of Hospital Clínico San Carlos (Madrid, Spain; project reference 18/557-E). All methods were performed in accordance with the relevant guidelines and regulations. All the participants of the study gave their informed consent.



Publisher's note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41598-021-01002-1.

