Parabacteroides distasonis: intriguing aerotolerant gut anaerobe with emerging antimicrobial resistance and pathogenic and probiotic roles in human health

Parabacteroides distasonis is the type strain for the genus Parabacteroides, a group of gram-negative anaerobic bacteria that commonly colonize the gastrointestinal tract of numerous species. First isolated in the 1930s from a clinical specimen as Bacteroides distasonis, the strain was re-classified to form the new genus Parabacteroides in 2006. Currently, the genus consists of 15 species, 10 of which are listed as 'validly named' (P. acidifaciens, P. chartae, P. chinchillae, P. chongii, P. distasonis, P. faecis, P. goldsteinii, P. gordonii, P. johnsonii, and P. merdae) and 5 'not validly named' (P. bouchesdurhonensis, P. massiliensis, P. pacaensis, P. provencensis, and P. timonensis) by the List of Prokaryotic names with Standing in Nomenclature. The Parabacteroides genus has been associated with reports of both beneficial and pathogenic effects in human health. Herein, we review the literature on the history, ecology, diseases, antimicrobial resistance, and genetics of this bacterium, illustrating the effects of P. distasonis on human and animal health.

The intestinal gut is home to the largest collection of microbes, harboring trillions of bacteria and representing hundreds of species. Most of these species fall into two groups – Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes. These were among the first phyla that comprise most of the dominant gut commensal bacteria to be defined. Within the Bacteroidetes phylum, the relatively new genus Parabacteroides (defined as separate from its predecessor, the very broad Bacteroides genus, in 20061), now contains at least ten 'valid species,' which are recognized as being real species in clinical settings, and five 'non-valid species,' which are not recognized as being real species in clinical settings by the List of Prokaryotic names with Standing in Nomenclature. Several of these species were identified in isolates from clinical infections.

Herein, we hypothesize and illustrate that the pathologic role of these bacteria in human diseases may depend on the context, including the susceptibility of the host to immune suppression, impaired bacterial clearance, and the promotion of hyperinflammatory responses, together with strain-to-strain differences that may account for differences in antimicrobial resistance to human therapies and P. distasonis potential for pathogenicity.

As with several other new genera reclassified from the initially broad genus Bacteroides fragilis group, including Alistipes1, Parabacteroides is a relatively new genus with distinctive features shared among other gut commensal bacteria. It is important to highlight that great progress in our understanding of this and other related genera has been facilitated by the taxonomic contributions made by Japanese microbiologists Mitsue Sakamoto and Yoshimi Benno who proposed the genus,2 and by other international groups cited below. According to the NCBI, the full taxonomy lineage for the genus Parabacteroides is: Bacteria; FCB group; Bacteroidetes/Chlorobi group; Bacteroidetes; Bacteroidia; Bacteroidales; Tannerellaceae; Parabacteroides. Of note, the family Tannerellaceae is composed of Parabacteroides and another new genus, Tannerella, with the species T. forsythia and T. pachnodae.

To provide an example of genetic similarity with other fecal commensals within the Bacteroidetes, based on 16s RNA gene sequence similarity, the three founding species of the Parabacteroides genus-- P. distasonis JCM 5825 T, P. goldsteinii JCM 13,446 T, and P. merdae JCM 9497 T-- are phylogenetically closely related to each other (>92.3% DNA sequence similarity) and related to T. forsythia with about 90% similarity. However, they are distant from their predecessor genus Bacteroides (83.5–88.8%) and other comparable genera including Dysgonomonas (85.9–89.4%), Paludibacter (86.9–88.5%), Porphyromonas (82.2–86.9%), Prevotella (77.2–81.9%) and Proteiniphilum (85.9–87.3%).2

Of all the species listed previously, P. distasonis is the reference type strain for the genus Parabacteroides. Since the completion of the first genome sequence for the species by investigators at Washington University in St. Louis in 2007, P. distasonis strain ATCC 8503 has become the strain comparator for all Parabacteroides species.15 This type strain is an isolate deposited in 1933 and is a gram-negative, non-spore-forming, rod-shaped, strict anaerobic bacterium present in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract of humans and animals.2,16 A single P. distasonis ATCC 8503 cell is 0.8–1.6 × 1.2–12 μm in size. Its colonies on sheep blood agar plates are 1–2 mm in diameter, appear gray to off-white, and are circular, slightly convex, and smooth in shape.

As a result of this and other contradictory findings, P. distasonis has become a highly controversial bacterium in the gastroenterological and microbiological fields of study. In 2020 and early 2021 alone, over twenty studies were published involving P. distasonis, many of which produced controversial findings. Here, we delve into basic concepts on the history, biology, and ecology of the bacterium; its resistance to antibiotics; its genomic features; and its potential clinical relevance in the context of human health. We highlight papers that support both sides of the debate over P. distasonis' pathogenicity and present a summary of potential future perspectives on our analysis of this microbe.

Parabacteroides distasonis is a re-classified bacterium named after A. Distaso, a Romanian bacteriologist who was involved in the description of the Bacteroides phylum species in the 1910s.18,19 Originally, P. distasonis was considered part of the Bacteroides genus, where it bore the name Bacteroides distasonis. Prior to the 1980s, classification of bacteria was based on phenotypic features, which meant that all gram-negative rods with certain phenotypic profiles were designated as being part of Bacteroides.20 For decades, only minor changes in taxonomy were implemented, even though the Bacteroides genus increasingly started to contain vast numbers of strains and species (>50) that greatly differed phenotypically from one another.21

In addition to genetic differences, Sakamoto and Benno demonstrated differences in chemo-taxonomic features. Ratios of anteiso-C15:0 to iso- C15:0 ranged from 3.1 to 10.3 in B. distasonis, B. goldsteinii, and B. merdae strains, while those for T. forsythensis ranged from 22.8 to 95.2. Major menaquinones of B. distasonis, B. goldsteinii, and B. merdae were MK-9 and MK-10, while the same for T. forsynthesis and Bacteroides species were MK-10 and MK-11. Taken together, the differences observed prompted Sakamoto and Benno to propose that these species be placed in their own genus, named Parabacteroides, meaning “adjacent to Bacteroides”.2

P. distasonis has been detected in healthy and unhealthy patients, although the loads compared to other members of the Bacteroides group may vary across studies depending on the methods of detection used and factors like diet, which remain largely uncharacterized. Earlier studies utilizing immunoassays and monoclonal antibodies to identify Bacteroides species revealed that more than 30% of bacteria in human feces were Bacteroides species.

The presence of this species in feces and their survival in natural waters supports our proposal that water and migratory birds could serve as an important avenue for Parabacteroides species dissemination between and across avian and mammalian species, possibly increasing the risk of antimicrobial resistant strains appearing in clinical settings. If human-originated isolates of P. distasonis can appear in chicken or other animals, then this bacterium might be able to reach humans via food and livestock, as is common among other aerobic or anaerobic foodborne or food-dwelling microbes.27

Numerous methods exist for culturing P. distasonis. As a saccharolytic bacterium, P. distasonis is capable of metabolizing carbohydrates such as mannose and raffinose for energy production and can grow on a medium containing 20% bile.2 Furthermore, the latter enables P. distasonis to selectively grow on Bacteroides bile esculin agar.28

In another study, using both the MALDI-TOF MS system and the Rapid ID 32A system, the single P. distasonis isolate (abundance = 0.74%) involved was successfully detected.36 Together, these studies, indicate that P. distasonis is a species of higher abundance, is more readily cultivable, and is identifiable by several detection methods. This is perhaps the reason why it was the first species isolated to be assigned to the Parabacteroides genus. These methods prompt future studies to examine mechanisms by which this species mediates human health; however, emerging strains will need to be considered to help define the genetics behind the modulation of either effect.

According to phylogenetic analyses, P. distasonis diverged from a common ancestor shared with Bacteroides species, as confirmed via nucleotide sequencing of the complete 16S rRNA gene from distinct bacterial species.37 A study by Xu et al.37 explored the driving forces behind the adaptation of Bacteroidetes in the distal gut environment and their importance to the evolution of human gut commensals. To examine how the intestinal environment affects microbial genome evolution, Xu et al.37 sequenced the genomes of two members of the distal human gut microbiota, B. vulgatus and P. distasonis. Through comparison with other sequenced gut and non-gut Bacteroidetes, and analyzing their niches and habitat adaptations, Xu et al. identified three general functions that could illustrate an evolutionary uniqueness for the Bacteroidetes phylum: polysaccharide metabolism, environmental sensing and gene regulation, and membrane transport. These processes are important in aiding with lateral gene transfer, mobile elements, and gene amplification, all of which affect the ability of gut-dwelling Bacteroidetes to vary their cell surface, sense their environment, and harvest nutrients present in the distal colon.37 More recently, genome-based analyses have examined the metabolic features that are typical for a wide array of Bacteroides, which complements the taxonomic classification of the phylumspecies within.38–40

In a study involving an individual that received ceftriaxone therapy, P. distasonis demonstrated monodominance in the gut microbiota community. Hildebrand et al.41 observed an extreme bloom of P. distasonis in the gut, where it was the second most abundant commensal with a 95% relative abundance. Here, Borkfalki ceftriaxensis was the most common conditionally monodominant taxa (CMT) that was not invasive. The initial colonization by this species was succeeded by P. distasonis.41 Thus, P. distasonis is a key member of the gut microbiota community, rendering it as a highly influential bacterium.

Parabacteroides distasonis’ lack of polysaccharide degradation genes is compensated for by the bacterium’s unique surface layer (S-layer) composed of glycoproteins. Fletcher et al.42 identified at least nine glycoproteins utilized by P. distasonis using the lectin-affinity purification technique. Intriguingly, the researchers found that seven of the nine glycoprotein promoters identified undergo DNA inversion, predominantly in their endogenous human environment.42

This unique S-layer could form the basis of P. distasonis’ effective pathogenic nature. Understanding the potentially pathogenic nature of P. distasonis is crucial for comprehending the interactions between the host or host’s environment and this bacterium.42,45–49

It is thought that fermentation by P. distasonis results in the production of methane. It is unclear if direct production of methane occurs in P. distasonis; however, it is known that P. distasonis produces hydrogen, carbon dioxide, formic acid, acetic acid, carboxylic acid, and succinic acid.2 Other microbes may convert the carbon dioxide and acetic acid to methane. Acetogenic bacteria might then oxidize the acids, obtaining more acetic acid and either hydrogen or formic acid. Finally, in complex gut communities, methanogens may convert acetic acid to methane.

Whether P. distasonis contributes(likely indirectly) to local production of methane is at this time speculative, but there is a need to consider that the ultimate beneficial or pathogenic role on any animal model of disease, or clinical disease, might also depend on other species present in the local microbiome.

Comprehensive analysis of the end-products of fermentation have indicated that P. distasonis and other Bacteroides and Prevotella spp. primarily produce acetic acid and succinic acid, in contrast to other microbes that produce other acids in a less specific manner.2 Succinate serves as an inflammatory signal in immune cells to induce IL-1β through HIF-1α (transcription factor induced by hypoxia), a downstream target of succinate.52–54 Succinate can stimulate reactive oxygen species (ROS),55,56 and succinate accumulation in immune cells acts as an inflammatory signal for macrophages via HIF-1α.52 HIF-1α activation attenuates Treg development, induces IL-17 production, and increases RORyt transcription, favoring differentiation of T lymphocytes into pro-inflammatory TH17 cells.57 Succinate is also a ligand for succinate-receptor 1 (SUCNR1; formally GPCR91) expressed by dendritic cells53 and can enhance both the pro-inflammatory cytokine (TNFα and Il-1β) production and the antigen presentation capacity of dendritic cells, thereby inducing adaptive immune responses.53,58 In the colonic mucosa of rats, succinic acid leads to reduced crypt size and inhibition of epithelial cell proliferation rate.59 Notably, leptin is also a well-known HIF-1α-inducible modulator,60 with HIF-1α overexpression observed in obese adipose tissue, and reduction during weight loss.61

Since the isolation of P. distasonis from fecal samples, sites of infection, abscess formation, or the gut wall in IBD patients is potentially linked to clinical outcomes affected by antimicrobial resistance, the sections below provide an overview of studies examining the resistance patterns of P. distasonis to various classes of antibiotics.

Bacteroides spp. and Parabacteroides spp. are becoming increasingly more resistant to certain antibiotics62 because of an increase in the number of antimicrobial resistance-related virulence genes. Within the genus Parabacteroides, P. distasonis has a wide spectrum of resistance to various beta-lactams, being particularly resistant to the penicillin class.63–67 Nakano et al.67 demonstrated that up to 99% of P. distasonis isolates were resistant to penicillin and the first generation cephalosporin, cephalexin, while more than 85% of the P. distasonis isolates could be resistant to amoxicillin and ampicillin. Resistance to the second generation of cephalosporin, cefoxitin, was less frequent; it was found in only 12% of isolates tested.67 Differential resistance to cephalosporins, including cefotetan, cephalothin,63,68 cephalexin,67 cefoxitin,64,68 cefotaxime,64 cefazolin,68 and cefotetan,69 have also been reported, with resistances higher in earlier generations.

P. distasonis is generally susceptible to carbapenems such as meropenem and imipenem.72,73 However, recently it was found that a small percentage of clinical isolates of P. distasonis are resistant to imipenem, ranging from 4%66 to 11%.69 This is clinically relevant considering the apparent current trends of increasing antimicrobial resistance in P. distasonis over time, a pattern that has been reported in the Bacteroides fragilis group in Europe, where high-level resistance to ampicillin (MIC 64 mg/L) increased from 16% to 44.5% over 20 years.69

Several studies have reported the various rates of clindamycin resistant isolates of P. distasonis: from 9%74 in the 1990s to about 30% in the 2000s,67,75,76 and even up to 50% in the early 2010s.76 This suggests that a growing proportion of P. distasonis strains have reduced susceptibility to clindamycin.62 It is possible that the indiscriminate use of this antibiotic in clinical settings, especially for members of the Bacteroides and Parabacteroides genera, exerts selective pressure, leading to increased resistance of P. distasonis to clindamycin over time.77

One of the potential underlying mechanisms for clindamycin resistance in P. distasonis is the presence of the resistance gene ermF, known to be frequently found in various anaerobes.78,79 This gene encodes the ribosomal methylase that modifies peptidyl transferase in the ribosome, resulting in resistance to lincosamides, macrolides, and streptogramin drugs.80 However, the data on the frequency of this gene in different P. distasonis isolates remain controversial – it varies from being completely absent in isolates66 to being detected in 37.5% of all samples.67 Further confirmation for the potential role of ermF in clindamycin resistance comes from a study by Kierzkowska et al,77 in which 88.9% (8 out of 9) of clindamycin-resistant isolates were found to harbor the ermF gene.77

P. distasonis demonstrates considerable resistance to tetracycline – up to 87.5% among tested clinical isolates.68 The high frequency of tetracycline resistance among Parabacteroides isolates has been attributed to the presence of the tetQ gene.68,81 The conjugative transposon that tetQ resides on harbors ermF, and exposure to low concentrations of tetracycline can trigger horizontal gene transfer, thereby also triggering the transfer of other transposons present in the genome, like Tn4555 which harbors cfxA. Thus, this has the potential to be horizontally transferred to other susceptible intestinal species of the Bacteroides and Parabacteroides genera.68

An enzyme found in P. distasonis, Pd_dinase (short for P. distasonis protease) has diaminopeptidase activity. This enzyme can hydrolyze some human antimicrobial peptides normally present in the gut, such as keratin-derived antimicrobial peptides (KAMPs), human β-defensin 2, and human neutrophil peptide 3. If secreted into the extracellular milieu of the gut, Pd_dinase may promote intestinal colonization by P. distasonis via the inactivation of the aforementioned host antimicrobial peptides.82

In a study by Sóki et al. conducted in 2020,83 the resistance of intestinal isolates of different bacterial species, including P. distasonis, was evaluated against several antimicrobials. The relevant MIC values were compared between clinical and intestinal isolates. Several notable observations can be made from their findings, summarized in Table 1. For example, in the clinical and intestinal isolates of all species examined, ampicillin resistance is almost 100%; moxifloxacin, cefoxitin, and clindamycin resistance is intermediate (13–44%); and amoxicillin/clavulanate, imipenem, metronidazole, and tigecycline resistance is very low (0–4%).83

*For the intestinal isolates, the study examined 202 Bacteroides and Parabacteroides strains (11.9%, were B. fragilis) collected between 2014 and 2016 in Europe and compared resistance levels between clinical and commensal isolates. Isolates were recovered from feces using Bacteroides Chromogenic Agar (BCA) method and tested via agar dilution for ten antibiotics. For clinical isolates, the study used published data from a 20-year survey of isolates in Europe.69 These results were similar to previous European clinical Bacteroides antibiotic susceptibility survey, all the variations existed across countries and antibiotics.83 Adapted from Table 2 from Sóki et al.83 with permission. Available from Anaerobe and used with permission from Elsevier. Note that that metronidazole, imipenem, cefoxitin, and amoxicillin/clavulanic acid MIC ranges were significantly greater in clinical isolates compared to intestinal isolates. Notably, however, intestinal isolates of P. distasonis are significantly more resistant (p = 0.048 via X2 test) to moxifloxacin than their clinical counterparts.83

These results highlight the possibility and importance of differential antimicrobial resistance in samples of clinical origin compared to commensal intestinal isolates. In addition, these results also indicate a need for greater study of antimicrobial resistance at the strain level, since multiple genetic factors may confer resistance to antibiotics and/or enable bacteria to induce chronic illness. Culture-based studies and genomic analyses of strains well-defined with respect to the source region (healthy vs diseased) are warranted to understand the drivers that enable some isolates or strains to become pathogenic compared to others that remain as commensals.

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a spectrum of life-long chronic conditions that affect the digestive tract of humans and animals in a slow, progressive matter. In humans, the prototypic forms of IBD are Crohn’s disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis. Crohn’s disease affects the entirety of the gastrointestinal tract, and patients have chronic, debilitating symptoms. These include abdominal pain, severe diarrhea, stools containing blood, weight loss, and fatigue. In general, IBD has aberrant exaggerated host immune and inflammatory responses to luminal antigens that reveal recurring themes in IBD pathogenesis: first, lesions in IBD predominate in areas of highest bacterial exposure; and second, manipulation of luminal content using selective antibiotics reduces inflammation in IBD patients. Thus, it remains to be determined if IBD is triggered by the presence of an imbalanced microbiota composition and if such composition can be corrected with probiotic-like enhanced anti-inflammatory bacteria like P. distasonis.17

Taken together, these often-conflicting reports underscore the potential importance of P. distasonis in gut health and the need to elucidate its pathogenic effects so that clinically relevant solutions can be developed to address such effects. An overview of studies reporting an experimental or observational effect on IBD and intestinal health is presented in Table 2.

To date, P. distasonis has only been shown to have beneficial effects on colorectal cancer. Multiple researchers have identified that levels of P. distasonis in stool are inversely correlated to the presence of intestinal tumors.101 Koh et al.86 determined that P. distasonis membrane fractions were responsible for suppressing the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines in a colon cancer cell line. Studies by other researchers have suggested that P. distasonis has anti-inflammatory and anti-tumor properties mediated by the reduction of signaling via TLR4, MYD88, and Akt and the stimulation of apoptosis.86 These results are in agreement with observations of reduced microbiome levels of P. distasonis in mouse models of colorectal cancer.44 In a study by Koh et al.86 that was previously noted for revealing P. distasonis effect on the expression of tight junction proteins, the same mice were later treated with the carcinogen azoxymethane (AOM). The investigators stated that TLR4, IL-4, and TNF-α expression were 40% (p < .01 using a one-way ANOVA), 58% (p < .05), and 55% (p < .001) lower in mice fed a chow diet containing P. distasonis throughout the investigation than mice that were never fed a diet containing P. distasonis. In mice fed a diet containing P. distasonis after switching from a chow diet, the IL-10 and TGF-β expression were 217% (p = .05) and 185% (p < .001) higher compared to mice fed a chow diet without P. distasonis.86 Furthermore, Gu et al.101 found that the abundance of P. distasonis, in addition to that of Bacteroides vulgatus, decreased in response to CEACAM proteins disrupting TGF-β signaling. This alteration in the intestinal microbiome in turn promoted colorectal carcinogenesis, thus providing further evidence of P. distasonis potential role in preventing colorectal carcinogenesis.101

The evidence for the potential anti-inflammatory effects of P. distasonis in colorectal cancer is further supported by the inverse correlation between P. distasonis levels and IL-1β production in the gut.44 A comparison of the fecal microbiota composition between patients with spontaneous colorectal adenocarcinomas and patients without any proliferative lesions in the colon revealed a lack of P. distasonis in the patients with tumors.102 Collectively, these studies suggest that P. distasonis has anti-tumorigenic and anti-inflammatory potential in colorectal cancer patients.

Further potential benefits of P. distasonis have been identified, particularly in relation to obesity. Xu et al.103 found that mice with high-fat diet-induced obesity (DIO) had higher relative abundances of P. distasonis and Akkermansia muciniphila in the gut, resulting in a gut microbiota that was significantly more capable of reducing host adiposity. Here, this change in gut microbiome composition was induced by Panax notoginseng saponins (PNS), often used as a form of traditional Chinese medicine. This suggests a potential ability for PNS and, in turn, P. distasonis, to be used in the treatment of obesity.103 This also raises the potential for P. distasonis to be important in modulating host adiposity. Furthermore, a study by Gallardo-Becerra et al.104 found that the abundance of P. distasonis in the gut microbiota of Mexican children with obesity and metabolic syndrome (MetS), a multicomponent condition associated with obesity, was reduced compared to Mexican children of normal weight. This, the investigators noted, was “correlated with clinical and anthropometric parameters associated with obesity and metabolic syndrome”.104 A study by Haro et al.105 illustrated a link between the gut microbiota, diet, and patients diagnosed with MetS. The study’s assertion implied that P. distasonis was originally diminished in MetS patients who were then presented with a Mediterranean diet for 2 years, partially restoring P. distasonis populations. The data from the MetS patients exhibited a negative relationship between waist circumference and the relative abundance of P. distasonis (R = −0.213). The patients on this Mediterranean diet, which was enriched with antioxidant phenolic-compound-rich foods, saw a statistically significant increase in the abundance of P. distasonis (p = .025 via ANOVA). These results suggest that the Mediterranean diet could potentially be utilized to correct microbial imbalances especially in reference to P. distasonis, providing further evidence that P. distasonis may be involved in mitigating obesity.105

Recently, Wang et al.106 demonstrated that P. distasonis alleviated obesity, hyperglycemia, and hepatic steatosis in ob/ob and high-fat diet mice via the production of secondary bile acids and a previously mentioned byproduct of fermentation: succinate. Here, succinate was found to bind to fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase, a rate-limiting enzyme involved in intestinal gluconeogenesis (IGN), decreasing hyperglycemia in ob/ob mice. Furthermore, treatment with live P. distasonis dramatically altered the bile acid profiles of the mice, increasing the levels of lithocholic acid (LCA) and ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA), in turn reducing hyperlipidemia by activating the FXR pathway and, as a result, repairing gut barrier integrity, highlighting additional suspected benefits of P. distasonis in relation to obesity and gut barrier integrity.106 Of interest, the abundance of P. goldsteinii in feces has been reported to also have an inverse (protective) correlation with obesity in rats.107

As with IBD, P. distasonis has been shown to have both beneficial and detrimental effects on diabetes, complicating its definition as a beneficial commensal or pathogenic bacterium. However, research on P. distasonis’ effects on diabetes is currently very limited. Cai et al.108 found that supplementing extract of propolis (EEP) in high-fat diet mice increased the abundance of P. distasonis, which was identified as an ‘anti-obesity and anti-inflammatory bacterium,’ in line with associated metabolic parameters of insulin resistance.106 Based on these findings, one may conclude that P. distasonis could play a role in decreasing insulin resistance and preventing diabetes.

However, some evidence that P. distasonis may be involved in the pathogenesis of diabetes has begun to emerge. Hasain et al,109 citing several metagenomics studies, concluded that P. distasonis, which has been shown to be enriched in women with gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM), could serve as a gut microbiota signature in women with GDM.109 This suggests that P. distasonis may play a role in the pathogenesis of certain types of diabetes rather than prevent it, as Cai et al.’s106 findings suggest, underscoring the importance of further investigation into P. distasonis’ effects on diabetes.

Several studies have suggested that P. distasonis may play a role in various forms of autoimmunity. For example, in a recent study addressing the potential functional relationship between gut bacteria and T cell responses in multiple sclerosis (MS), P. distasonis levels were shown to be lower in human MS patients compared to healthy controls.110 P. distasonis was shown to drive T cell differentiation toward an increased percentage of anti-inflammatory CD25+ T cells relative to the total CD3+ CD4+ T cell population. There was also an abundance of CD25+ IL-10+ FoxP3− Tr1 cells, which are strongly associated with the immunoregulatory phenotype.111 Interestingly, these results are corroborated by the elevated proportion of FoxP3+ T regulatory cells in the overall population of CD4+ T cells found in the colonic lamina propria of C57BL/6 J mice monocolonized with P. distasonis.85 Transplantation of the gut microbiome from the MS patients into germ-free mice augmented the severity of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis symptoms in comparison to their counterparts that received the microbiome transplant from healthy human donors.110

Notably, Moreno-Arrones et al.117 found that patients with alopecia areata – an autoimmune disease mediated by T cells – had higher abundances of P. distasonis in their gut microbiota (LDA score > 2). In conjunction with Clostridiales vadin BB60 group, P. distasonis could correctly predict alopecia areata status in 80% of patients, indicating that P. distasonis could be involved in the pathophysiology of alopecia areata.117 However, whether these findings indicate a causative relationship between the abundance of P. distasonis in the gut and alopecia areata and if the bacterium presence serves as a biomarker for the disease remains to be elucidated. At the genus level, elevated systemic antibodies toward commensal gut P. distasonis and P. merdae have been reported to be consistently increased in Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF, which is an autoinflammatory condition characterized by acute, self-limiting episodes of fever and serositis and chronic subclinical inflammation in remission), irrespective of disease activity (remission, 2180 ± 1150 and 2508 ± 1241; vs. flare, 2383 ± 1207 and 2393 ± 1069) compared to controls (658 ± 161 and 995 ± 363, for P. distasonis and P. merdae, respectively).99 The relevance of these findings are not well understood because in IBD, increased IgA antibody concentrations have been found to work against other commensal microbes, including Lactobacillus casei.118

P. distasonis has also been implicated in the pathogenesis of cardiovascular disease (CVD). However, as with its impact on diabetes, research on P. distasonis impact on CVD is limited. A study focused on exploring the relationship between the gut microbiota and CVD in patients with cardiac valve calcifications and coronary artery disease found P. distasonis and other bacterial species to be potential pathogens contributing to CVD.114

Conversely, a study on the role of the intestinal microbial flora in vascular inflammation in rats found a potential anti-inflammatory role for P. distasonis, contributing to potentially beneficial effects on CVD. Here, the relative abundance of P. distasonis was inversely correlated to the neointimal hyperplasia and composite intima+media area after a carotid artery angioplasty.119 Thus, the role of P. distasonis in the pathogenesis of CVD is yet to be determined and remains another point of controversy surrounding this bacterium. It is clear that more research will be needed to determine P. distasonis role in relation to CVD.

Abscesses are a prime hotspot for numerous infectious bacteria to manifest and thrive. Clinical studies have reported finding culturable P. distasonis isolates in abscesses. Clinical studies and case reports have implied a possible role for P. distasonis in abscess formation in various tissues, including the spleen,120,121 liver,122 and wounds.33 For example, Gunalan et al.120 reported a case of splenic abscess in a 40-year-old man presenting to the hospital with fever, left-side abdominal pain, altered sensorium, and vomiting. After the patient received antimicrobial therapy and underwent a splenectomy, it was discovered that pus aspirated from the splenic abscess grew P. distasonis. Gunalan et al.120 noted that this is one of only a few recorded cases of P. distasonis causing splenic abscess in humans; nonetheless, such a finding is alarming and supportive of a pathogenic role of P. distasonis in human infections.120 Furthermore, CD4+ T-cells were shown to play a key role in the formation of P. distasonis-induced intra-abdominal abscesses in rodent models.123

The mechanism behind P. distasonis pathology regarding abscess formation is still under investigation. One study examined the abscedative and intra-abdominal sepsis role of P. distasonis infections using rats that were intraperitoneally infected with different bacterial pathogens, namely, Staphylococcus aureus, Bacteroides fragilis, and a combination of Enterococcus faecium and P. distasonis.123 The study aimed to define the mechanisms by which i) T-cells mediate abscess induction secondary to intra-abdominal sepsis, ii) the contribution of T-cell activation and iii) the role of co-stimulation of antigen-presenting cells via CD28-B7 pathways. Researchers found that T cells activated with zwitterionic bacterial polysaccharides in vitro required CD28-B7 co-stimulation to induce abscesses when adoptively transferred to the peritoneal cavity of naïve rats, promoting abscess formation. Although not exclusively specific to P. distasonis pathogenesis, the study demonstrated that blockade of T-cell activation via the CD28-B7 with CTLA4Ig prevented abscess formation, while an alarming 82.4% (n = 28) of 34 induced abscess yielded P. distasonis.123

It has become apparent that P. distasonis might have a modulatory effect on the predisposition to or protection against numerous other types of diseases. For example, elevated levels of P. distasonis were positively associated with the progression of cervical cancer.124 However, the number of patients in this particular study was rather small, so these results should be interpreted with caution. More possible positive roles for P. distasonis and P. merdae were described in another recent study. Both of these Parabacteroides species were shown to promote the beneficial anti-seizure effects of the ketogenic diet. Presence of these bacterial species strongly correlated with protection against seizures, potentially via increasing levels of glutamate and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) in the hippocampus.125 Reduced levels of GABA are well-known to exacerbate seizures.126 Furthermore, a whole metagenome sequence analysis demonstrated a lower abundance of P. distasonis in children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) compared to their neurotypical counterparts. Here, metagenomic analysis revealed decreases in the expression of genes linked to the production of melatonin, butyric acid, and GABA.127 A summary of these and additional studies reporting an experimental or observational effect on non-intestinal diseases is presented in Table 3.

Among the Parabacteroides species associated with the human gut, P. distasonis has the smallest genome (<5Mb, vs >6.5Mb) and the smallest repertoire of genes that are members of the environmental sensing and gene regulation categories. P. distasonis type strain ATCC 8503 possesses a 4,811,369-bp genome, 3,867 protein-coding genes, and shares 1,416 sets of orthologous protein-coding genes with other gut Bacteroidetes. Figure 2 illustrates the genomic relatedness of the Parabacteroides genus with that of other relatively new reclassified genera within the Bacteroidetes phylum. Additionally, P. distasonis has the smallest number of genes associated with carbon source degradation; however, P. distasonis has two classes of carbohydrate-processing enzymes that are more abundant in its proteome than in the proteomes of other gut Bacteroidetes.37 According to the PATRIC database, all P. distasonis sequences strains correspond to single chromosome isolates, with only one phage reported in the system (Parabacteroides phage YZ-2015a, NCBI Taxon ID 1,655,644)131.

Due to horizontal gene transfer of antimicrobial resistance genes, Bacteroides and Parabacteroides isolates from European and American patients now show tetracycline and erythromycin resistance, complicating genetic selection processes. Furthermore, while genetic manipulation via CRISPR-Cas9 can be done on Bacteroidales, off-target mutations, inefficient transformation, and the need for strain-specific modifications prevent CRISPR-Cas9 from being an effective method for molecular-level genetic manipulation.133 Recently, however, a new avenue for the genetic manipulation of P. merdae and diverse Bacteroides isolates from the human gut microbiota has been identified by García-Bayona & Comstock. This avenue consists of placing a selection cassette based on the dietary fiber inulin (the selection of which P. merdae is thought to be amenable to) into pNBU2, a “pir-dependent suicide vector,” resulting in facilitated transconjugation in P. merdae. This signifies that this combination, dubbed “pLGB28,” could be utilized in the genetic engineering of P. distasonis, thus providing a facilitated method of genetic manipulation for the species.133

P. distasonis is a unique bacterium that is involved in many of the biochemical processes of numerous human diseases. While there are apparent associations between P. distasonis, related IBDs, and numerous other diseases, there is a lack of an established consensus on P. distasonis’ role in modulating the human gut microbiota and, more importantly, the pathogenicity of the bacterium. Going forward, the directive for new studies is to understand and identify the mechanisms of P. distasonis, its pathogenesis, its antimicrobial resistance, and its commensal relationship with the gut mucosal wall. Additionally, it is imperative to understand its impact on our intestinal microbiota.

Ultimately, it may be that P. distasonis does not cleanly fit into either the beneficial commensal bacterium or pathogenic bacterium categories: perhaps P. distasonis, and potentially, other species of bacteria, straddle both definitions. If this were the case, it could have major implications for research on the gut microbiome, including prompting further investigation into other bacteria thought to be beneficial commensals for potential pathogenicity. However, more research is needed to determine whether P. distasonis truly straddles both the pathogenic and beneficial commensal definitions.

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).

A.R.-P identified the need for and conceived the manuscript. All authors contributed to the review, discussion of the findings, and wrote the manuscript. All authors discussed and edited the manuscript and approved its final version.

This is a review of the controversial and intriguing roles of Parabacteroides distasonis (PD) on human and animal health. This is a re-classified bacterium, originally called Bacteroides distasonis, and a part of the Bacteroidetes phylum. This well-established and extensively described bacterium was identified and isolated from patients with clinical infections as well as from microscopic cavitating lesions in the gut wall of a patient with Crohn’s disease, a major prototype of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). These observations contrast those made by other investigators who have reported potential probiotic effects of P. distasonis for a multitude of diseases, including IBD.

