The Microbiome in Hidradenitis Suppurativa: A Review



Hidradenitis suppurativa (HS) is a chronic autoinflammatory skin disease. It is characterised by the development of abscesses and nodules in intertriginous anatomical sites. Whilst it is now recognised as an autoinflammatory condition rather than an infective disease, bacteria are implicated in disease pathogenesis.

We performed a search of the literature from inception to 12 August 2020 using the search terms “hidradenitis suppurativa”, “Verneuil’s disease”, “acne inversa”, “microbiome”, “bacteriology” and “microbiology”. Studies were included if they assessed the cutaneous, gut or oral bacteria, bacteriology or microbiome in hidradenitis suppurativa.

Twenty-one studies examining the cutaneous microbiome and two studies examining the gastrointestinal microbiome in HS were identified. No studies examining the oral microbiome in HS were identified. A total of 972 patients and 46 healthy controls were included across studies examining the cutaneous microbiome. A total of 100 patients and 36 controls were included across both gut microbiome studies. Coagulase-negative Staphylococcus, anaerobes such as Porphyromonas and Prevotella, and Staphylococcus aureus species were commonly encountered organisms across the included cutaneous microbiome studies. The studies examining the gut microbiome were limited, with one small study demonstrating an alteration in the gut microbiome composition compared to controls. The other study found no alteration to the gut microbiome in patients with HS compared to those with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and HS, and IBD and/or psoriasis.

Research should be undertaken into the oral microbiome in HS. Further research should be undertaken examining the cutaneous and gut microbiome in HS, and its relationship with documented co-morbidities. Additionally, metagenomics-focused studies may help identify the relationship between microorganisms and host, and this may shed light on new pathways of disease pathogenesis. This may help identify potential future therapeutic targets.



This article is published with digital features to facilitate understanding of the article. You can access the digital features on the article’s associated Figshare page. To view digital features for this article go to 10.6084/m9.figshare.13182875.

Hidradenitis suppurativa (HS) is a chronic autoinflammatory skin condition characterised by recurrent abscesses and nodules in intertriginous anatomical sites, such as the axilla, groin and gluteal areas [1, 2]. There is associated purulent and malodour discharge from these lesions in many patients, and it may be initially mistaken for an infective process [3]. There is often a significant delay between disease onset and diagnosis, and many cases are only first identified in the moderate to severe stage [4]. The disease has a number of disease and lifestyle associations, including metabolic syndrome, diabetes mellitus, obesity, polycystic ovarian syndrome and smoking [5–10].

The role of the microbiome in HS remains an area under ongoing investigation. The use of antimicrobial agents in HS is a well-established treatment, despite HS now being recognised as an autoinflammatory rather than infective disease [20]. The microbiome has been implicated in the pathogenesis of HS, although the interaction between organisms and host remains to be fully elucidated.

The purpose of this narrative review was to collate and review the available evidence examining the cutaneous, gastrointestinal and oral microbiome in hidradenitis suppurativa.

We have constructed tables (Tables 1,
2,
3) which include the main findings from each included study.

Twenty-one studies examining the cutaneous microbiome and two studies examining the gastrointestinal microbiome in HS were identified. A total of 972 patients and 46 healthy controls were included across studies examining the cutaneous microbiome. A total of 100 patients and 36 controls were included across both gut microbiome studies.

See Tables
1 and
2.

See Table
3.

No studies were identified which examined the oral microbiome in HS.

In the studies which utilised bacterial culture in their study design, Staphylococcus aureus, coagulase-negative Staphylococcus and Enterobacteriaceae species were commonly cultured [27–29, 32, 33]. In the studies utilising 16S and 18S to examine the cutaneous microbiome, Porphyromonas and Prevotella had increased abundance [21, 23, 24]. Porphyromonas, Prevotella and Corynebacterium were the most commonly encountered bacteria in HS tunnels [23]. Thomas et al. found that in patients with recalcitrant HS Corynebacterium, S. epidermidis, S. aureus and Prevotella were the most frequent organisms [31]. One study utilised immunofluorescence (IF) and fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FSH), which demonstrated the presence of biofilms, some of which were associated with P. acnes [2]. However, Ring et al. found a reduction in P. acnes in involved HS tissue compared to control [25].

Eppinga et al. found no decrease in F. prausnitzii or increase in E. coli in participants with HS in comparison to the other included groups, none of which included healthy controls [41]. Kam et al. found an increased abundance of Bilophila and Holdemania and decreased abundance of Firmicutes, Lachnobacterium and Veillonella in patients with HS compared to controls [40]. However, this study was very small, with only three participants each in the HS and control groups.

Both Porphyromonas and Prevotella are most prevalent organisms on mucosal surfaces, including in the oral cavity, colon and tongue [42]. Porphyromonas and Prevotella in the skin microbiome may contribute to the pathogenesis of HS through upregulation of antimicrobial peptide (AMP) secretion, which in turn increases keratinocyte proliferation and recruitment of macrophages and neutrophils [43]. Porphyromonas gingivalis is an oral periodontopathogen and is implicated in the pathogenesis of periodontitis. Relevant virulence factors in HS include biofilm formation and dipeptidyl peptidase 4 activity [44]. Prevotella largely activates T helper 17 (Th17) immune responses, and has been shown to increase production of IL-23 and IL-1, both of which are implicated in the pathogenesis of HS [45–47]. Riverain-Gillet et al. demonstrated the presence of Porphyromonas and Prevotella in normal controls, but only in 22% of this group (as an anaerobic cluster) in comparison to 61% of affected individuals [21]. Ring et al. did not find the presence of Porphyromonas in normal controls [25].

The role of the microbiome in the pathogenesis of HS remains unclear. There is evidence that inflammation is the triggering event to follicular occlusion and subsequent follicular rupture and fistula formation [62]. Whether the dysbiosis and alternations in the local microbiome are pathogenic and a driver in the underlying inflammatory processes, or a result, remains to be elucidated.

Defining what constitutes the “normal” cutaneous microbiome is an evolving area. The microbiota predominantly vary by anatomical location on the skin, rather than ethnicity or the use of common topical products [63]. The Human Microbiome Project is a large-scale microbiome study aimed at characterising the “normal” human microbiome across a number of anatomical environments including the skin [64, 65]. It is unlikely that a true normal microbiome exists, and it is likely to be varied within and across individuals at various stages of time. Therefore, comparisons with “normal healthy” controls may introduce identification bias into interpretation of the results.

Biofilms and their role in disease pathogenesis of HS were outside of the scope of this review article but are deserving of mention in this discussion. It has been established that HS is a disease characterised by biofilm formation, which may be a significant trigger in the organism–host pathophysiological response [76, 77]. Ring et al. demonstrated the increased bacterial aggregates via PNA-FSH in chronic HS lesions, and the presence of biofilms in both lesional and perilesional tissue [77]. Several bacteria have been shown to have biofilm formation as an established virulence factor, such as Porphyromonas and S. epidermidis [44, 78]. The treatment resistance of HS to antibiotics, particularly in moderate to severe disease, may be in part due to the presence of biofilms [12].

The influence of treatment on the local microbiome is an area worthy of exploration. Adalimumab is an anti-TNFα which has been shown to be an effective treatment in the treatment HS [79]. Studies have demonstrated that treatment with adalimumab causes alterations in the gut microbiome towards eubiosis in patients with CD [80, 81]. Treatment of psoriasis with biologics has been demonstrated to cause alterations in the local microbiome, shifting it back towards the microbial composition of healthy controls [82]. However, alterations to the oral, gut and cutaneous microbiome in patients with HS undergoing treatment (including with biological agents) have not yet been investigated. This may help identify if the cutaneous and gastrointestinal microbiome alter with treatment, and whether this precedes or follows clinically measurable improvement in skin lesions. On the basis of research in CD and psoriasis, we would anticipate that an alteration towards eubiosis in the cutaneous and gastrointestinal microbiome in HS would be demonstrated. However, whether changes towards eubiosis will be accompanied by clinical response in patients with HS to treatment remains to be known.

As discussed, future studies examining the cutaneous microbiome of HS should include both biopsies for NGS and swabs or aspirates for traditional culture methods, and use metagenomics where possible, with a view to the implementation of whole genome sequencing and transcriptomics. The use of swabs and traditional culture methods is important to continue to include in future research, given that this represents a low-cost and mostly non-invasive test for future clinical practice when assessing alterations in the microbiome before and after treatment as potential markers of treatment response. Examining the oral, gastrointestinal and cutaneous microbiomes concurrently in individuals with and without HS would assist in understanding the alterations towards dysbiosis, and potentially provide targets for future therapeutic interventions.

No funding or sponsorship was received for this study or publication of this article.

All named authors meet the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE) criteria for authorship for this article, take responsibility for the integrity of the work as a whole, and have given their approval for this version to be published.

Dr Kirsty Wark has received a research grant from Sun Pharma and has undertaken paid work for AbbVie. Professor Geoffrey Cains has received research grants from Sun Pharma and AbbVie. He has been a paid speaker for the AbbVie Pharmaceutical company.

This article is based on previously conducted studies and does not contain any new studies with human participants or animals performed by any of the authors.

Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no datasets were generated or analyzed during the current study.

