The Microbiome and the Gut‐Liver‐Brain Axis for Central Nervous System Clinical Pharmacology: Challenges in Specifying and Integrating In Vitro and In Silico Models

The complexity of integrating microbiota into clinical pharmacology, environmental toxicology, and opioid studies arises from bidirectional and multiscale interactions between humans and their many microbiota, notably those of the gut. Hosts and each microbiota are governed by distinct central dogmas, with genetics influencing transcriptomics, proteomics, and metabolomics. Each microbiota's metabolome differentially modulates its own and the host's multi‐omics. Exogenous compounds (e.g., drugs and toxins), often affect host multi‐omics differently than microbiota multi‐omics, shifting the balance between drug efficacy and toxicity. The complexity of the host‐microbiota connection has been informed by current methods of in vitro bacterial cultures and in vivo mouse models, but they fail to elucidate mechanistic details. Together, in vitro organ‐on‐chip microphysiological models, multi‐omics, and in silico computational models have the potential to supplement the established methods to help clinical pharmacologists and environmental toxicologists unravel the myriad of connections between the gut microbiota and host health and disease.

One of the grand challenges facing both clinical pharmacology and environmental toxicology in the decade of the 2020s will be to integrate into their intellectual frameworks the explosion of knowledge regarding microbial communities residing within many human tissues and fluids, individually described as a microbiota and collectively as the microbiome. 1 To quote a recent review, “the human microbiome … is widely accepted as a major factor that drives the interpersonal variation in therapeutic response.” 2 Microbial cells and human cells have about a 1:1 numeric ratio, but there is a 1:100 ratio of human‐to‐microbial genes (~ 20,000 human genes compared with 1 million microbial genes 2 ). Organs‐on‐chips (OoCs), that is, 2D and 3D human tissue constructs typically grown in perfused, microfluidic devices using primary, tissue‐resident adult stem cells, or induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) to create microphysiological systems (MPS), 3 , 4 are one of the newest tool sets being introduced into clinical pharmacology and toxicology. 5 , 6 Although they are increasingly recognized as being able to recapitulate enough tissue or organ functions to recapitulate a functional unit and serve as useful in vitro human models for quantitative systems pharmacology, 4 their full potential for studying host‐microbiome interactions has yet to be realized. This review first examines microbiota‐host interactions, exogenously driven microbiota composition perturbations, and treatment outcomes that depend upon microbiota composition, all from the perspective of clinical pharmacology. The review then discusses efforts and opportunities to use the emerging methods of in silico microbiota modeling, multi‐omics, and organ‐on‐chip technology to clarify the factors that govern human‐microbiome‐drug interactions and to improve microbiota‐dependent treatments. (Given the speed with which these three fields are growing, we were unable to include full citations and in‐depth discussion of several subtopics in the body of this review. Additional discussion and references are included in the Supplementary Information , which is structured to parallel the main sections in the body of the review.)

The breadth of the topics touched upon in this review indicates the importance of the microbiome in the next decade of clinical pharmacology. The integration of the microbiome into clinical pharmacology and environmental toxicology should expand our understanding of human development, disease, and aging, identify important environmental toxicants, and create opportunities for the development of new drugs. We now examine significant factors that affect the human‐microbiome interaction, explore external influences on the microbiome, and discuss decoding microbiome‐human interactions, with particular emphasis on the M‐GLIBA.

As shown in Figure 1 , the interactions between the microbiome and the human can occur at levels that span the genome, transcriptome, proteome, metabolome, cells, tissues, organs, and organ systems. The signals that connect humans and their microbiomes are carried by physical contact or the vascular, nervous, gastrointestinal, and lymphatic systems. The signals can go in either or both directions. The metabolome of the microbiome comprises chemicals that are termed postbiotics. In the Supplementary Information , we discuss in detail the primary postbiotics that alter the host's physiological state: tryptophan metabolites, bile acids, SCFAs, and immune system signaling.

The gut microbiota postbiotics have multiple means for influencing the CNS through the enteric and vagus nerves, the hypothalamic‐pituitary‐adrenal (HPA) axis, and microglia. 17 , 38 , 39 , 40

The enteric nervous system (ENS) provides local control of digestive functions and an intimate connection between the stromal cells of the GI tract and the autonomic nervous system. The Supplementary Information provides citations to studies that show how (i) the ENS regulates enteric processes that include immune response, detecting nutrients, motility, microvascular circulation, intestinal barrier function, and epithelial secretion of fluids, ions, and bioactive peptides, (ii) the gut microbiota regulates maturation of the adult ENS via enteric serotonin networks, and (iii) how the vagus nerve, connected to all of the layers of the digestive wall, serves as the functional connection between the CNS and the ENS.

Inflammasomes are cytosolic signaling complexes in the innate immune response and epithelial barrier tissues that activate in response to microbial and endogenous threats. NLRP3 inflammasomes are activated in the gut epithelium through microbiota‐fermented SCFAs. In addition, activated NRLP6 in the gut epithelium modulates microbiota composition, which may induce dysbiosis. Activated NLRP3 inflammasomes, activated NLRP6 inflammasomes, and increased amounts of pro‐inflammatory cytokines, such as IL‐1β, IL‐6, and IL‐18 proteins, are implicated in the development of major depressive disorders. 38

Microglia dysfunction is associated with AD and Parkinson's disease, autism spectrum disorder, and depression. Microglia overactivation by environmental toxins and endogenous proteins promotes the synthesis of reactive oxygen species, which can lead to neurotoxicity and the development of neurodevelopmental diseases. 17 For example, microglia influence the development of AD by inhibiting amyloid‐β clearance while promoting amyloid‐β deposition, which, in turn, leads to release of pro‐inflammatory mediators, such as reactive oxygen species and NF‐κB. 38 Important for development is the effect of gut microbiota on the morphology and gene expression of microglia. Gut microbiota‐derived SCFAs, particularly butyrate, alter the maturation and function of microglia and the permeability of the blood‐brain barrier (BBB). 41

The HPA axis controls the body's reactions to stressors. 39 , 42 Diet, stress, or antibiotic‐induced inflammation of the GI tract triggers the release of cytokines and neurotransmitters, which stresses the microbiome and leads to increased permeability of both the intestinal epithelium and the BBB to drugs and toxins. Pro‐inflammatory cytokines activate the HPA axis, which acts to reduce inflammation. The hypothalamus releases corticotropin‐releasing factor, which then triggers the release of adrenocorticotropic hormone in the adenohypophysis of the pituitary gland. Adrenocorticotropic hormone acts to reduce the pro‐inflammatory cytokine signal. Hyperactivity and dysregulation of the HPA axis are associated with major depression disorder and anxiety. 39 , 42

One can appreciate the complexity of the human‐microbiome relationship by studying how the microbiome evolves after birth and affects maturation of the GI epithelium during the establishment of the normal symbiotic relationship. 43 Molecular signals from the gut can modify a breadth of neurodevelopmental processes in the enteric system and the CNS. 44 , 45 It has been shown that the maternal gut microbiota can influence the prenatal development of the BBB of germ‐free mice, resulting in an increase in BBB permeability that persists into adulthood, and that introduction of a pathogen‐free microbiome would tighten the BBB. 46 The initial colonization of the gut microbiome modulates brain development and adult behavior. 47 One must also appreciate the potential implications of the disruption of these developmental processes by drugs or environmental toxins that affect the microbiome, which, in turn, could complicate precision medicine unless adequate quantification tools are developed.

As we stated in the introduction, the composition of the microbiota varies between different layers and regions of the GI tract. Specific examples are provided in the Supplementary Information .

Central to this new frontier in clinical pharmacology is the need to understand how to effect changes in the microbiome for the good of the human host, and how conventional drugs and both environmental and industrial toxins may alter the microbiome to the detriment of the human.

Learning how nutrients and xenobiotics, such as drugs, probiotics, and bioactive compounds in the diet or the exposome, 48 affect the ENS, autonomic nervous system, and CNS is of utmost importance for understanding how the gut microbiota influence CNS disorders. Xenobiotic metabolism has potential effects on gut microbiota composition and health outcomes. Microbes can metabolize drugs, and drugs can alter the composition of the gut microbiota. 49 The gut microbiota can be affected by exposure to heavy metals, pesticides, nanoparticles, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, dioxins, furans, and polychlorinated biphenyls. 50 There are two primary ways that the gut microbiome influences the metabolism of xenobiotics: direct metabolism in the gut and indirect control of liver xenobiotic metabolism. The direct mechanisms include activation (i.e., prodrugs, detoxification or deactivation of xenobiotics, and direct binding of bacteria to xenobiotics). The indirect mechanisms include enterohepatic cycling, the process by which xenobiotics are inactivated in the liver and reactivated in the gut by microbes by deconjugation, postbiotic interactions with enzyme kinetics, and alteration of the expression of various cytochrome P450s in the host liver. 13 Please refer to the Supplementary Information for additional details.

Probiotics are bacteria that are introduced to the gut for beneficial effects, typically administered orally or through stool transplantation. Prebiotics are nutrients that are indigestible to the host but promote the growth of beneficial bacteria populations. Synbiotics act to incorporate both probiotics and prebiotics to further promote the beneficial effects of probiotics. When used for therapy, these three supplements can positively regulate gut microbiota composition for improved treatment outcomes. 14 The Supplementary Information contains specific examples of probiotics, prebiotics, and synbiotics.

The FDA is beginning to address the “science and regulation of live microbiome‐based products used to prevent, treat, or cure diseases in humans.” 51 This is distinct from the possibility that the genotype of a patient's existing microbiome might affect the patient's response to a drug. 2 Already, the FDA includes pharmacogenomic information in drug labeling to inform, for example, drug exposure and clinical response variability, risk for adverse events, and drug mechanisms of action. 52 A 2008 analysis of pharmacogenomic biomarker information in FDA‐approved drug labels for 1945–2005 found that 10% of the 1,200 drug labels contained pharmacogenomic information, and 52 (4% of all labels) referred to microbial genomic biomarkers. 53 It is not clear from this study how many of these were related to infectious agents rather than the commensal microbiome, but it is reasonable to assume that the latter were in the minority. It is inevitable that as the field of pharmacometabonomics matures, biomarkers will be identified that could indicate or contraindicate the use of a drug based upon a particular metabotype (i.e., reflecting the metabolic activity of both the patient and the commensal microbiota). Whether this added complexity will represent a regulatory challenge remains to be seen.

Diet and lifestyle are two of the largest factors controlling gut microbiota composition. Diet has the potential to rapidly alter microbiota composition based on fat, protein, and fiber intake. 54 High consumption of red meat is associated with increased levels of carnitine and choline (molecules included in Figure 1 ), which are converted to trimethylamine (TMA) by the gut microbiota, which is, in turn, converted to trimethylamine N‐oxide (TMAO) by flavin‐containing monooxygenase in the liver. Other factors associated with increased TMA/TMAO production with red meat consumption include enhanced nutrient density of dietary TMA precursors and reduced renal excretion of TMAO. 55 Increased levels of TMAO are linked to nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, coronary artery disease, chronic kidney disease, and type 2 diabetes. 56 , 57 Western diets, with their high meat content, show an increase in activity of β‐glucuronidase, an enzyme involved with rescuing liver‐metabolized morphine and returning it to its original neuroactive form. 58 The Supplementary Information discusses the Western and Mediterranean diets, intermittent fasting, the ketogenic diet, and the microbiome of professional athletes.

Although diet modulates microbiota composition, it does not fully control how microbiota compositions evolve. The microbiota composition of individuals has low convergence between individuals (i.e., beta diversity), even those on the same diet, 59 which, in turn, may constrain the success of precision medicine until there are better methods to both characterize the complexity of the gut microbiota 60 and predict specific microbiota‐drug‐host interactions. 61

Drugs are one the largest xenobiotics of interest. When exposed to 21 drug cocktails of different combinations of 271 drugs, 76 gut microbiota species were able to metabolize two‐thirds of the applied drugs. 29 The host metabolizes drugs primarily in the liver through oxidative and conjugative reactions, whereas gut bacteria utilize hydrolytic and reduction reactions. (Drug metabolism in other organs complicates the situation, but this is beyond the scope of our review.) Gut microbiota and drugs interact in a variety of ways. In addition to direct drug‐induced alteration of the gut microbiota composition or function, the gut microbiota can activate, inactivate, or reactivate drugs, or generate toxic metabolites from drugs. In addition, the gut microbiota can have indirect effects on the host's bioavailability and response to a drug, primarily through modulation of a host's immune and metabolic systems. Genetics and exogenous factors, like diet, also play a role in how the gut microbiota interacts with and metabolizes drugs. 62 The gut microbiota affects drug efficiency both directly and indirectly through multiple mechanisms, 2 , 63 as discussed in greater detail in the Supplementary Information .

Clearly, the microbiome presents new pharmaceutical opportunities. As a harbinger of a possible explosion in microbiome pharmacology, a recent news story presents 15 examples of small molecules being developed by a dozen or more companies to target microbes or host microbe interactions. 69

Opioids provide important and timely examples of how drugs can interact with multiple tissues, different cellular phenotypes, and gut microbiota, thereby contributing to the complex system of overlapping feedback loops shown in Figure 1 . The spinal cord and vagus nerve carry visceral pain signals that arise from nociceptor activation in the thorax, abdominal and pelvic visceras, and the nervous system and that can become sensitized under chronic pain conditions. 70 Decades of research have focused on the mechanisms of opioid analgesia and tolerance within the CNS, implicating glial cells and the release of inflammatory cytokines in an anti‐analgesic role.

It is important to note that allosteric modulators of muscarinic acetylcholine receptors are being developed that may enable regulation of the addictive and executive dysfunction aspects of substance use disorders. 96 How these drugs interact with the M‐GLIBA and the microbiome would be a worthy area of inquiry.

The interactions we have described provide ample opportunity for clinical pharmacologists to develop new microbiome‐related drugs to treat CNS diseases. The readily accessible postbiotics and the chemicals in the human metabolome together provide signals for nondestructive and noninvasive assessment of the state of the Vitruvian human for both diagnosis and evaluation of pharmacological control.

In the context of precision medicine, genetics are a large factor in adverse drug reactions, which can vary due to drug, patient, and disease. 97 Human genetics account for 20–95% of variation of drug response, which is dependent on the context of treatment: the type of disease and the prescribed medication. 2 Variance of drug action, fate, efficacy, and toxicity between different individuals is a major concern for pharmacology and personalized medicine. The postgenomic revolution popularized the practice of using pharmacogenetics, where treatment variance is explained by genetic variance between patients. Akin to pharmacogenetics, the emerging field of pharmacomicrobiomics explains treatment variance by variance in a patient's gut microbiota composition. 62 , 98 Host genetics play a role in gut microbiota composition, active microbial enzymes, and effects of dietary intake. 66 Today, pharmacomicrobiomics is currently limited by inadequately validated causal relationships between gut microbiota and host and the difficulty of culturing different bacterial species in the laboratory. 66

Drug metabolism in the host is dependent on the complex, tripartite interaction of gut microbiota, host lifestyle, and host genetics. 62 , 101 Integrating pharmacogenomics with pharmacomicrobiomics enables a higher understanding of patient‐specific adverse reactions to drugs. Genetic influences cannot be changed, but microbiomic influences can be modified by altering the gut microbiota composition to the extent allowed by host genetics. Researchers focusing on how metabolic phenotype can lead to variability in treatment outcomes have coined the term “pharmacometabonomics,” 102 defined as “the study of the metabolic response of organisms to disease, environmental change, or genetic modification.” 103 The numerous interactions in Figure 1 manifest the complexity and suggest the challenge of inferring the nature of the interactions from measurement of the metabotype.

There is a lack of mechanistic understanding of how the host and microbiome interact. Many microbial species cannot be cultivated in the laboratory and, hence, are difficult to observe. Metabolic interactions, as reported by the metabotype, are also currently difficult to observe and hard to interpret, so quantitative modeling has been used to elucidate these interactions. Computational methods, such as ordinary differential equation modeling, statistical comparison of microbiota, constraint‐based reconstruction and analysis, Boolean networks, and agent‐based modeling have been used to understand microbiota metabolism, microbiota perturbations due to drugs, and microbiota‐host interactions. 61 Partial differential equation models could include spatial gradients in nutrients, metabolites, and metabolic activity, as has already been done for the distributed electrical activity in the intestine. 104 Modeling the M‐GLIBA is clearly a multiscale problem with multidimensional complexity, spanning molecular interactions, intracellular and extracellular signaling, cells, tissues, organs, and organ systems, with times spanning from nanoseconds for molecular dynamics to years for aging. A systems approach is necessary for understanding and treating CNS diseases, and the merging of pharmacology with systems biology has created the field of quantitative systems pharmacology. 4 , 5 , 105 The problems only become harder with the need to incorporate the microbiome. Fritz et al. 106 review the current status of in silico models. More details and references are provided in the Supplementary Information .

The advantage of the computational approach is that once mechanism‐based models of host‐microbiome interactions and microbiome‐microbiome interactions have been created, it will be straightforward to examine a large number of combinations of host and microbiota genomes to address pressing questions in pharmacomicrobiomics and pharmacometabonomics that will arise when precision medicine is applied to a single patient rather than a patient population. One hopes that the mechanisms that drive the model will be sufficiently detailed to support appropriate interactions between the species that might have been modeled in isolation—at present, there is no guarantee that the interactions will exhibit linear, commutative, associative, or other properties that would support simple overlaying of individual models to create one for the whole patient. As with many computational models of biological systems, the greater challenge is to obtain the data required first to parameterize and then validate the model as accurately representing clinical physiology. 4 Notably, there is the obvious difficulty in obtaining detailed, quantitative descriptions of microbiota sequestered deep within that patient's GI system that might be addressed using single or coupled organ chips. Hence, our discussion turns to assays and OoCs.

Detailed characterization of the interactions in Figure 1 between the microbiome and the GLIBA will be demanding, to say the least, and will involve genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, lipidomics, interactomics, etc. Today, untargeted metabolomics can identify the metabolites of microbial species, and enrichment analysis allows mapping the bacterial genome to drug metabolism. 29 The human protein‐protein interactome alone is daunting, and the full capture of Figure 1 will require specification of the relationship of large numbers of both human and microbial proteins and metabolites. Although untargeted multi‐omic assays are advancing rapidly, the mere connection between the human proteome and metabolome is in its infancy. At the most reductionist level, the annotation of the interactions in Figure 1 represents a scientific grand challenge that would require a decade or more of effort because of the diversity of the interactions of totally different classes of chemical species. Obviously, work will proceed with whatever level of annotation of the interactions is available.

Frameworks are being established to develop and curate the metagenomic profiles of the microbiome 107 ; however, even limited assays are demanding. Analysis of gut microbiota involves identification of present taxa, analysis of alpha (within the same sample) and beta diversity (between samples) within the microbiota, statistical analysis of gut microbiota with sample metadata, network analysis, biomarker discovery, and functional analysis of the microbiome and metabolomics. 108 It is difficult to identify the relevant bacterial taxa in different diseases. For example, there is no consensus on which bacterial taxa are most prevalent for major depression disorder. This disparity has roots in methodologic differences, sample differences, and the complex microbiota‐host interactions. 59 However, multiple assays exist for measuring the ADMET and other properties of the gut microbiota‐drug interaction. 109 Culture collection and ex vivo incubations are two methods for collecting a gut microbiota sample. Fecalase preparation, a cell‐free fecal extract with microbial enzymes, enables analysis of microbiota‐mediated drug metabolism. Microbial RNA‐seq can be used to identify which pathways are active in microbes, and host RNA‐seq can be used for identifying which pathways are modulated by microbiota action. Genetics are difficult to study in the gut microbiota, given the inability to genetically manipulate most microbial species present in the gut. Two methods that are commonly applied are comparative genomics and functional genomics. Gene knockouts can be used for model gut microbes, such as Escherichia and Bacteroides. Microbiota profiling can be utilized for identifying drug‐responsive microbes. Cell culture models, gnotobiotic models, and antibiotic‐knockdown models are used to observe microbiota interactions. Cell cultures are often inaccurate, so in vivo gnotobiotic models, which have well‐defined microbiotas, are preferred. The creation of a gnotobiotic model involves putting specific microbes into germ‐free animals to enable investigation of the drug interactions of specific microbes in vivo. Gnotobiotic models are expensive, so antibiotic knockdown can be used as an alternative, but there are issues with reproducibility and the disparity between nonhuman host microbiota and human microbiota. 101 An important question is the extent to which some of these limitations can be overcome with in vitro, organ‐on‐chip microphysiological models.

Many studies of the gut microbiota are hard to reproduce due to the complications of sample acquisition and preparation, analytical methods, variability between individual human and animal models, dosage, duration of exposure, and cost. 50 The most important feature required by an M‐GLIBA model is two key barriers (at the minimum): the GI epithelium and the BBB. Fritz et al. 106 provide a compact but very useful review of experimental models. Accepted models for the M‐GLIBA include germ‐free mice, antibiotic‐treated mice, and clinical data. 41 Of these, germ‐free mice are the most expensive to maintain due to the required sterile conditions for the life of the animal. 41 Studying how postbiotics affect drugs taken orally can be accomplished with clinical data, but this is challenging due to the high variance of the gut microbiota and external factors, such as use of other drugs, tobacco, alcohol, and undeclared substance of abuse. 41 In vitro gut chemostats can be used to culture and analyze microbial communities. 110 , 111 Given the limitations of the existing models and the expanding needs of clinical pharmacology and environmental toxicology, there is an obvious need for compact, sterile, interconnected in vitro models of the M‐GLIBA using human cells and suitable for high‐content optical screening and untargeted multi‐omic analyses.

One of the driving motivations for OoCs is that the cellular microenvironment for the seeded cells, often as 3D matrices, more closely replicates the organ than a 2D plastic Petri dish or well plate. Another is to have an appropriate match between cellular and perfusate volumes so as to support realistic paracrine and juxtacrine signaling and external quantification of these signals. 35 This emerging technology is well suited to the study of individual organs (as well as the GLIBA). Figure 4b shows how a limited number of independent organ chips can be functionally interconnected by manual or auto‐pipetted transfer of conditioned media from one bioreactor to the input of another, something that has been accomplished with remarkable success. 119 The third approach, shown in Figure 4c , is to have each OoC physically interconnected to the others. The bioreactor effluent from one is automatically directed to another, and a universal culture medium is recirculated with appropriate exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide and continually refreshed at as low a rate as is required to support organ‐chip metabolism: without a kidney to excrete toxins and metabolites, the same fraction of media would have to be regularly withdrawn and replaced, possibly confounding the concentration of key circulating factors.

The addition of a microbiome to a gut‐on‐a‐chip is critical for understanding the interactions in Figure 1 . The first demonstration of this was by the Ingber group, 120 whose gut‐on‐a‐chip supported periodic stretching of the Caco‐2 GI epithelial cells that were cultured on a porous elastomeric polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) membrane. Their devices supported the aerobic culture of Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG for longer than a week. Subsequent studies 37 , 121 provided a more robust characterization of the structure and function of the cultured Caco2 cells, their transformation to a complex villi‐like surface topography, and reconstitution into multiple cell types (absorptive, enteroendocrine, Paneth, and goblet cells) with appropriate polarization, and mucous production. The devices supported coculture with both commensal and pathogenic, noncommensal strains of Escherichia coli bacteria.

Hence, it is reasonable to conclude that each of the organ chips required to reconstitute the M‐GLIBA has been demonstrated individually. The next challenge is to successfully couple multiple chips while maintaining flow rates, concentrations, and sterility. 3 , 35

Although many of the corporate ventures in OoCs are focusing on single‐organ chips for drug screening, there is much interest in using coupled‐chip MPS models for ADMET to study situations in which metabolism of a metadrug or drug by one organ creates a drug that treats or toxifies another organ. For first‐pass metabolism studies, it is also important to include the gut. 124 , 125 Other multi‐organ MPS models, including recent studies that include a gut chip, are summarized in the Supplementary Information .

We note that there has been minimal discussion in the MPS community about the challenges of adding more than a single immune cell type (macrophages in the gut, Kupffer cells in the liver, tissue‐resident lymphocytes in the kidneys, microglia in the brain, etc.), 126 and there are significant, unresolved issues with creating innate immune systems from a single line of iPSCs, as would be required to avoid HLA/MHC incompatibilities that might trigger a graft‐vs.‐host response in an immune‐enabled MPS. That said, the innate immune system, in the form of tissue‐resident macrophage‐like cells, can reproduce many important inflammatory and oxidative‐stress responses.

Recent reviews have well summarized the current state of lab‐on‐a‐chip and pharm‐on‐a‐chip in the determination of PK, PD, toxicokinetic, and toxicodynamic parameters of target drugs. 127 , 128 Although the initial motivation for the DARPA, NCATS, and FDA MPS programs was to address unanticipated toxicity, drug failures due to toxicity are now less common than failures in efficacy, and, as a result, it is recognized that MPS approaches will provide a greater return on investment when focused on drug mechanism of action and PK/PD. 3 Much of the effort by the MPS community to date has been to demonstrate and validate specific tissue chips. As listed in the Supplementary Information , there have been a number of papers addressing drug toxicity and pharmacology, but only a few of the many groups working on OoCs are developing the PD tools that will be needed by clinical pharmacologists and toxicologists to fully utilize tissue chips. This should improve because MPS models are beginning to move from the realm of engineers to that of pharmacologists and toxicologists.

As a final example, we discuss briefly a demonstration of how functionally coupled gut, liver, kidney, and brain tissue chips can inform PDs, shown in Figure 5 . 119 In this experiment, the liver chip was located at the University of Pittsburgh, the gut chip at the Baylor College of Medicine in Houston, the kidney chip at the University of Washington in Seattle, and the neurovascular unit (NVU) chip at Vanderbilt University in Nashville. Although a number of groups have manually or automatically pipetted conditioned media from one tissue chip to another, for this demonstration the investigators simply froze the tissue‐chip effluent and used overnight shipping to transport it to the next organ. Figure 5a shows the various steps in the workflow, including, as appropriate, addition of blank media, mixing of conditioned media, and withdrawal of samples for mass spectrometric analysis.

Of course, this study, conducted > 3 years ago, would be much better were it to be repeated with today's more advanced perfusion control and bioreactor technologies and with an appropriate microbiome. However, the work flow would still resemble that in Figure 5A , whether the mixing and transfer steps were performed manually or automatically. These are complicated assays that will undoubtedly benefit from the coupled‐organ technologies currently under commercial development by TissUse, Hesperos, and CN Bio Innovations, among others.

The growth in our understanding of the microbiome and the absence of any end in sight in the breadth and volume of its literature add urgency to understanding the complexity that the microbiome brings to clinical pharmacology and environmental toxicology. Forsythe et al. 130 provide an excellent review of and commentary on the state of research into the biology, biochemistry, and neuroscience that govern the microbiota‐gut‐brain axis. They discuss in detail the neuroscience of the bidirectional information transfer from the microbiome through the enteric nervous system, vagal and spinal nerves, and the brain, emphasizing the importance of the identification of a nicotinic intramural sensory synapse between the sensory neurons in the wall of the gut and the vagal neurons. They present a reasoned analysis of the relative merits and disadvantages of human vs. animal models. They do not address in any depth clinical pharmacology, environmental toxicology, or opioid/inflammation, or the possible role of tissue chips as in vitro models that are the subjects of this review. They do offer an important cautionary warning: “Communication between gut and brain depends on both humoral and nervous connections. Since these are bi‐directional and occur through complex communication pathways, it is perhaps not surprising that while striking observations have been reported, they have often either not yet been reproduced or their replication by others has not been successful.”

This lengthy review and its detailed Supplementary Information attempt to bring to clinical pharmacology and environmental toxicology a preview of what microphysiological systems and mathematical models might deliver over the next decade. To Forsythe et al.'s cautionary statement, we add another: “The fundamental challenge to any attempt to model a biological system in vitro is the complexity of biology, as best exemplified by the hundreds of thousands of different chemicals that are active in any large biological organism. An MPS should be viewed as an approximation of reality, not as an accurate reconstruction. We should not fall into the trap of unrelenting detail and accuracy, lest we fail to recognize that ‘[t]he best material model for a cat is another, or preferably the same cat.’ 150 It is important to recognize that, following Einstein's apocryphal advice to ‘make one's theory as simple as possible but not too simple,’ we should make our organ constructs and integrated MPS [models] as simple as possible but not too simple. Were we to succeed in fully recapitulating a [µHuman] on a chip, it would be too complicated for us to understand! So the role of these systems is to provide us readily fabricated and easily studied model systems to test hypotheses.” 148 The addition of the microbiome to the gut‐liver‐brain axis will only make the experimental problems more challenging, so the experiments need to be simple and well designed, and their shortcomings appreciated, to achieve commensurate rewards.

This work was supported in part by the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health & Human Development (NICHD), the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS), and the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) under Award Number UG3/UH3TR002097, by NIH/NCATS under Award U01TR002383, by NIH/NCATS Contract HHSN271201700044C through CFD Research Corporation, and by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) under Assistance Agreement 83573601. Support for K.H. includes the NIH Training Programs in Biomedical Informatics (T15LM007450) and Environmental Toxicology (T32ES007028). The views expressed in this paper are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the funding agencies, nor do the funding agencies endorse any products mentioned in the paper.

The authors declare no competing interests for this work.

