Does the microbiome and virome contribute to myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome?

Myalgic encephalomyelitis (ME)/chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) (ME/CFS) is a disabling and debilitating disease of unknown aetiology. It is a heterogeneous disease characterized by various inflammatory, immune, viral, neurological and endocrine symptoms. Several microbiome studies have described alterations in the bacterial component of the microbiome (dysbiosis) consistent with a possible role in disease development. However, in focusing on the bacterial components of the microbiome, these studies have neglected the viral constituent known as the virome. Viruses, particularly those infecting bacteria (bacteriophages), have the potential to alter the function and structure of the microbiome via gene transfer and host lysis. Viral-induced microbiome changes can directly and indirectly influence host health and disease. The contribution of viruses towards disease pathogenesis is therefore an important area for research in ME/CFS. Recent advancements in sequencing technology and bioinformatics now allow more comprehensive and inclusive investigations of human microbiomes. However, as the number of microbiome studies increases, the need for greater consistency in study design and analysis also increases. Comparisons between different ME/CFS microbiome studies are difficult because of differences in patient selection and diagnosis criteria, sample processing, genome sequencing and downstream bioinformatics analysis. It is therefore important that microbiome studies adopt robust, reproducible and consistent study design to enable more reliable and valid comparisons and conclusions to be made between studies. This article provides a comprehensive review of the current evidence supporting microbiome alterations in ME/CFS patients. Additionally, the pitfalls and challenges associated with microbiome studies are discussed.



Virtually every surface of the human body is colonized by vast populations of microbes, including prokaryotes, archaea, viruses, fungi and unicellular eukaryotes [1–3]. Bacteria of the phyla Bacteriodetes and Firmicutes dominate the diverse and complex intestinal bacteriome of most animals [4]. Microbial colonization begins rapidly at birth when the infant is first exposed to microbes in its immediate environment. The microbiome increases in diversity during the first 2–4 years of life in response to various hosts (i.e. genetics), and environmental factors including diet, lifestyle and behaviour [5–7]. It is believed that the early colonizers of the infant intestine play a key role in laying the foundations for the development of the complex and diverse adult microbiome and lifelong health [8]. In recent years, the role of microbiome in health of the host and its contribution to disease development has emerged [9–11]. It contributes to various body systems including immunity, metabolism, neurological signalling and homeostasis [12,13]. Describing the microbiome in detail is beyond the scope of this article, however several excellent review papers have been published recently [7,14–17].

The vast majority of microbiome research has to date focused on its bacterial component, largely neglecting the other organisms. However, the influence of these lesser studied organisms, such as viruses are just beginning to be understood, thanks primarily to recent advancements in sequencing technology and bioinformatics capability (Table 1) [18].

Abbreviations: CD, Crohn’s disease; IBD; inflammatory bowel disease.

It is estimated that there are 1031 different DNA and RNA viruses on the planet; many of which remain undiscovered [19]. This collection of viruses (dsDNA, ssDNA, dsRNA and ssRNA) within an ecosystem is defined as the virome [20]. Similar to the bacteriome, the intestinal virome is established from birth and increases in diversity/complexity with age [21]. A large proportion of this complex environment consists of prokaryotic viruses (bacteriophage); with archaea-, human-, plant- and amoeba-infecting viruses found at lower frequencies [20]. The tailed, dsDNA viruses of the Order Caudovirales (Siphoviridae, Myoviridae, Podoviridae) dominate the bacteriophage portion of the virome (Figure 1) [22].

The importance of the intestinal microbiome in maintaining health is an emerging research topic with advances in high-throughput sequencing technology allowing the identification and characterization of microbes that contribute to host health [10,11]. The microbiota has been implicated in immunomodulation, pathogen resistance, maintenance of intestine structure/function and nutrition and host metabolism [12,13]. It provides the host with a physical barrier to pathogen invasion and infection by, for example competitive exclusion and competing for nutrients, occupation of attachment sites and production of antimicrobial proteins [23–26]. Importantly, various microbiome members have been found to contribute to the intestinal metabolome, through for example vitamin synthesis, bile salt metabolism and xenobiotic degradation [27]. There is bidirectional communication between the microbiome and the local host immune system [28]. The immune system influences the composition of the microbiota and gut microbes and their products (e.g. metabolites and microbe associated molecular pattern (MAMPs) molecules) direct immune maturation and the development and possibly maintenance of immune (microbial) tolerance and homoeostasis [29,30].

There is increasing evidence that an imbalance of the intestinal microbiota (dysbiosis) may contribute to the pathogenesis of diseases affecting the gastrointestinal (GI) tract and other organ systems. Dysbiosis is characterized by a detrimental alteration of intestine microbial populations and ecology that can result in the growth and expansion of pathogenic microbes (pathobionts) and the production of factors toxic or harmful to host cells. These alterations are normally held in check by an intact microbiome but dysbiosis can result in the development and/or maintenance of chronic inflammatory infections caused by Clostridium difficile and Helicobacter pylori, metabolic syndrome and obesity, colorectal cancer, irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) [14,31–34]. The stability of the microbiome is largely influenced by age, behaviour and lifestyle [12,35,36]. It has been hypothesized that intestinal microbial dysbiosis can lead to an imbalance in the immune system, resulting in diseases such as IBD, common variable immunodeficiency and rheumatoid arthritis [37,38]. However, to understand the significance of dysbiosis, it is necessary to establish if microbiome alterations cause, follow, precede or simply correlate with disease onset. Dysbiosis can be precipitated by drugs and medications (i.e. antibiotics), immune dysregulation, age-associated reduction in microbiota diversity, colonization by pathogenic microbes, stress and changes in diet [36,38–41]. The precise trigger or cause of dysbiosis in any disease has yet to be established but is likely to be multifactorial.

Viruses utilize a lytic or lysogenic life cycle. In the lytic life cycle, infected host cells are destroyed during viral replication whereas in the lysogenic life cycle the virus integrates into the host chromosome as a prophage. Lytic phages can have both narrow or broad host ranges, and lysogenic phages can be converted into a lytic cycle in response to environmental stressors such as antibiotics [20]. Lytic phages can alter the microbiome by killing bacterial hosts, providing a competitive growth advantage to bacteria resistant to phages. Prophages encode mobile genetic elements which contribute to horizontal gene transfer between bacteria altering antibiotic resistance, virulence or metabolic pathways [42]. This can provide a competitive advantage by allowing bacteria to metabolize new nutrient sources or acquire antibiotic resistance [43–45]. Temperate phages, able to perform lysogenic or lytic cycle, have been shown to influence the dynamics of biofilms and dispersal by a number of important pathogens such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa (opportunistic pathogen), Streptococcus pneumoniae (e.g. pneumonia) and Bacillus anthracis (e.g. anthrax) [46–48]. For example, the presence of lysogenic phages Bcp1, Wip1, Wip4 and Frp2 in B. anthracis results in the formation of a durable, complex and viable biofilm; allowing prolonged survival of the bacterium [48]. There is a constant shift of phages between lytic and lygosenic forms that is presumed to contribute to microbiome homoeostasis and that a differential spatial distribution of phages is correlated with health.

Alterations in the virome have been implicated as sources of intestinal microbial (prokaryotic) dysbiosis for several different diseases [49–52]. Prophage induction in response to various environmental stressors can induce ‘community shuffling’ which alters the ratio of symbionts to pathobionts creating an imbalance within microbial communities that can lead to occupation of symbiont niches by pathobionts [42]. These events provide an explanation for the raised number of virus-like particles (VLPs, see Figure 2) as well as microbial population shifts in patients with GI-related disorders. Of note, an experimental model of Salmonella typhimurium diarrhoea has shown that inflammation increases lysogenic conversion of prophages [53].

Our own research is focused on developing a mechanistic understanding of the intestine–microbiome–brain axis and the GI tract microbiome in the pathogenesis of the neurological disorder, myalgic encephalomyelitis (ME)/chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) (ME/CFS).

The causative factor(s) of ME/CFS remain elusive resulting in a lack of robust diagnostics and effective treatments [68,69]. The disease onset and progression varies from patient to patient with the onset normally associated with an acute flu-like viral infection, which is either gradual or rapid [68]. Approximately 25% of patients become house- or bed-bound with less than 10% returning to predisease levels of function [70]. The socioeconomic burden of ME/CFS is significant and estimated to be between $17 and $24 billion per annum. This considerable cost is due to direct and indirect effects of the illness, such as healthcare and loss of work for patient and/or family carers [71].

A similar apparent epidemic of poliomyelitis appeared in Akureyri, Iceland between 1948 and 1949. There were striking similarities between this outbreak of atypical poliomyelitis and the one recorded in Los Angeles in 1934, including both overlapping symptoms and occurrence of relapse. This disease was named Iceland (or Akureyri) disease [79]. Sixty-one other outbreaks of a similar disease were reported worldwide between 1934 and 1990 [75]. The most significant outbreak was in 1955 at the Royal Free Hospital in London, where 292 hospital staff were affected by the illness. The disease when fully developed showed features of a generalized infection with involvement of the lymphoreticular system, and widespread involvement of the central nervous system. The mysterious polio-like illness (including the disease at the Royal Free Hospital) was renamed ME and later extended to CFS (ME/CFS) to include a seemingly identical disease [80,81].

In both historical and current cases of ME/CFS persistent fatigue is the dominant and defining symptom, which is accompanied by a range of heterogeneous symptoms that are universally present in all the patients. It is classified by the World Healthy Organization International Classification of Diseases (ICD-10) as a neurological disorder (WHO Reference 93.3). Patients often report delayed exacerbation of symptoms following mental or physical exertion and daily or weekly variations in symptom severity that have a significant impact on day-to-day living [69,82]. A standardized criterion for ME/CFS is urgently needed, with diagnosis relying heavily upon clinical observations and by exclusion of other disorders. This situation is further complicated by the use of different diagnostic criteria within the same country and between different countries. As a result, it is can take several years for sufferers to receive a diagnosis [83–85]. To date, an effective treatment for ME/CFS does not exist, with current treatments aimed at alleviating symptoms [86].

The co-morbidity of ME/CFS and GI symptoms is well documented, with one study reporting 92% of patients exhibiting IBS [87]. Additional studies have reported increased mucosal and systemic levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-6, IL-8, IL-1β and TNFα in patients with coexistent IBS [88,89]. The significant GI symptoms often experienced by ME/CFS patients has led researchers, including ourselves, to investigate the microbiome in these patients. Several studies have reported significant changes in microbiota composition of ME/CFS patients compared with controls [90–92]. However, ME/CFS microbiome studies to date have largely focused on alterations in bacterial populations. The advancement in sequencing technology and emerging influence of the virome on human health has enabled studies of the virome of ME/CFS [18].

We completed a literature search to determine the extent of microbiome research in ME/CFS using the following search terms: ‘Myalgic encephalomyelitis’, ‘Chronic Fatigue Syndrome’, ‘CFS/ME’, ‘ME/CFS’ in combination with ‘virome’, ‘microbiome’, ‘metabolome’, ‘metagenomics’, ‘viromics’ and ‘metabolomics’. The resulting papers were screened according to abstract contents. Articles were excluded if an intervention was used (e.g. probiotics) and measurements not reported prior to the invention. This resulted in 11 papers that had examined the microbiome and/or intestinal metabolome of ME/CFS patients, dating from 1998 to 2017 (Table 2). Due to inconsistencies in study design including small sample sizes, different sequencing platforms and bioinformatics software analyses, microbial sequencing depth and a single time point‘snapshot’ of sampling and analysis; it was not possible to compare the studies statistically. However, from examining the articles individually there is sufficient evidence to support the claim of an altered intestinal microbiome in ME/CFS patients.

Abbreviations: CFS, chronic fatigue syndrome; ME, myalgic encephalomyelitis

Abbreviation: MS, mass spectrometry

Seventeen criteria were either similar or conflicting between studies (microbiome composition). The down arrows represent a decrease in patients and up arrows represent an increase in patients.

As with any microbiome study, it is difficult to determine if the alterations observed cause, precede or correlate with disease. The microbiome of a patient would exhibit disease-specific microbial signatures and general microbial changes due to an unbalanced microbiome [106]. It is important, therefore, to separate microbial alterations associated with an unbalanced microbiome from those associated with a specific disease (microbiome disease biomarkers).

Of the 11 articles selected in our literature search, only 3 examined the intestinal virome of CFS/ME patients (Table 5). Of these, two articles used direct virus detection (e.g. PCR or immunostaining) and one article used a high-throughput sequencing technique (Illumina MiSeq). An increase in bacteriophage richness, particularly Siphoviridae and Myoviridae, in patients was noted in the Giloteaux et al. study [107]. However, this study is statistically underpowered due to its small sample size. Chia and Chia [108] and Frémont et al. [109] used virus detection techniques to examine the presence of eukaryotic viruses within the gastric/intestinal mucosa. These studies reported an increase in parvovirus B19, enteroviral RNA and viral capsid protein 1 in patients. Also of note, Nagy-Szakal et al. [90] used metagenomic based approach on a large (n=50) cohort of patients although they did not perform virome analysis on the dataset. The authors reported significant changes in the bacterial components of the microbiome in ME/CFS patients compared with controls [90]. Virome analysis could be performed with the available date to determine if significant changes are observed in the viral components of ME/CFS patients.

The identification of the bacterial and viral components of the microbiome is an important step forward, as is understanding how the use of nutrients by these microorganisms influences the overall metabolism within the gut. Metabolomics can be used to identify metabolites within the microbiome [110]. Only a handful of studies have attempted to characterize faecal metabolites in ME/CFS patients despite its potential for deciphering microbiome function (Table 6) [93,94,98]. There are significant challenges associated with identifying faecal metabolites due to differing metabolite properties and range of metabolite concentrations in samples [162,163]. A major challenge is not only to identify all metabolites (insufficient reference libraries available) but also to produce metadata (i.e. sample origin, tissue, experimental conditions) in a format that is easily interpreted [166]. The biological interpretation of metabolites as potential disease-associated biomarkers is often challenging as it requires data analysis and integration [167] and targeted and non-targeted metabolomics to dissect the metabolic pathway(s) and origin of metabolite(s) of interest [164]. Currently, 1H NMR is the most used analytical technique for metabolite profiling and is routinely used in clinical or pharmaceutical research and applications [165].

Abbreviations: NMR, nuclear magnetic resonance; HPLC, high performance liquid chromatography

Unfortunately, it is not possible to compare these three metabolomics studies directly because different metabolites were studied. However, it is possible to make general comparisons between metabolites and microbes. For example, Sheedy et al. [94] reported an increase in lactic acid and an increase in Enterococcus faecalis, a lactic acid producing bacteria. Interestingly, Armstrong et al. [93] reported a general increase in the short chain fatty acids (SCFAs) butyrate, isovalerate and valerate. This contradicts the microbiome studies as known SCFA-producing bacteria (Faecalibacterium, Eubacteria, Roseburia and Ruminococcus) were consistently decreased across multiple studies [90–92,107]. A decrease in lactate was also reported in this study [93]. Several bacterial members of the microbiota produce lactate, which is the most common short chain hydroxyl-fatty acid in the intestinal lumen [97,112]. It can be converted into other SCFAs by a subgroup of lactate-fermenting bacterial species. Changes in these lactate-fermenting bacterial species were not noted in the current microbiome studies. Future studies will need to examine microbiome and metabolome alterations in tandem and then integrate the data to reveal a truer picture of microbiome metabolism.

Within recent years, the increased interest in trying to understand the effect of the microbiome on health and disease has resulted in significant advancements in techniques to characterize it [9–11]. In particular, metagenomics is increasingly popular and favoured over sequencing bacterial 16s rRNA due to increased taxonomic sensitivity and potential for functional interpretation. Additionally, established techniques are being applied to microbiome research, such as metabolomics [11,113]. The research at the Quadram Institute Bioscience is focused on optimizing protocols, standardizing microbiome studies and applying this to ME/CFS. There are several pitfalls and challenges associated with microbiome studies, which need to be addressed prior to patient recruitment and sample collection [114]. The considerations that need to be made in designing microbiome studies in ME/CFS and some recommendations are outlined in Figure 3. Below we describe in some detail the particular constraints on microbiome and virome studies in ME/CFS and the approaches that can be taken to mitigate against or overcome them.

A standardized criterion for ME/CFS diagnosis is lacking, with diagnosis relying heavily upon clinical observations and exclusion [83,115]. Multiple diagnosis checklists have been created, with each checklist differing slightly on symptom emphasis and severity [69,83,84]. The International ME criteria and Canadian criteria place greater emphasis on the delayed exacerbation of physical and mental symptoms following exertion. However, it does not exclude psychiatric illness such as depression or anxiety [116,117]. Therefore, it is difficult to determine how many patients recruited have an accurate diagnosis of ME/CFS and how many have been misdiagnosed using inadequate criteria. Several studies have attempted to address this by using multiple diagnostic checklists, with the majority using the 1994 Fukuda diagnostic scale. The severity of ME/CFS is ranked according to impact of illness upon daily life and ranges from mild to very severe. The severity grade given to a patient is subjective and generally given by the diagnosing clinician. Several studies have used patient questionnaires to assess the level of illness [90,91,94,107]. However, four different patient questionnaires were used by four different studies (Short Form 36 Healthy Survey, Multidimensional Fatigue Inventory, Bell’s Disability Scale and McGregor 1995 questionnaire). Due to the multifactorial nature of the disease, standardization in diagnosis and disease severity are imperatives. These are a basic requirement to produce robust and reproducible microbiome studies. It is very difficult to determine if any microbiome differences are due to a true ME/CFS signature or complexities of patient recruitment. Future studies should aim to stratify patients according to disease duration and onset (sudden or gradual).

Although it is often impractical and perhaps impossible to control for all confounding factors within a microbiome study, efforts should be made to account for as many as possible.

As the number of microbiome studies has increased, the need for consistency in sampling techniques and standard operating procedures (SOPs) has also increased. An excellent review of the critical factors for sample collection, storage, transport and ‘gold standard’ techniques for longitudinal microbiome studies in human populations was recently published [114]. The most important considerations for storing microbiome samples are to reduce changes in the original microbiota from sample collection to processing and to keep storage conditions consistent for all samples in a study [133,134]. Sample storage conditions are not always consistent due to study or research group-specific downstream applications and resource limitations. Additionally, considerations are not always taken for preserving anaerobic bacteria within an anaerobic environment. Different studies often store samples at differing temperature (e.g. 4 to −80°C), affecting the long-term preservation of certain bacteria [114]. Additionally, the length of time for which the sample is stored and frequency of freeze/thaw cycles can significantly affect the microbiome composition. For example, Bacteroides is sensitive to freezing and should be processed within 6 weeks of storage (at −80°C) to avoid bacterial degradation [135,136]. The microbiome and ME/CFS studies reviewed here used different sample collection and storage techniques; including storage at <12°C, immediate processing, −20 and −80°C. For logistical reasons, it can be difficult to standardize this across all studies. However, it is important to be aware of these limitations.

Additionally, different DNA extraction techniques have been used as a prelude to sequencing (MoBio PowerSoil DNA isolation kit, QIAmp DNA Stool Mini Kit and DNeasy Blood and Tissue kit). These kits differ in protocol, bead size, reagents used and are likely to introduce unnecessary bias [138].

The development of sequencing, characterization of the bacterial component of the faecal microbiome relied on culture-based techniques that allow the identification of anaerobic and aerobic bacteria using selective or non-selective culture conditions and media; albeit taxonomic resolution and sensitivity is relatively low [12]. However, this approach does inform the cultured organism’s growth requirements and substrate utilization and other physiological parameters, which cannot be obtained from sequence-based approaches [12]. Next-generation sequencing technology now makes it possible to characterize the bacterial microbiome using the 16S rRNA gene ‘fingerprint’ for identification and as an indicator of genetic diversity [4]. The 16S rRNA gene was chosen because of its relatively small size (~1.5 kb) and harbouring enough variation to distinguish between different species, yet enough similarity to assign members belonging to the same larger phylogenetic group (e.g. order, family or phylum) [5,139]. However, this approach has its limitations. It only detects and analyses a short, specific genomic region and taxonomic resolution or functional inference is therefore limited [11]. For example, this assay cannot recognize the different serovars within Salmonella enterica or detect toxin genes that could distinguish pathogenic C. difficle or distinguish pathogenic Escherichia strains from non-pathogenic strains [140]. This is particularly problematic in comparative studies of the microbiome in healthy and diseased states. It also provides no insight into functionality of the bacteriome [11].

To date, only one study has utilized metagenomics in ME/CFS microbiome studies [90]. However, the analysis was incomplete and did not fully exploit the data produced. Whenever possible, metagenomics should be applied to microbiome studies in ME/CFS in order to achieve the required taxonomic resolution to fully examine the bacteriome and virome.

Virus genomes do not encode universally conserved genes such as the 16S or 18S genes of prokaryotes and eukaryotes respectively, and they are genetically highly diverse [142]. Consequently, it is not possible to use metataxonomic approaches such as 16S rRNA gene sequencing to characterize VLPs within an ecosystem [20]. Traditionally, classical approaches of microscopy and cultivation have been used to characterize VLPs isolated from faecal samples originating in the human intestine [143,144]. The only reliable molecular method currently available for surveying the human virome is metagenomics. However, to achieve an adequate sequencing depth, lytic VLPs need to be separated from the faecal material [145,146]. An excellent review describing the human virome and its characterization was recently published [147].

Perhaps the biggest challenge in studying the intestinal virome is the lack of bioinformatics tools for the analysis of sequence data [146,147,161]. To date, there is no easy-to-use pipeline that uses raw reads, can remove host DNA, can search for bacterial contaminants and assign taxonomy and functionality to viruses within the sample. However, efforts are being made to generate such tools. In addition to isolation and sequencing of VLPs, it is possible to identify prophages and the bacterial host(s) from metagenomic sequencing. To accurately study the virome, both techniques should be utilized to study the lytic and lysogenic phages [154,155,157]. The Norwich U.K., ME/CFS research group is currently optimizing and standardizing VLP isolation and DNA/RNA sequencing protocols in addition to developing fit-for purpose viromics pipelines to comprehensively analyse the virome in ME/CFS patients.

Several microbiome studies have been performed on ME/CFS patients in the hope of identifying disease-specific signatures. This disease should be viewed as multifactorial and that the alteration of one body system (e.g. microbiome) may not be the exclusive cause. The dysregulation of the microbiome may be variously placed in a disease progression pathway interfacing with other systems (immune, neuroendocrine and mitochondrial), tipping the body into persistent imbalance. Although studies to date often report conflicting results, microbiome dysbiosis in ME/CFS patients is evident. However, in order to discover disease-specific microbe alterations, future studies need to adopt standardized techniques and analyses. The recent advancements in sequencing technology allows the characterization of the previously neglected virome. As virome research increases, it is becoming clear that the virome can directly and indirectly affect host health, and may play a role in the pathogenesis of ME/CFS. Confirmation of such a role will be largely dependent on the adoption of robust patient selection, reproducible study design and appropriate data analyses by different research groups investigating the microbiome/virome in complex diseases such as ME/CFS.

The authors declare that there are no competing interests associated with the manuscript.

This work was supported in part by Invest in ME to S.R.C. and T.W.; and the Ph.D. funding [grant number R205102 to F.N.)].

F.N. wrote the manuscript with support from S.R.C. and T.W. T.W. also designed the graphical illustrations. S.-Y.H. prepared samples for TEM imaging.

