Host Bias in Diet-Source Microbiome Transmission in Wild Cohabitating Herbivores: New Knowledge for the Evolution of Herbivory and Plant Defense



It is commonly understood that dietary nutrition will influence the composition and function of the animal gut microbiome. However, the transmission of organisms from the diet-source microbiome to the animal gut microbiome in the natural environment remains poorly understood, and elucidating this process may help in understanding the evolution of herbivores and plant defenses. Here, we investigated diet-source microbiome transmission across a range of herbivores (insects and mammals) living in both captive and wild environments. We discovered a host bias among cohabitating herbivores (leaf-eating insects and deer), where a significant portion of the herbivorous insect gut microbiome may originate from the diet, while in deer, only a tiny fraction of the gut microbiome is of dietary origin. We speculated that the putative difference in the oxygenation level in the host digestion systems would lead to these host biases in plant-source (diet) microbiome transmission due to the oxygenation living condition of the dietary plant’s symbiotic microbiome.

IMPORTANCE We discovered a host bias among cohabitating herbivores (leaf-eating insects and deer), where a significant portion of the herbivorous insect gut microbiome may originate from the diet, while in deer, only a tiny fraction of the gut microbiome is of dietary origin. We speculated that the putative difference in the oxygenation level in the host digestion systems would lead to these host biases in plant-source (diet) microbiome transmission due to the oxygenation living condition of the dietary plant's symbiotic microbiome. This study shed new light on the coevolution of herbivory and plant defense.

Host phylogeny and diet are two major factors shaping the animal gut microbiome (1,–4). It is also commonly understood that dietary nutrition influences the composition and function of the animal gut microbiome (5, 6). In nature, herbivorous animal food sources (e.g., plants) harbor a number of the symbiotic microbiome (7, 8). This leads to the question of whether these diet-source microbiomes would survive in the animal intestinal tract and become an integrated part of the animal gut microbiome. The development of the animal gut microbiome includes vertical (e.g., from mothers to offspring) and horizontal (e.g., from the living environment to individuals) transmission (9,–14). However, how diet-source microbiome transmission occurs in nature is still poorly understood.

Insects (e.g., grasshoppers and locusts) belong to invertebrates, and the milu are vertebrates. The oxygenation of insect guts varies from fully aerobic to anaerobic (19), while the milu, a type of ruminant, harbors an anaerobic gut (20). Plants harbor a number of symbiotic microbiomes, the majority of which exist in an aerobic environment (7, 8). Therefore, we hypothesized in this study that there would be a bias in the transmission of diet-source microbiome between the sympatric herbivorous insects (e.g., grasshoppers and locusts) and mammal (e.g., milu) in the wild habitat and that the gut microbiome of grasshoppers and locusts would harbor a higher proportion of diet-source microorganisms, while the milu would harbor a much lower proportion. Moreover, we also investigated diet-source microbiome transmission among other herbivores (insects and mammals) living in both captive conditions and in the natural environment.

We obtained 16S rRNA gene data from 285 samples (Table 1). The main phyla in the diet (81 dietary plant samples and five forage samples) included Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, and Bacteroidetes. The dominant phyla in the gut microbiomes of herbivorous insects (43 pooled samples from leaf-eating grasshoppers, locusts, and Pyralidae) included Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, and Bacteroidetes, while in the sap-sucking cicadas, the main phyla included Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, and Tenericutes. The dominant phyla in herbivorous mammals (89 samples including Père David's deer [milu], musk deer, and rabbits) included Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes (Fig. 1A).

Moreover, the dominant genera in the dietary samples included Pantoea, Pseudomonas, Enterobacter, and Acinetobacter. The dominant genera in herbivorous insects included Pseudomonas, Enterobacter, Acinetobacter, Pantoea, and Lactococcus. In contrast, the dominant genera in herbivorous mammals included Ruminococcaceae UCG 005, Ruminococcaceae UCG 010, Christensenellaceae R7 group, and Bacteroides, and in sap-sucking cicadas, they included “Candidatus Sulcia,” Spiroplasma, Lactococcus, Rickettsia, Bacillus, and Pseudomonas (Fig. 2B). Thus, based on the microbiome composition, we found some common features (relatively high proportion of Proteobacteria, Pseudomonas, Enterobacter, and Pantoea) between the herbivorous insect gut microbiome and diet-source microbiome. Moreover, permutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) using unweighted UniFrac distance showed a significant dissimilarity (P < 0.01) in the gut microbiome community among these host groups.

Although the total number of amplicon sequence variants (ASVs) in the milu gut microbiome was largest (6,033 ASVs in milu, 4,621 in insects, and 1,259 in dietary plants), we found that the gut microbiome of herbivorous insects harbored a greater number of organisms originating from their diet than that harbored by herbivorous milu (Fig. 2). For example, the shared ASVs in the gut microbiome between herbivorous insects and dietary plants was 305 (see Table S2 in the supplemental material) compared with 23 shared (see Table S3 in the supplemental material) between milu and dietary plants (Fig. 2A; see also Fig. S2 in the supplemental material). The ASVs shared between herbivorous insects and dietary plants primarily belonged to the Proteobacteria (Gammaproteobacteria including Pantoea, Kluyvera, Escherichia, and Shigella from the Enterobacteriales; Acinetobacter and Pseudomonas from the Pseudomonadales; and Pseudoalteromonas from the Alteromonadales) and Firmicutes (Bacillus and Exiguobacterium) (see Fig. S3 in the supplemental material). The proportion of the putative diet-source microbiome was significantly higher in the insect gut microbiome (0.50 ± 0.328) than in the milu gut microbiome (0.00 ± 0.011) (nonparametric t test, P < 0.001) (Fig. 2B). This finding indicated that a high proportion of the gut microbiome of herbivorous insects might originate from the symbiotic microbiome of their dietary plants. Finally, the pairwise unweighted UniFrac distance was significantly lower between the insect gut microbiomes and diet-source microbiome than that between the milu gut microbiome and diet-source microbiome (nonparametric t test, P < 0.001) (Fig. 2C). This finding indicated a high similarity between the insect gut microbiome communities and the dietary plant symbiotic microbiome.

Interestingly, the proportion of the aerobic microbiome in the insect gut microbiome and diet-source microbiome was significantly higher than that in the milu gut microbiome (Fig. 3A), while the opposite trend was observed for the respective anaerobic microbiomes (Fig. 3B). We speculated that this could be due to the level of oxygenation in these animal guts (7, 8, 19, 20), and this would explain the survival of the dietary source microbiome in herbivorous insect guts. Therefore, based on this evidence, we conclude that there is evidence for host bias in diet-source microbiome transmission among the gut microbiomes of wild cohabitating herbivores. However, there remained the question of whether there was a common pattern among other herbivorous animals.

Next, we investigated the potential for host bias across different herbivorous animals (including invertebrates [wild Pyralidae insects and cicadas] and vertebrates [captive musk deer and rabbits]) (Fig. 4). We confirmed host bias in diet-source microbiome transmission among gut microbiomes. For instance, the proportion of diet-source microbiome in herbivorous musk deer and rabbits was close to zero. In contrast, the mean proportion in the Pyralidae insects (living in two separate wild regions) was about 25% (Fig. 4). However, the proportion in cicadas, which suck juice and saps from perennial plants, from two wild regions was close to zero. The discrepancy between the Pyralidae insects and cicadas might be partially due to the different feeding habits (leaf eating versus sap sucking). The pairwise unweighted UniFrac distance between the host microbiome and dietary plant symbiotic microbiome was lower in Pyralidae insects than in other animals (including milu, rabbits, and cicadas) (Fig. 4) and further supported our findings regarding host bias in the transmission of diet-source microbiomes.

The development of the animal gut microbiome includes vertical transmission (e.g., from mothers to offspring) and horizontal transmission (9,–14). Previous studies have revealed a putative connection between the host gut microbiome and diet-source microbiome (13, 21, 22). However, in nature, we showed a host bias in the diet-source microbiome. The proportion of diet-source microbiome was higher in some herbivorous insects due to the potential oxygen level in their gut. Thus, we speculated that these diet-source microbiomes would survive in the animal intestinal tract. This study uncovered new evidence that a portion of the animal gut microbiome might be derived from their diet. The amount would be host-specific, depending on the conditions present in their inner intestines.

Plant defense and optimal foraging by herbivores are typical interactions in nature (23, 24). Plant secondary metabolites (PSMs) are considered a defense against pathogens or herbivores (both invertebrate and vertebrate) (24, 25). Herbivores utilize both behavioral methods and physiological strategies to detoxify and limit the harmful effects of PSMs (25,–28). For example, in addition to the digestion of the plant primary compounds (e.g., carbohydrates, proteins, and lipids), herbivores have developed numerous enzymes (e.g., P450s, glutathione S-transferases [GSTs], choline/carboxylesterases [CCEs], and glucuronosyltransferases) to detoxify PSMs (25, 29,–31). Some studies have found that the animal gut microbiome might be involved in the detoxification of PSMs (32, 33). Our previous studies found that Enterobacteriales and Pseudomonadales (belonging to Proteobacteria) in the gut microbiomes of bamboo-eating panda were associated with the detoxification of bamboo PSM (e.g., cyanide compounds) (34, 35). Spartina alterniflora, one of the major dietary plants in this study, also contains cyanide compounds (concentration, about 0.1 μg/g) (34). Many strains from the Enterobacteriales and Pseudomonadales play essential roles in biodegradation and detoxification of PSMs (36,–39). For example, many Pantoea strains are plant pathogens (40, 41), some of which can degrade specific PSMs (tannic acid) and environmental polyphenols (42,–45).

Therefore, we speculated that the simplest and superior way for the adaptation to host-plant interactions might be to harbor select organisms from the dietary plant’s symbiotic microbiome beyond host generated enzymes. In addition, here, we didn't sample all of the animals in the environment or test the hypothesis in all of the animals. Therefore, the current findings are limited to the animals that we investigated (e.g., grasshopper, locust, cicada, Pyralidae, milu, and musk deer).

Here, we uncovered host bias in the diet-source microbiome of cohabitating herbivores and show that a variable portion of the normal animal gut microbiome might be derived from dietary sources. We speculated that the putative difference in the oxygenation level in the host digestion systems would lead to these host-biases in plant-source (diet) microbiome transmission due to the oxygenation living condition of the dietary plant’s symbiotic microbiome. Furthermore, we suggest that future work focuses on functional evaluation of the colonization of the dietary plant symbiotic microbiome in herbivorous insects and tests whether they play an important role in detoxifying and decreasing the negative effects of PSMs.

We collected the sympatric insects (grasshoppers and locusts) and milu fecal samples in the wetlands of Dafeng (Jiangsu Province) (Table 1; see also Table S1 in the supplemental material). The leaves and stems of the major dietary plants were collected at the same time. We also collected samples from captive and wild herbivores (insects and mammals) (Table 1; Table S1). For example, in the bamboo forest in Liyang city, we collected cicadas, Pyralidae, and dietary bamboo samples. In the bamboo forest in Anji city, we collected Pyralidae and dietary bamboo samples. In the forest in Xuzhou city, we collected cicadas and dietary plant samples. In the rabbit breeding center in Dayi city, we collected fresh feces for each rabbit individual and dietary forage samples. During sampling, each cage only has one rabbit; thus, we could collect fresh feces. In the musk deer breeding center in Dujiangyan city, we collected fresh feces for each musk deer individual and dietary plant samples. Each cage only has one musk deer individual, so we could collect fresh feces for each individual. The fresh feces were placed into 15-ml sterile tubes. Because the deer live alone, the feces could be marked to each individual. The forage and plant samples were reserved in aseptic plastic bags.

All instruments and materials were sterilized prior to sampling. The insects were frozen after sampling and then shipped to the lab on dry ice. Each insect was successfully dissected. We cut the whole gut (including the contents) using the dissecting microscope and then transferred the whole gut into 2-ml aseptic centrifuge tubes. Due to the small amount of gastrointestinal content available in a single insect, the gut contents from five individuals were pooled as one insect sample for DNA extraction, and the majority of the 81 insect samples were pooled samples. In this study, in total, we collected 86 samples from the diet (including 81 dietary plant samples and five forage samples) (Table S1). Fresh feces were collected from the herbivorous mammals. All plant samples and fresh feces were frozen (−20°C) upon collection and then shipped on dry ice to the laboratory for analysis.

The FastDNA spin kit for feces (MP, OH, USA) was used to extract microbial DNA from the gut contents and fecal samples once they were thawed at room temperature. The FastDNA spin kit for soil (MP, OH, USA) was used to extract microbial DNA from the plant samples. We used primers 515F (5′-GTGCCAGCMGCCGCGGTAA-3′) and 806R (5′-GACTACHVGGGTWTCTAAT-3′) to amplify the V4 region of the bacterial 16S rRNA gene. The thermocycling reaction conditions were as follows: 95°C for 5 min and 35 cycles of 95°C for 30 s, 55°C for 30 s, and 72°C for 45 s, with a final extension step at 72°C for 10 min. High-throughput sequencing of amplicons was performed using the Illumina MiSeq platform. Sequencing was performed by Mingke Biotechnology Co., Ltd. (Hangzhou, China).

We performed quality control (e.g., demultiplex and denoise) and taxon classification (against the SILVA132 database) in QIIME 2 (48). ASV (amplicon sequence variant) abundance tables for downstream analysis were obtained using QIIME 2. We chose to rarefy our sampling depth at 19,902 reads per sample to equalize the sampling depth across all samples. We used four strategies to investigate diet-source microbiome transmission in the herbivore gut microbiomes.

In addition, SourceTracker (49) was also used to assess the contribution (microbiome transmission) of the diet-source microbiomes to other herbivorous insects (e.g., Pyralidae and cicadas) and the herbivorous mammals (e.g., musk deer and red rabbits) (Table 1). For example, in each sampling region, the dietary food was treated as the source; the herbivorous insects (groups) or mammals were treated as sinks. For some sampling regions in this study, sap-sucking (cicadas) rather than leaf-feeding insects were sampled, and thus, we treated them as a different insect group.

The 16S rRNA gene data have been submitted to figshare (10.6084/m9.figshare.15073920) and are public (https://figshare.com/articles/dataset/The_fasta_clean_data/15073920).

Supplemental material is available online only.



