Similarity of the dog and human gut microbiomes in gene content and response to diet



Gut microbes influence their hosts in many ways, in particular by modulating the impact of diet. These effects have been studied most extensively in humans and mice. In this work, we used whole genome metagenomics to investigate the relationship between the gut metagenomes of dogs, humans, mice, and pigs.

We present a dog gut microbiome gene catalog containing 1,247,405 genes (based on 129 metagenomes and a total of 1.9 terabasepairs of sequencing data). Based on this catalog and taxonomic abundance profiling, we show that the dog microbiome is closer to the human microbiome than the microbiome of either pigs or mice. To investigate this similarity in terms of response to dietary changes, we report on a randomized intervention with two diets (high-protein/low-carbohydrate vs. lower protein/higher carbohydrate). We show that diet has a large and reproducible effect on the dog microbiome, independent of breed or sex. Moreover, the responses were in agreement with those observed in previous human studies.

We conclude that findings in dogs may be predictive of human microbiome results. In particular, a novel finding is that overweight or obese dogs experience larger compositional shifts than lean dogs in response to a high-protein diet.

The online version of this article (10.1186/s40168-018-0450-3) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

The gut microbiome has been shown to impact the health of its host, in particular by mediating the impact of diet on host body weight [1–3]. Specific interactions between dietary components, the microbiome, and the host are however still cumbersome to determine and confirm. While it is possible to perform such studies in humans, the costs involved, time constraints, and the need to control many confounders make it desirable to conduct such research in other species, where the findings might be predictive of human results. The traditional lab mouse has been widely used for this purpose, but its value has been questioned [4, 5]. Recently, pigs, although much more expensive, have been proposed as an alternative model as they may be closer to humans in phenotype and diet [6, 7]. Pigs have long been known to possess a gastrointestinal tract similar to that of humans and have been used as model animals in nutrition studies [8].

In this context, we investigated the effect of dietary intervention on the dog gut microbiome in a randomized control trial (RCT), containing equal numbers of lean/normal (LN) and overweight/obese dogs (OW). After a feed-in period with a baseline diet (Base), dogs were randomly assigned to one of two diets: (1) a high-protein/low-carbohydrate (HPLC) diet or a (2) lower-protein/higher-carbohydrate (LPHC) diet (Fig. 2a and Additional file 6: Table S6). This experimental design allowed us to explore differential effects of diet on the microbiome of OW dogs compared to that of LN dogs. Using shotgun deep sequencing, we built a non-redundant gene catalog of the dog gut microbiome, which we compared to previously published catalogs for the human, mouse, and pig guts.

A total of 129 dog stool samples were collected from 64 dogs (32 Labrador retrievers and 32 beagles; see Additional file 1: Table S1 for physical characteristics of the study cohort), with two samples from each dog (except for a single case where three samples were collected from the same dog). DNA was extracted and Illumina-sequenced in pair-end mode (125 bases per read). Each metagenome contains an average of 117 million paired-end reads (s.d. 32 million), leading to a total of 1.9 terabasepairs over all samples (Fig. 1a and Additional file 2: Table S2). Following previously developed approaches [27], we assembled the metagenomic reads from each sample into contigs, predicted genes on these contigs, and, finally, clustered the predicted genes from all samples into a non-redundant gene catalog (see Fig. 1a; “Methods” section; [28]). This catalog contains 1,247,405 non-redundant (at 95% nucleotide sequence identity) coding sequences, of which 630,230 (50.5%) are complete genes with an average size of 884 base pairs, compared to an average of 571 base pairs for incomplete ones.

Taxonomic annotation (see the “Methods” section) showed that the dog gut microbiome gene catalog is predominantly composed of five phyla: Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, Proteobacteria, Actinobacteria, and Fusobacteria, with the first two contributing more than half the detected genes (Fig. 1c).

We compared our gene catalog with three previously published gut microbial gene catalogs: from human [28], pig [7], and mouse [30] hosts, which had been built based on similar (Illumina sequencing) data with similar computational procedures. We applied the same taxonomic annotation to all catalogs (see the “Methods” section). The phylum-level distribution of genes in the dog gut is most similar to that of the human gut catalog, although we observe a higher proportion of genes from Fusobacteria (Fig. 1c). The mouse catalog contains the largest fraction of Firmicutes genes among the four species considered, while the pig catalog has a higher fraction of genes which cannot be annotated (Additional file 7).

These different analyses consistently show that, of the three animal gut microbiomes considered, the mouse gut microbiome (the current go-to model system) is the least similar to the human gut microbiome of the three non-human animals studied. When comparing pig and dog gut microbiomes to the human one, considering in particular the analyses that are robust to the presence in the catalog of rare and low abundance genes (by taking the abundances into account), we conclude that, overall, the dog gut microbiome has a higher taxonomic and functional overlap with the human gut microbiome. As microbial gut strains are host-specific, this similarity cannot be explained solely by direct transmission between dogs and humans. Rather, it must be a function of similar physiology and lifestyle. To further explore the behavior of the dog gut microbiome, particularly in comparison to that of humans, we investigated the dog microbiome response to dietary intervention.

Sixty-four dogs from two breeds were fed for 4 weeks on a common baseline diet (Base, diet details see [35]), followed by random assignment to one of two possible diet interventions: high-protein/low-carbohydrate (HPLC) or lower protein/higher carbohydrate (LPHC). The Base diet was more similar to the LPHC (Fig. 2a (top); Additional file 5: Table S5). To avoid the confounding effect of changes in the host phenotype, dogs were fed to maintain initial body weight (minimum energy requirement). Stool samples were collected before and at the end of the diet intervention (Fig. 2a). To control for possible batch effects, the study subjects were randomly split into two groups of 32 dogs and the procedure was repeated for each groups, at the same pet care center, 1 month apart. One of the dogs had to be excluded from analysis due to an antibiotic treatment for an infection unrelated to the study.

We subsequently identified functionally interacting species by searching for co-abundant taxa across the dog samples and found two large groups of microbial genera which have significantly correlated gut abundances (Spearman r > 0.5 in absolute value, statistical significance tested with sparCC [53], FDR set at 5%), within one group, but are anticorrelated in abundance with those of the other (Fig. 4). The first group, more abundant in dogs fed the HPLC diet, consists mainly of genera in the Clostridiales order, while the second one is enriched for Bacteroidiales. In mice, a decrease in Clostridiales was accompanied by an increase in Bacteroidiales in response to induced inflammation [54], while increased Clostridiales and decreased Bacteroidetes have been reported in response to high-fat and high-sucrose diets [55]. As discussed above, better resolution in metabolic annotation of gut microbial genomes and metagenomes may allow testing to what extent direct diet effects such as higher nutrient availability for different fermenters drive these compositional changes.

Here, we present a dog gut microbiome gene catalog, which provides over 1 million taxonomically and functionally annotated genes and can serve as a resource for future studies. Together with the taxonomic census, our study of two dog breeds should provide a baseline for expanding dog microbiome research to other breeds, biogeography, and variation of living conditions (e.g., pets and feral dogs), thus disentangling the respective contribution of these factors to structuring the microbiome.

The structural and functional similarity of the dog microbiome to the human one implies that, as human studies are predictive of results in dogs, dog studies may be predictive of results in humans. Thus, dog studies provide a double benefit: for dogs directly and for their potential to generalize to humans. We illustrate this by a controlled dietary intervention study, in which we were able to reproduce high-level diet effects reported in other mammals, while also uncovering the higher responsiveness of the microbiome of overweight/obese dogs. This is a hypothesis to be tested in future human diet intervention studies.

Sixty four dogs (32 Labrador retrievers and 32 beagles) were selected for an 8-week feeding study (Fig. 2a). Physical characteristics of the dogs were described in details in Additional file 1: Table S1. Dogs in each breed were divided according to their body fat percentages into two body condition groups: overweight or obese (OW) and lean or normal (LN). In the first 4 weeks, all dogs were on the commercially available Base diet. In the second 4 weeks, dogs in each breed and body condition group were first randomized by age, sex, and body fat percentage into two dietary intervention groups, HPLC and LPHC, and were switched to their assigned diets. Fecal samples were collected and body fat percentages were measured using dual energy X-ray absorption (DEXA, GE Lunar DPXα with EnCore 2011 software) after 4 weeks on the BASE diet and 4 weeks on the intervention diets.

A staggered start with two cohorts of dogs was implemented, the second cohort beginning 1 month after the first. Dogs in each body condition and dietary group were randomly assigned to the two cohorts by breed, age, and sex. Dogs were fed to maintain their body weights and were weighed weekly. The amount of food offered to a dog was adjusted by 5% if its body weight changed by 5% over its initial body weight. The maintenance energy requirement (MER) was estimated using the equation: MER = 139 × BW0· [56] (kilocalories), where BW is body weight in kilograms. Dogs had free access to the playgrounds and socialization activities. The OW dogs were fed to reduce their body weight after the study.

All diets were formulated to be nutritionally complete and to comply with the guidelines of the Association of American Feed Control Officials and were manufactured by the Nestlé Purina PetCare Company. All diets contained animal protein as a primary protein source. The protein level in the HPLC diet was adjusted by replacing grains with plant protein. The macronutrient contents and energy densities of the three diets, BASE, HPLC, and LPHC, are listed in Additional file 6: Table S6.

Canine fecal samples were collected within 15 min of defecation and immediately frozen at − 80 °C. The PowerFecal DNA Isolation Kit (MO BIO Laboratories, Inc., Carlsbad, CA, USA) was used to isolate fecal genomic DNA, following manufacturer’s protocol. DNA quantification was performed using PicoGreen® assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).

The library preparation was performed following the recommended Nextera XT protocol from Illumina. (Nextera XT DNA Library Preparation Guide, Part # 15031942 Rev. E January 2015, Illumina), with modifications for normalization and pooling as described below.

Sequencing was performed on a HiSeq 2500 with the pool loaded onto three flow cells using v4 chemistry PE125 and dual indexing with (8 bases used for each index).

The gene catalog was built as previously described [27, 57]: after trimming and filtering (by removing reads which match either the canine reference genome or the human reference), contigs were assembled for each sample separately using SOAPDenovo2 [58]. Genes were then predicted on these reads with MetaGeneMark [59]. These genes were then clustered at 95% identity to form the final catalog using CD-HIT [60]. All 129 metagenomes were included in building the gene catalog. Pre- and post-dietary intervention samples from the same dog were treated as separate samples and processed independently.

For taxonomic annotation, we used the dual-BLAST least common ancestor approach [61] using Diamond as an alternative to BLAST [62]. Briefly, using Diamond, for each gene, we searched for homologs in the Uniprot database (version 2016_07). If no hits with e-value 10−5 or less were found, the result was “no hit.” Otherwise, the matched Uniprot region was used as input to a second homolog search against Uniprot and all hits whose e-value is equal or less than the original e-value were recorded. This constitutes the homolog neighborhood of the initial query gene. We assign to the query gene the least common ancestor of this neighborhood. This analysis was performed with the Jug scripts [63] in the taxonomic directory of the Supplementary Source Code.

Functional annotation of genes was performed using MOCAT2, which was also used to generate abundance profiles [27]. KEGG orthologous (KO) groups were filtered to include only KOs which were used in the annotation of prokaryotic species (thus removing any spurious hits to Eukaryotes). KEGG modules were similarly filtered to exclude modules which refer to more than 50% of non-prokaryotic KEGG. This filtering was performed with the Jug scripts in the prok-kos directory of the Supplementary Source Code.

Single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) variation was quantified over representative specI genomes [64], using an approach previously described in [65] implemented by metaSNV [34]. Briefly, samples that had enough coverage over a given genome (5× vertical and 80% horizontal) were compared using a manhattan distance on the allele frequencies of the observed SNPs. This distance was normalized by the number of examined SNPs so that identical variation profiles have a distance of 0 and the ones that are completely distinct, a distance of 1.

Principal coordinate analysis on the distance matrices obtained as above was used to illustrate the variation space of bacterial species and show that dog samples are more closely related to other dog samples than they are to human subjects. This analysis is implemented by the Figure-PCoA_boxplots.py script.

To determine the total microbial species composition of each stool sample, for both taxa previously identified and those yet to be isolated and characterized, mOTU-LGs were constructed as described by [66]. In brief, a non-redundant database of single copy marker genes (MGs), extracted from reference genomes as well as those assembled from canine and human samples, were clustered at gene-specific species-level identity cut-offs [64]. mOTU linkage groups (mOTU-LGs; all MGs belonging to a single microbial species) were produced by correlating MG abundances across all canine samples. In total, 228 mOTU-LGs were formed, containing between 2 and 10 MGs with an FDR of 0.02, these on average explained over 98% of total microbial abundance in a sample. mOTUs were annotated through BLAST of the assembled MGs against reference genome MGs using a last common ancestor approach; the reference annotation at each taxonomic level was migrated over to the mOTU-LG only when there was 100% agreement between all MG’s best hit results. For a mOTU-LG to be annotated to the species level, 100% agreement was required between top hits as well as an identity exceeding the MG clustering cut-off. mOTU-LG abundances were inferred from base-scaled read mappings standardized to the total length of the genes making up the linkage group. The relative abundance detection limit was estimated for each sample as the relative abundance of the least-abundant mOTU-LG. The global detection limit was the highest value (i.e., least sensitive) of all samples. This analysis was performed with the fetchMG tool [64] and the scripts in the motus directory of the Supplemental Software package.

Principal coordinate analyses were performed on log-transformed data using the Bray-Curtis distance. Comparisons between compositional shifts were computed based on the original distance matrix and compared using the two-tailed Wilcoxon test.

The analysis in this subsection was performed using the scripts in the analyses directory.



Funding was provided by EMBL, the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Programme (grant agreement #686070; DD-DeDaF), and Nestlé Purina PetCare Company.

All sequence data will be made available at the time of publication at the European Nucleotide Archive (study accession nr.: PRJEB20308). The gene catalog (including all taxonomic and functional annotations) can be accessed at 10.5281/zenodo.1198434. Additionally, preprocessed abundance tables and analysis scripts (in Python) are available under an open source license at https://codeocean.com/2018/04/04/similarity-of-the-dog-and-human-gut-microbiomes-in-gene-content-and-response-to-diet.

The animal study protocol was reviewed and approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee of the Nestlé Purina PetCare Company.

Not applicable.

Nestlé Purina PetCare Company partially funded this research. The following authors are employees of the company: Coralie Fournier, Yuanlong Pan, Gail Czarnecki-Maulden, Patrick Descombes, Janet R. Jackson, and Qinghong Li.

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (10.1186/s40168-018-0450-3) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

