The Human Gut Microbiome – A Potential Controller of Wellness and Disease

Interest toward the human microbiome, particularly gut microbiome has flourished in recent decades owing to the rapidly advancing sequence-based screening and humanized gnotobiotic model in interrogating the dynamic operations of commensal microbiota. Although this field is still at a very preliminary stage, whereby the functional properties of the complex gut microbiome remain less understood, several promising findings have been documented and exhibit great potential toward revolutionizing disease etiology and medical treatments. In this review, the interactions between gut microbiota and the host have been focused on, to provide an overview of the role of gut microbiota and their unique metabolites in conferring host protection against invading pathogen, regulation of diverse host physiological functions including metabolism, development and homeostasis of immunity and the nervous system. We elaborate on how gut microbial imbalance (dysbiosis) may lead to dysfunction of host machineries, thereby contributing to pathogenesis and/or progression toward a broad spectrum of diseases. Some of the most notable diseases namely Clostridium difficile infection (infectious disease), inflammatory bowel disease (intestinal immune-mediated disease), celiac disease (multisystemic autoimmune disorder), obesity (metabolic disease), colorectal cancer, and autism spectrum disorder (neuropsychiatric disorder) have been discussed and delineated along with recent findings. Novel therapies derived from microbiome studies such as fecal microbiota transplantation, probiotic and prebiotics to target associated diseases have been reviewed to introduce the idea of how certain disease symptoms can be ameliorated through dysbiosis correction, thus revealing a new scientific approach toward disease treatment. Toward the end of this review, several research gaps and limitations have been described along with suggested future studies to overcome the current research lacunae. Despite the ongoing debate on whether gut microbiome plays a role in the above-mentioned diseases, we have in this review, gathered evidence showing a potentially far more complex link beyond the unidirectional cause-and-effect relationship between them.

The human microbiome comprises of collective genomes of microbiota inhabiting us, namely protozoa, archaea, eukaryotes, viruses and predominantly bacteria that live symbiotically on and within various sites of the human body. Examples of occupied habitats include our oral cavity, genital organs, respiratory tract, skin and gastrointestinal system (Lloyd-Price et al., 2016). The human microbiota is estimated to be ∼1013–1014 microbial cells, with around 1:1 microbial cells to human cells ratio (Sender et al., 2016). These numbers are derived from the total bacterial cells in colon (3.8 × 1013 bacteria), the organ that harbors the densest number of microbes (Sender et al., 2016). The diverse gastrointestinal microbiota is predominantly composed of bacteria from three major phyla, namely Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, and Actinobacteria (Tap et al., 2009). This diverse and complex microbiome serves as a functional expansion of host genomes, and is estimated to harbor 50- to 100-fold more genes, compared to the host. These extra genes have added various types of enzymatic proteins which were non-encoded by the host, and play a critical role in facilitating host metabolism, thus contributing to the regulation of host physiology (Hooper and Gordon, 2001). Until recent decades, the properties of the human microbiome and the host–microbiota interactions have been largely unknown due to technology limitations especially in examining non-cultivable microbes of interest, and lack of population-scale data depicting the microbiota compositions and functions. However, advances in sequencing technologies and subsequent large-scale sequence-based microbiome projects such as the Human Microbiome Project (HMP) consortium funded by The United States National Institutes of Health (NIH), as well as the MetaHIT (Metagenomics of the Human Intestinal Tract) consortium funded by the European Commission, have served as catalysts in nourishing research on the human microbiome. These large-scale endeavors both share similar missions in characterizing the human microbiome and their roles in health and disease states, with MetaHIT solely focusing on gut microbiome. Several analyses have been incorporated in these meta-omics projects including 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) sequencing to taxonomically characterize the microbiota communities; Whole Genome Shotgun (WGS) metagenomic sequencing of body-site specific whole community DNA, followed by reference genome mapping, metagenomic assembly, gene cataloging and metabolic reconstruction, to facilitate maximal capture of organismal and functional data of human microbiota (The Human Microbiome Project Consortium, 2012).

Undoubtedly, these efforts shed light on the clinical significance of the human microbiome which is pretty much a ‘black box.’ Although the human microbiome research is still at its preliminary stage, the findings are deemed intriguing yet promising in terms of filling the knowledge gap in microbiome-host relationships, and their role in disease pathogenesis, as well as therapeutic value, which requires more in-depth investigations to uncover this exciting yet mysterious field of research. Below, we review recent investigations specifically related to the bacterial microbiome in the GIT – the largest microbial reservoir of the human body. Gut microbiota and the microbial-synthesized metabolites are discussed along with their roles in human wellness and normal functioning. Further, we review several studies related to the gut microbiome dysbiosis and its association with specific human diseases. We introduce novel microbiome-based therapy employed in specific disease conditions to ‘restore’ wellness and ameliorating dysbiosis-associated diseases. Finally, we discuss future directions and research areas that require further elucidation in order to better understand the human microbiome and its relationship with the host.

The symbiotic relationship between the gut microbiota and the host is regulated and stabilized by a complex network of interactions that encompass metabolic, immune, and neuroendocrine crosstalk between them. This crosstalk is potentially mediated by microbial-synthesized metabolites which exhibit pleiotropic effects, including acting as signaling molecules in regulating host neuro-immune-inflammatory axes that could physiologically link gut with other organ systems. The predominant functions of gut microbiota and the associated key metabolites in governing host wellness are depicted in the following subsections, with some other microbial metabolites being described in Table
1.

Human fecal sample analysis using 16S ribosomal RNA and metagenomic sequencing techniques reveal significant enrichment in metabolism of polysaccharides, amino acids, xenobiotics and micronutrients conferred by gut microbiota, suggest that these indigenous microbes facilitate host energy harvesting and metabolic efficiency (Gill et al., 2006). These findings were further validated by germ-free (GF) mice experiments where it was found that germ-free mice had 40% lower epididymal fat and an additional 10–30% food consumption was needed to maintain the same body mass as mice with normal microbiota (Backhed et al., 2004). Gut microbiota is important in fermenting unabsorbed starch and soluble dietary fiber. The fermented end products exist in the form of a SCFAs. SCFA (such as butyrate, propionate, acetate and pentanoate) act as one of the energy substrates for the host (Salminen et al., 1998) thereby contributing an extra 10% daily dietary energy for utilization by the host for other metabolic processes (Payne et al., 2012). Microbial-synthesized SCFAs contribute 70% of ATP production in colon, with butyrate as the preferred fuel for colonocytes (Firmansyah et al., 1989; Donohoe et al., 2011). Butyrate-producing microbes rescued the deficit mitochondrial respiration, ATP synthesis and autophagy in colonocytes of germ-free mice (Donohoe et al., 2011), proving the importance of butyrate in colonic cellular respiration and energy production. Furthermore, SCFAs which are the ligands for G protein-coupled receptor 41 (GPR41) expressed by a subset of the gut epithelial enteroendocrine cells, had been shown to regulate energy homeostasis by stimulating GPR41-mediated leptin production in mouse adipocytes, in which this multifunctional circulating hormone, leptin exhibits pleiotropic effects on a vast range of host physiological functions such as energy metabolism, appetite, as well as sympathetic nerve activity and immune response, potentially giving rise to interactive host-microbe signaling and gut-brain axis immune-inflammatory crosstalk (Xiong et al., 2004; Samuel et al., 2008).

Gut microbiota also plays an important role in the co-metabolism of bile acids with the host. These cholesterol derivatives are synthesized in the liver, followed by conjugation with taurine or glycine prior to storage in the gall bladder and subsequent secretion into duodenum to aid digestion, cholesterol and lipid metabolisms. In humans, 95% of bile acids are reabsorbed at distal ileum (Staels and Fonseca, 2009). The 5% unabsorbed primary bile acids are then bioconverted or deconjugated to secondary bile acids (predominantly DCA and LCA) by bile salt hydrolases secreted by several colonic microbiota such as Clostridium perfringens and Clostridium scindens, followed by partly colonic reabsorption and transportation back to liver for conjugation (Gopal-Srivastava and Hylemon, 1988; Ajouz et al., 2014) and the unabsorbed secondary bile acids are excreted by the host (Sorg and Sonenshein, 2008). Both primary and secondary bile acids are able to activate host nuclear FXR signaling, which in turn regulates the bile acids production, glucose metabolism, and potentially hepatic autophagy (Lee et al., 2014; Nie et al., 2015). Secondary bile acids serve as a potent activator of TGR5 (a member of the Rhodopsin-like subfamily of GPCRs) which is widely expressed on different tissues including in gall bladder, liver, spleen, intestine, and the immune cells. Such GPCR activation will stimulate second messenger c-AMP production, and the subsequent c-AMP-dependent downstream signaling, inducing expressions of a multitude of genes, whereby its physiological importance remains to be fully elucidated, pointing toward impacts of secondary bile acid-TCR5 axis (Hylemon et al., 2009). Secondary bile acids also possess antimicrobial effects which alter microbial cell membrane integrity, causing spillage of intracellular contents, thus inhibiting growth of bile acid-intolerant microbes (Nie et al., 2015). Such antimicrobial properties may contribute in shaping the composition of the gut microbiota and protecting the host from an array of infectious pathogens.

Gut barrier which is composed of mucus layer and epithelial layer (containing several junctional protein structures that regulate barrier integrity and paracellular permeability), serves as the interface between the outside world and host internal environment. Disrupted gut barrier function will increase gut permeability to commensal microbes, microbial derived products (such as metabolites, virulence factors) as well as other luminal components, contributing to aberrant immune-inflammatory response such as inflammation, allergy, and autoimmune disorder mediated by molecular mimicry and dysregulated T-cell response (Barnaba and Sinigaglia, 1997). Such physical and immunological barrier’s function is cross-regulated by host-gut microbiota interactions. The regulation of gastrointestinal T-lymphocytes balance [regulatory T cell/T helper type 17 (Treg/TH17) ratio], which is crucial in maintaining intestinal homeostasis, discriminating between pathogens and commensal microbes via organizing “immune tolerance-productive immune response” status, is found to be involving the role of gut microbiota. Several commensal microbes such as Bacteroides fragilis, Bifidobacterium infantis, and Firmicutes are capable in inducing expansion of Treg cells such as FOXP3 expressing Treg and anti-inflammatory IL-10-producing Treg lymphocytes, which are crucial in suppressing pathological inflammation induced by aberrant effector T cells, hence fortifying gut barrier function (Paust et al., 2004; El Aidy et al., 2012; Lawley and Walker, 2013). Suppression of inflammatory response by Treg cells also play a critical role in inducing host tolerance in non-host cells, possibly enabling gut microbiota to construct their niches in host without being attacked by host immunity under normal circumstances. Furthermore, several microbiota-derived metabolites such as SCFAs had been shown to confer protection to the gastrointestinal barrier integrity against the disruptive effects of proinflammatory cytokines resulted by aberrant immune-inflammatory axis (Peng et al., 2007; Chen et al., 2017), whereby the mechanism remains unclear. On the other hand, commensal SFB was shown to induce intestinal TH17 cells and production of pro-inflammatory IL-17 and IL-22, enhancing antimicrobial defense and mucosal immunity in against of intestinal pathogen Citrobacter rodentium in gnotobiotic mice model (Ivanov et al., 2009). Besides, according to Atarashi et al. (2008), ATP which can be contributed by gut microbiota, is capable to activate differentiation of lamina propria cells (CD70 and CD11c) into TH17. In short, tight regulation of Treg/TH17 balance by healthy host-gut microbiota interactions are critical to prevent aberrant immune-inflammatory response.

Toll like receptors (TLRs) from the microorganism-sensing PRR family serve a critical role in maintaining gut microbiota-host symbiotic relationship and intestinal homeostasis (Rakoff-Nahoum et al., 2004). Expression of TLR4 that recognizes the LPS of Gram-negative microbes, can be found on intestinal neurons and glial cells, possibly conferring ENS the ability to react straight to the stimulus derived from gut microbiota. The observation of decreased gut motility and lesser nNOS (neuronal NO synthase) neurons had been demonstrated in GF and antibiotic-treated mice, whereby such deficits are reproduced in TLR4-knockout mice as well as TLR signal transducer MyD88-knockout mice (Anitha et al., 2012), suggesting TLRs signaling might be the mediator between intestinal microbiota and ENS development. Furthermore, Soret et al. (2010) had reported a noteworthy elevation in ChAT but not nNOS-immunoreactive neuron, as well as increased cholinergic-mediated colonic circular muscle contractile reaction, induced by intracecal perfusion of butyrate, hence indicating potential regulatory effect of butyrate in ENS and gut motility.

Another important role of human microbiota is colonization resistance where indigenous microbiota confers protection to host against colonization of pathogenic invader and prevention against overgrowth of pathogenic microbiota members (pathobionts). Although the molecular basis of colonization resistance remains to be elucidated, the postulated mechanisms of actions can be classified into (1) direct interaction between human microbiota and pathogens in competing for shared niches and nutrients, and (2) exploitation or enhancement of host defense machinery by human microbiota to suppress pathogen (refer to Table
2).

Dominant non-pathogenic gut microbiota members play a central role in occupying the niche and suppressing the growth and colonization of pathogens. However, during gut microbiome perturbation, decrease in dominant microbiota members reduces the colonization resistance capacity, allowing opportunistic pathogenic strains to invade or colonize the empty niches, leading to occurrence of infection. C. difficile is a classic example of pathobiont which we have discussed below.

External factors (such as antibiotic consumption, dietary component, psychological and physical stress) and host factors can induce dysbiosis in gut microbiome. Dysbiosis is likely to impair the normal functioning of gut microbiota in maintaining host wellness, and potentially induce selective-enumeration of certain microbiota member including pathobionts, leading to dysregulated production of microbial-derived products or metabolites which might be harmful to the host, causing diverse range of diseases on local, systemic or remote organ (refer to Table
3), with some of the notable diseases, along with their respective microbiome-based therapy being discussed as below.

Clostridium difficile is a Gram-positive toxin- and spore-producing anaerobe. It is also one of the Firmicutes members in normal gut microbiota. Catalytic activity of C. difficile toxins A (TcdA) and B (TcdB) damages cytoskeleton and colonic epithelial barrier integrity, thereby inducing aberrant inflammatory response and cell death (Genth et al., 2006; Pruitt et al., 2012). C. difficile infection (CDI)-associated symptoms include diarrhea, pseudo-membranous colitis, sepsis and death in severe cases (Bartlett, 1982). In America, around 453,000 incidences of CDI with 453,000 mortality cases were observed in 2011 alone (Lessa et al., 2015). Intriguingly, antibiotic administration was found to be the major risk factor for CDI (Pear et al., 1994). Around 5–35% antibiotic-treated individuals developed diarrhea as a common side effect. Association of C. difficile with antibiotic-associated diarrhea is the most frequent, which accounts for 10–20% of total incidences, compared to other pathogens such as Staphylococcus aureus and Salmonella species (Song et al., 2008). It was observed that greater incidence of diarrhea was correlated with uptake of antibiotics with broad-spectrum antibacterial effect (Bartlett, 2002). Also, C. difficile acquisition of resistant genes toward broad spectrum clindamycin, erythromycin, chloramphenicol, and linezolid mediated by multiple horizontal gene transfer modes (potentially via mobilizable transposon, phage transduction, conjugative plasmids) within C. difficile strains and possibly among commensal microbes had been reported (Johanesen et al., 2015). A cohort study by Pépin et al. (2005) discovered that broad-spectrum fluoroquinolone appeared to be the most potent risk contributor to C. difficile-associated diarrhea compared to other antibiotics. Precise mechanism of this antibiotic-associated diarrhea remains unknown, however, its noteworthy correlation with CDI inspires research on the relationship between gut microbiome and its pathogenic member – C. difficile in healthy non-disease state.

Improved understanding on antibiotic-induced microbiome dysbiosis in pathogenesis of CDI and its recurrence has given rise to development of new promising therapeutic approach that involves restoration of gut microbiota, such as FMT. This therapy has successfully restored gut homeostasis via re-introduction of gut microbiota from healthy donor feces. Patients received FMT showed long-lasting elevation of fecal microbial diversity and a high recovery rate (90%) compared to vancomycin (narrow-spectrum antibiotic) therapy (recovery rate = 60%) (van Nood et al., 2013). Besides, elevation in gut Bacteroidetes and Clostridium cluster IV and XIVa (Firmicutes), and reduction in Proteobacteria were observed post-FMT (van Nood et al., 2013), indicating the importance of dominant microbes such as Bacteroidetes and non-pathogenic Clostridia member in suppressing C. difficile outgrowth. Similar study by Konturek et al. (2016) also had demonstrated a high healing rate (94%) of CDI post FMT treatment, with no recurrent CDI observed across 16 months follow-up. Besides, marked reduction of proinflammatory cytokines (such as TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8, and IL-12), significant elevation in plasma level of human antimicrobial peptide LL-37, along with increase in beneficial bacteria (such as Lactobacillaceae, Ruminococcaceae, Desulfovibrionaceae, Sutterellaceae, and Porphyromonadaceae) were observed in successfully treated patients post FMT. Although the exact beneficial strains and the underlying mechanisms of FMT in conferring high cure rate of CDI have not yet been clarified, these studies undoubtedly demonstrate a strong association between gut microbiome and development of CDI, and shed a light on the potential widespread use of microbiota displacement therapy in targeting CDI.

Another example of gut microbiome-associated disease is IBD. IBD is a group of multifactorial, idiopathic, persistent and recurring gastrointestinal inflammations. Two common forms of IBD are CD and UC (Lennard-Jones, 1989). In CD, inflammation can occur anywhere along the whole GIT, whereas UC is only restricted to the large intestine. Both forms are associated with relapsing diarrhea, fever and abdominal pain. The occurrence of IBD is rising at alarming rate worldwide, estimating 1.4 million and 2.2 million individuals in America and Europe, respectively (Loftus, 2004). IBD generally involves host factors combined with environmental factors (Franceschi et al., 1987; Gent et al., 1994; Hugot et al., 2001). Although our understanding on the mechanism of pathogenesis for this disease is still lacking, crosstalk between gut microbiota and host factors show great potential in contributing to the disease development, as demonstrated in Figure
2. The inappropriate host immune response against gastrointestinal microbiota in genetically predisposed individual is speculated to be the main culprit in causing severe inflammation.

Since IBD involves heightened host inflammatory response, current therapeutic approaches generally target the aberrant pro-inflammatory immune response at intestinal mucosa. Anti-inflammation therapies such as antibodies targeting proinflammatory cytokines (anti-TNF-alpha, anti-IL12, anti-IL23) and employing α4β7-integrin antagonist to inhibit trafficking of T-lymphocytes to gut tissue (Feagan et al., 2013; Christensen et al., 2015). However, IBD tends to recur in long-term, and chronic treatment with immuno-suppressive agents will develop neurotoxic side effects (Hyde et al., 1998; Croft et al., 2013). Therefore, development of a safer and more effective novel treatment is in great need. Given the association of IBD patients with decreased anti-inflammatory cytokines IL-10, administration of genetically modified probiotic (beneficial microorganism) such as Lactococcus lactis to express IL-10 had demonstrated a significant remission of disease activity in CD patients during trial (Braat et al., 2006). In this study, 80% CD patients demonstrated clinical improvements, with 50% showing complete remission, and no severe side effect was observed, thus, indicating a promising and safer maintenance treatment strategy for chronic intestinal disease, as compared to sole administration of inflammatory cytokines. However, 40% patients developed CD relapse upon discontinuation of such therapy, indicating the need of long-term prescription of this medication, which in turn will impact its economic viability. Besides, administration of prebiotics (fermentable polysaccharides) to stimulate growth and metabolic activity of beneficial protective gut microbes such as butyrate-synthesizing bacteria might be an attractive concept to treat gastrointestinal inflammation in IBD (Joossens et al., 2012; De Preter et al., 2013). Positive outcome had been reported in a randomized controlled trial by De Preter et al. (2013), whereby around 40–50% of CD patients with mild to moderately active disease achieved remission post treatment with prebiotic OF-IN. OF-IN intake induced a significant reduction in mucolytic Ruminococcus gnavus and a marked elevation of beneficial Bifidobacterium longum, which the latter was strongly correlated with the clinical improvement in CD disease activity (Joossens et al., 2012). This may due to the anti-oxidant and anti-inflammatory effects of B. longum in neutralizing reactive oxygen/nitrogen species (ROS and RNS) at site of inflammation, reducing gastrointestinal discomfort and tissue injury. Despite these exciting novel approaches in treating or managing IBD, the elusive etiology of IBD in each patient renders individual-specific variation in therapeutic response, posing a great challenge in designing a curative treatment that is effective to all.

Furthermore, evidence has pointed to dysbiosis as the possible risk factor of autoimmune disorders, such as celiac disease. Other examples of gut microbiome-associated autoimmune disorders such as Type 1 diabetes, SLE and RA are depicted in Table
3. Celiac disease is a multifactorial chronic immune-mediated disorder in small intestine characterized by permanent intolerance to dietary gluten (such as gliadin peptides) and prolamines in genetically predisposed individuals expressing human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-DQ2 and/or HLA-DQ8 (Sanz et al., 2011). Celiac disease serves as one of the most prevalent lifelong disease in Europe, affecting 1% of the general population of all ages (Mustalahti et al., 2010), contributing to absolute mortality rate of 10.4 per 1000 person-years in celiac disease (Ludvigsson et al., 2009). In celiac patients, gluten triggers the activation of adaptive immune response in mucosa, inducing TH1 and TH17 mediated production of pro-inflammatory cytokines [for example IL-21, interferon (IFN)-gamma, TNF-alpha]; as well as innate immune response through stimulation of IL-15 synthesis, consequently leading to NKG2D-mediated enterocyte killing (Stepniak and Koning, 2006). Gliadin-mediated zonulin (a type of tight junction protein) signaling activation also had been reported, whereby it causes cytoskeleton rearrangement, reduced occludin – ZO-1 protein–protein interaction and increased gut permeability, allowing trafficking of luminal antigens to the submucosa (Drago et al., 2006). The etiology of celiac disease remains to be fully elucidated, with several factors including genetic predisposition, immunological factors (mucosal IgA), and environmental factors including gluten consumption, breast-feeding duration as well as gut infections (for example rotavirus infection), have been postulated to serve a concerted effort in contributing the risk and timing of celiac disease onset (Akobeng et al., 2006; Mulder and Mulder-Bos, 2006; Stene et al., 2006). These factors also play a critical role in shaping and altering gut microbiota composition, therefore potentially modulating gut microbiota roles in gut barrier function and immunity development.

Gluten-free diet has been largely employed to ameliorate the deleterious disease symptoms in celiac patient. However, gluten-free diet exhibits therapeutic limitation which it allows only a partial recovery of gut microbiota in celiac disease patients, both microbiologically (for example reduction in certain potentially pathogenic strains, incomplete restoration of beneficial Bifidobacteria) and metabolically (for example indifferent SCFA pattern in treated and non-treated patient), possibly due to the genetic factor of the patient, or the selective-enumeration of gut microbiota mediated by the absence of dietary gluten, which the underlying reason remains unclear. Strict adherence to total gluten-free diet appears challenging to the patient as well due to the vast application of gluten in processed food, hence alternative measures using microbiome-based therapy such as probiotic might be a promising option to manage celiac disease. Several in vivo, animal studies as well as human studies had demonstrated various beneficial effects of probiotics Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus strains in ameliorating epithelial-gliadin induced deleterious effects. For example, Bifidobacterium lactis exerts inhibitory effect on the increased gut permeability induced by gliadin, and it protects the healthy curvy appearance of epithelial tight junctions from the unfavorable gliadin-induced “straightening” effect on tight junction in human colon Caco-2 cells (Lindfors et al., 2008). B. longum was shown to be capable in enhancing anti-inflammatory response by stimulating markedly high Treg cell mediated production of IL-10, suppressing pro-inflammatory TH1 cytokine IFN-gamma induced by fecal microbiota of celiac patient in a cell culture-based study (Medina et al., 2008). B. longum and Lactobacillus casei also have been reported to exert protective effect on animal model from gliadin-induced enteropathy, whereby B. longum can downregulate the production of pro-inflammatory TNF-alpha and reduce CD4+ T-cell mediated immune reactions (Laparra et al., 2012); whilst L. casei can induce complete recovery of gliadin-induced villus blunting, recover the basal TNF-alpha level, rescue homeostasis of GALT (gut-associated lymphoid tissue) (D’arienzo et al., 2011). Administration of probiotics Bifidobacterium in children with newly diagnosed celiac disease together with gluten-free diet had significantly reduced the potentially harmful Bacteroides fragilis abundance, decreased peripheral CD3+ T cells, and improved the disease symptoms (Olivares et al., 2014). Together, despite complete disease remission is not observed thus far, these studies demonstrate great therapeutic value of probiotics Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus in ameliorating gliadin-induced toxic effects and improving celiac disease symptoms, indicating promising approaches in managing celiac disease.

In recent years, the newly identified factor – gut microbiome which is largely involved in host metabolism regulation, has been integrated into crosstalk studies between genetic factors, behavior and environmental factors as a possible contributor to obesity. Obesity is a global health hazard affecting more than 600 million people worldwide in 2014 (World Health Organization [WHO], 2016). It is associated with elevated energy intake and decreased energy expenditure, causing excessive fat accumulation with raised body mass index (BMI ≥ 30kg/m2), and is linked to metabolic syndrome, posing obese individuals to have a higher risk of developing obesity-associated disorders (for example cardiovascular disease, type-II diabetes, and liver abnormalities), low-grade inflammation, and premature mortality (Donnelly et al., 2005; Cani et al., 2007).

Since obesity-related metabolic disorder has been associated with gut microbiota dysbiosis, selective modulation of microbial composition via dietary intervention such as administration of prebiotics or probiotics might be a promising therapeutic approach. Administration of bacterial-synthesized CLA or CLA-producing bacteria such as Lactobacillus rhamnosus has shown a significant decrease in plasma cholesterol, triacyl glycerides and white adipose tissue in animal models (Koba et al., 2002; Lee H.Y. et al., 2006). Prebiotics such as inulin-type fructans that selectively nourish Roseburia and Clostridium cluster XIVa, and arabinoxylan that increases the abundance of Bifidobacterium, Roseburia, and Bacteroides, have demonstrated anti-adipogenic effect in high-fat-induced obese mice (Dewulf et al., 2011; Neyrinck et al., 2011). These findings demonstrate promising application of prebiotics and probiotics in obesity management, however, more supportive data from human models and clinical trials are required to justify these treatment strategies and their respective success rates.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the fourth leading cause of cancer-related mortality worldwide (Arnold et al., 2017). Similar to other cancer forms, CRC is a multifaceted diseases associated with genetic and environmental factors. Recent findings have suggested that gut microbiota plays a role in the intersection of these factors, probably through shaping a tumor-promoting environment. Colorectal carcinogenesis of the gut has been demonstrated by Li et al. (2012) using mouse model of APC-related CRC. In this study, GF mice displayed a significantly lower colonic tumor incidence and reduced tumor load as compared to that of conventionally raised mice, which the latter also exhibited other distinctive phenotypes of CRC such as rectal bleeding and anemia with a massive infiltration of inflammatory cells arising from a dysfunctional intestinal epithelial barrier at older ages, thereby suggesting gut microbiome and host factor (such as age and genetic predisposition) exert a concerted effort in contributing to CRC growth and progression. Conversely, tumor outgrowth into gut lumen would damage the intestinal barrier, resulting in increased infiltration of gut microbiota and potentially harmful luminal substrates into deeper tissue, leading to further stimulation of immune-inflammatory response and myeloid cell recruitment, which could in turn perturb the gut microbiome (Li et al., 2012). Together, gut microbiome and CRC display a bidirectional self-feeding relationship.

Accumulating data has also demonstrated protective effect of probiotics using lactic acid-producing bacteria (Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium) against experimentally induced colon cancer, as shown by reduced tumor incidence and tumor loads. The underlying mechanisms are suggested to involve direct anti-proliferative effect on tumor cells, prevention of carcinogen-induced DNA damage, partly via inhibition of carcinogen and mutagen formation, reduction of pro-carcinogenic enzyme (ornithine decarboxylase) activity, and elevation of detoxifying enzyme activity, as well as enhancement of anti-tumor immunity as evidenced by increased natural killer cells, MHC class II antigen presenting cells, and CD4–CD8+ T cells post-probiotic treatment (Goldin et al., 1996; Pool-Zobel et al., 1996; Singh et al., 1997; Wollowski et al., 1999; Lee et al., 2004). Moreover, the gut microbiome is pivotal in influencing therapeutic efficacy of anti-cancer immunotherapy employing immune-checkpoint inhibitors. The anti-tumor effect of antibodies targeting CTLA-4, a major negative regulator of T-cell activation, is compromised in both GF mice and broad-spectrum antibiotics-treated mice, confirmed in both melanoma and colon cancer models, along with the observations of significantly reduced CD4+ T-cell and tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes. Such defects can be overcome by the administration of non-enterotoxin-producing strains of B. fragilis, immunization with immunostimulatory B. fragilis polysaccharide, or by adoptive transfer of B. fragilis-specific T-cells, in which the mechanisms underlie the restoration of therapeutic response to CTLA-4 blockade is suggested to be via induction of the IL-12-dependent TH1 immune response in tumor-draining lymph nodes, and stimulation of intratumoral dendritic cells (DCs) maturation (Vétizou et al., 2015). Similarly, Sivan et al. (2015) reported that Bifidobacterium could facilitate PD-L1 blockade efficacy via augmenting DCs function, enhancing CD8+ T-cell priming and accumulation at the tumor microenvironment level. The concept of combination treatment that encompasses anticancer immunotherapy and commensal microbes holds great promise for future CRC treatment.

In recent years, increasing number of studies have explored a possible link between the gut microbiome and brain- or neuro-developmental disorders, such as ASD, with symptoms like mood disorder (depression), neurodegenerative Alzheimer’s and PDs (Table
3). ASD is a multifarious group of neurobiological disorders affecting 1 in 68, 8-year-old children in America (Christensen et al., 2016) and 1 in 160 children globally (World Health Organization [WHO], 2017). It is characterized by social and communication deficits, and repetitive, stereotyped behaviors (Constantino et al., 2000; Kim and Lord, 2012). Despite the poorly understood causative factor of ASD, several studies had observed a significant association between ASD, gastrointestinal dysfunction and dysbiosis in gut microbiota. Comorbidity analysis of ASD patients revealed high occurrence of gastrointestinal symptoms, with the severity positively associated with that of ASD (Wang L.W. et al., 2011). This co-occurrence is speculated to be implicated by impaired tyrosine kinase MET signaling which is important in brain development, gastrointestinal health and immune response regulation (Ieraci et al., 2002; Okunishi et al., 2005). This hypothesis is supported by the observation of impaired MET-signaling in ASD patients especially those that comorbid with familial gastrointestinal disorder (Campbell et al., 2009; Jackson et al., 2009). Also, clinical data has shown that physical health problems like chronic abdominal pain caused by gastrointestinal disorders aggravate self-injury and tantrum in ASD patients (Carr and Owen-Deschryver, 2007), thereby suggesting that treating the gastrointestinal dysfunction will possibly alleviate such ASD-associated symptoms.

During the investigation of microbiota composition in ASD patients, dysbiotic features such as increased Clostridium sp., Bacteroidetes, Lactobacillus, Desulfovibrio, and reduced Bifidobacteria were reported (Song et al., 2004; Adams et al., 2011), suggesting a possible link between dysbiosis and ASD. In a study by Shultz et al. (2015), mice treated with PPA via intra-cerebroventricular injection had shown to develop brain abnormalities and ASD-like symptoms. PPA is a type of SCFA, synthesized by enteric bacteria include the aforementioned Clostridium, Bacteroidetes, and Desulfovibrio species, but PPA level usually exist at low levels in normal healthy individuals. This suggests that possible bloom in PPA-producing gut microbes leads to elevated neurotoxic PPA concentration in blood, contributing to neuropsychiatric disorders. However, to date, dysbiosis-associated elevation in microbial-synthesized PPA in plasma of ASD patients has not been reported. Future studies in examining plasma PPA level in ASD patients are required. Surprisingly, treatment targeting gut microbiome has demonstrated beneficial effects in alleviating ASD-like symptoms in murine model. Desbonnet et al. (2010) reported that probiotic Bifidobacterium infantis improved the behavioral abnormalities and stress-associated gastrointestinal dysfunction which were initially induced in mice suffering MS. Reduction in Bifidobacterium is commonly observed in ASD patients, positive outcome post-probiotic treatment indicates a potential protective role of Bifidobacterium in neuro-immune aspects, suggesting probiotic B. infantis as a potential ASD therapy. Despite the unclear underlying mechanisms, antioxidant properties of Bifidobacterium are suggested to have a neutralizing neurotoxic effect, induced by excess NO in ASD (Yui et al., 2016). Further studies that mimic the human physiological environment are very much required to assess the therapeutic success and underlying mechanism of probiotic B. infantis in managing ASD.

Emerging research on human microbiome and its role in human wellness and disease are currently making it to the limelight, by virtue of which, researchers of diverse clinical specialty areas are attempting to fit this potential “missing piece of puzzle” into existing disease models, particularly those with unknown etiology. Tremendous data has demonstrated strong association of the gut microbiome with host metabolism, immune and neuroendocrine homeostasis, and the possible dysregulation or alteration of gut microbiome. Perturbation of such delicate equilibrium will in turn contribute to disease manifestation. However, the causal or correlation link remains debatable due to lack of direct evidence and mechanistic details. Our understanding on gut microbiome is still at a very preliminary stage, whereby there are several limitations and research gaps that are worth further exploration to better justify the link. For instance, large-scale longitudinal studies that account for subject-specific variations in characterizing the human microbiome are strongly required. On the other hand, another important component of human microbiome – the human virome that is dominated by bacteriophage (viruses that infect bacteria), is relatively less established compared to that of commensal bacteriome research. Only recently the presence of bacteriophage (or phage) in the human microbiome has been highlighted. Their potential role in modulating immune homeostasis has been suggested via (1) indirect mechanisms such as through regulating bacterial microbiome composition (phage-mediated lytic killing of host bacteria) and function (phage-mediated introduction of novel functional genes to lysogenic host such as production of endotoxin and antibiotic resistance), and (2) direct interference with human immune-inflammatory responses such as downregulation of the pro-inflammatory NF-κB pathway, inhibition of excessive ROS synthesis, induction of anti-inflammatory IL-10 production, and T4 phage adhesin gp12 - mediated counteraction to LPS-induced inflammation, as evidenced by downregulation of inflammation markers IL-1α and IL-6, and diminished leukocyte infiltration (Górski et al., 2016; Miernikiewicz et al., 2016). In addition, simultaneous increase in pro-inflammatory markers such as IL-1β, IL-1α, along with upregulation in anti-inflammatory IL-1 receptor antagonist and SOCS3 have been observed in P. aeruginosa and S. aureus phages treated cells, and the authors postulate that at least some phages have evolved anti-inflammatory properties to aid their survival and propagation, while retaining some pro-inflammatory properties (Van Belleghem et al., 2017). On the contrary to the largely reported anti-inflammatory properties of phage, significantly increased abundance of bacteriophages and changes in phage communities composition in CD patients compared to healthy controls have indicated a possible contributory role of phage in aberrant immune response (Lepage et al., 2008; Wagner et al., 2013). Undeniably, integrating human virome studies into the existing human bacterial microbiome will provide a bigger and clearer picture on how such transkingdom interactions could impact human health, thus, facilitating disease etiology studies. However, overcoming the obstacles such as limitations in virome sequencing techniques, uninformative database for characterization of novel viral genomes and the difficulties in identifying origin of virus from patient sample followed by deciphering the underlying mechanisms are urgently required.

A better understanding of human microbiome and how the commensal microbes interact with the host is undeniably useful to delineate the etiology and pathophysiological aspects of several human diseases, as well as developing a more effective therapeutic option to counteract the limitation of currently existing treatments. Application of FMT, probiotic and prebiotics derived from advances in gut microbiome studies to ‘rectify’ or ‘restore’ the altered gut microbiota in the dysbiosis-associated disease state back to the ‘healthy’ equilibrium, holds great promise as the alternative therapeutic option in several symptomatic disease management. However, the beneficial therapeutic effect of microbiome-based therapy is largely dependent on the role of dysbiosis in contributing to the nature of the disease. Accurate identification of key microbiota members, intricate selection of microbial strains used in probiotics, or types of prebiotics administered to selectively enumerate the desirable commensal, have definitely added extra challenges to the extensive application of microbiome-based therapy to future clinical practices. In addition, majority of the probiotics are generally regarded as safe but it does not warrant permanent safety. Several potential risks include possible transfer of antibiotic resistance gene or virulent genes among microbes. Although severe systemic side effects post-microbiome therapy are not observed to date, minor gastrointestinal discomforts such as abdominal pain, vomiting, nausea are commonly reported. This subsequently leads to withdrawal or non-compliance by patients during field trials. Therefore, improvement on treatment regime, route of administration, and effective communication with the patients are strongly encouraged. In short, Human Microbiome field of research is still relatively new but rapidly growing, showing several preliminary but promising studies on the modulatory role of human microbiome in human wellness and disease. Future applications of microbiome-based disease diagnosis, prognosis monitoring, prophylaxis and treatments which exhibit great potential in revolutionizing the current measures in disease management and treatment, are definitely worth anticipating.

ZK conducted the literature search and compiled the information. SL contributed academic assistance and edited the manuscript.

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

Funding. This publication was supported by funding from the Tropical Medicine and Biology Platform.

