Gut microbiome composition in the Hispanic Community Health Study/Study of Latinos is shaped by geographic relocation, environmental factors, and obesity

Hispanics living in the USA may have unrecognized potential birthplace and lifestyle influences on the gut microbiome. We report a cross-sectional analysis of 1674 participants from four centers of the Hispanic Community Health Study/Study of Latinos (HCHS/SOL), aged 18 to 74 years old at recruitment.

Amplicon sequencing of 16S rRNA gene V4 and fungal ITS1 fragments from self-collected stool samples indicate that the host microbiome is determined by sociodemographic and migration-related variables. Those who relocate from Latin America to the USA at an early age have reductions in Prevotella to Bacteroides ratios that persist across the life course. Shannon index of alpha diversity in fungi and bacteria is low in those who relocate to the USA in early life. In contrast, those who relocate to the USA during adulthood, over 45 years old, have high bacterial and fungal diversity and high Prevotella to Bacteroides ratios, compared to USA-born and childhood arrivals. Low bacterial diversity is associated in turn with obesity. Contrasting with prior studies, our study of the Latino population shows increasing Prevotella to Bacteroides ratio with greater obesity. Taxa within Acidaminococcus, Megasphaera, Ruminococcaceae, Coriobacteriaceae, Clostridiales, Christensenellaceae, YS2 (Cyanobacteria), and Victivallaceae are significantly associated with both obesity and earlier exposure to the USA, while Oscillospira and Anaerotruncus show paradoxical associations with both obesity and late-life introduction to the USA.

Our analysis of the gut microbiome of Latinos demonstrates unique features that might be responsible for health disparities affecting Hispanics living in the USA.

Immigrants from Latin America and the Spanish-speaking Caribbean make up the majority of the foreign-born population living in the USA. Immigration-related life course experiences may affect the gut microbiome (GMB) among Latinos, with potential implications for chronic diseases that have been linked to the GMB [1]. Many of these, including obesity, diabetes, and asthma, are highly prevalent in the US Hispanic population [2, 3] although the association of these diseases with the Hispanic GMB pattern is unknown.

We used data from a longstanding multicenter US cohort study to characterize the association of relocation to the mainland USA with GMB characteristics among individuals from several Latin American national backgrounds.

Among the participating group of 1674 Hispanic US residents (Table 1), approximately half were of Mexican/Mexican American background, while Puerto Ricans and Cubans each comprised over 10% of the population. Thirteen percent had been born in the mainland USA, almost all of whom were “second-generation” offspring of at least one Latin American-born parent. Fourteen percent were first-generation individuals who had relocated to the US mainland during childhood and adolescence (“relocation age” < 18 years old), whom we considered to be the “1.5 generation”. The remaining three quarters of the population had relocated from Latin America to the US mainland during adulthood. Puerto Rican-born individuals had the youngest relocation age (mean 18.6 years, standard deviation 12.1 years) and Cuban-born migrants had the oldest relocation age (mean 41.4 years, standard deviation 14.5 years) (Additional file 1: Figure S1). Peak decade of relocation ranged from the 1970s for Puerto Ricans to the 2000s for Cubans and Central and South Americans (Additional file 1: Figure S2).

Several markers of gut microbiome community structure were defined. We quantified alpha diversity using the Shannon index to describe the 16S rRNA gene V4 region bacterial and ITS1 fungal microbiome. We also derived the Prevotella to Bacteroides ratio from 16S data; these taxa frequently appear as important and dominant in other gut microbiome studies [14–16], hence the focus here. From analysis of the Bray-Curtis community ordination, we performed principal coordinate analysis (PcoA) using the 16S and ITS1 data. The first 16S principal coordinate (PCoA1) was strongly correlated with the Prevotella to Bacteroides ratio (Spearman’s r = − 0.89), while PCoA2 was correlated strongly with Shannon index (r = 0.77). Correlations with PCoA1 were − 0.89 and 0.94 for relative abundance of Prevotella and Bacteroides, respectively.

Univariate analyses of 156 participant characteristics and health-related phenotypes, including dietary behaviors and disease-associated variables, were evaluated one-by-one by calculating beta diversity based on genus-level bacterial 16S and fungal ITS1 data. Multiple sociodemographic variables reflecting country of birth and relocation from Latin America to the mainland USA were identified in the top 35 variables (all P < 0.05) associated with Bray-Curtis distance in bacterial and fungal community-level analyses (Fig. 2). Nearly all of the variables associated with Bray-Curtis distance also met q value criteria of < 0.05, with a few exceptions for ITS1 analyses (Fig. 2).

Systematic analysis was undertaken to discern the birthplace and migration-related factors that were independently associated with GMB (Fig. 3a). Multivariable adjustment was performed for gender, study center, intake of vegetables excluding potatoes, intake of whole fruit, intake of whole grains, moderate-to-vigorous physical activity (MVPA), body mass index (BMI), diabetes, visits returning to home country, education and income, and medications including use of antibiotics and metformin. Prevotella to Bacteroides ratio was lowest among those born in the US mainland (Fig. 3a). Among those born in Latin America, Prevotella to Bacteroides ratio increased monotonically with increasing relocation age. Analyses of bacterial (16S) Shannon index failed to find a clear “dose response” between timing of exposure to the USA and bacterial diversity. (Fig. 3a). Point estimates suggested that the Latin America-born group who relocated to the USA after 45 years of age had high bacterial alpha diversity, while in contrast, those who relocated from Latin America before 18 years of age had the lowest bacterial alpha diversity. Enigmatically, a high bacterial alpha diversity was also found in the US-born group. Confidence intervals for the groups were largely overlapping, and none of these findings for bacterial alpha diversity met q value criteria of < 0.05. Fungal (ITS1) Shannon index was lowest among individuals with early-life US exposure (i.e., born in the mainland USA or relocated prior to age 18 years), and highest among those who relocated to the mainland USA after age 45 (Fig. 3b).

Figure 5 summarizes the results described above relating GMB with exposure to the USA, as defined by birthplace and age at arrival to the mainland USA. Prevotella to Bacteroides ratio and fungal alpha diversity were lowest among individuals with early-life exposure to the USA. These measures increased in linear fashion across groups with later-life arrival in the USA. In contrast, bacterial alpha diversity was highest among the US-born and those who migrated from Latin America to the mainland USA after age 45 years old, whereas this GMB characteristic was lowest in childhood arrivals from Latin America to the USA.

Next we sought to understand the relationship of GMB with acculturation, or adaptation of features of the US environment, which varied across birthplace and relocation age groups (Table 2) [17–19]. English language preference was associated with lower Prevotella to Bacteroides ratio and lower fungal Shannon diversity (Fig. 3a). However, English language preference was associated with higher Shannon bacterial diversity (versus Spanish language, beta English preference = 0.09 higher 16S Shannon index, 95% confidence interval, 0.01, 0.16); this contradicts the hypothesis that increasing exposure to the USA leads to depletion of the bacterial microbiome. Those consuming primarily “American” foods rather than “Hispanic” foods (dietary acculturation) had significantly lower Prevotella to Bacteroides ratio, although this dietary acculturation variable was not associated with alpha diversity. Social acculturation, which captures whether social interactions mainly involved other Latino or non-Latinos, had no association with Prevotella to Bacteroides ratio or alpha diversity.

We next examined variation in dietary habits across Hispanic groups, which was previously shown in our cohort [20]. Latin America-born individuals, especially those who relocated to the US mainland during later adulthood, had the most favorable eating habits, evidenced by a higher Alternative Healthy Eating Index - 2010 (AHEI) score, a summary measure of diet quality (Table 2), lower consumption of fats and sodium, and higher consumption of fiber (Table 3). Fiber was further analyzed by food sources (Additional file 1: Table S2 displays definition of food group-derived variables.) We found no significant variation in bean/legume intake according to US-born or relocation age groups. Instead, fruit and whole grains were the sources of fiber that appeared to differ across the population, favoring the adult age immigrants to the USA who had higher intakes of these foods. More favorable AHEI diet score was associated with higher Prevotella to Bacteroides ratio (beta 1 AHEI unit = 0.0063, 95% confidence interval 0.0027, 0.0100, P value = 0.0062) (Table 4). AHEI was not associated with alpha diversity for 16S (beta = −.0004, 95% confidence interval − .0048, 0.0040, P value = 0.34) or for ITS1 (beta = 0.006, 95% confidence interval 0.0010, 0.0099, P value = 0.40). Four specific foods that were associated with higher Prevotella to Bacteroides ratio were higher whole grains, higher vegetables, lower red meat, and lower trans fats (Table 5). Higher grain intake was associated with lower bacterial (16S) alpha diversity, while higher vegetable intake was associated with higher fungal (ITS1) alpha diversity (Table 5).

Using data from 7-day accelerometry, we observed that late-life migrants to the USA had the worst physical activity habits (Table 2). However, there was no evidence that physical activity habits were related to measures of GMB composition including diversity or Prevotella to Bacteroides ratio (data not shown).

As compared with those who relocated to the US mainland in adulthood, both mainland US-born individuals and those arriving during childhood (age 0 to 17 years) had greater attained height, which is a marker of early-life socioeconomic advantage, and larger current household income (Table 2). Lower ratio of Prevotella to Bacteroides was associated with annual household income above $40,000 and higher educational attainment (Table 4). Conversely, higher Prevotella to Bacteroides ratio was found among those who lacked plumbing facilities during childhood.

The US Latino population has a significant burden of obesity [18]. Therefore, we next examined the potential role of GMB in obesity as has been shown in other populations [4, 22].

The association between GMB and obesity is shown in Fig. 6. Higher levels of obesity were associated with lower bacterial alpha diversity (Shannon index) and higher Prevotella to Bacteroides ratio, after adjustment for confounders. Measures of ITS1 composition had no evidence of association with obesity (data not shown).

We next screened 74 bacterial genera with relative abundance > 0.01% to identify taxa associated with body mass index and relocation age. Of the 74 bacterial genera, after FDR correction at P trend < 0.05, 20 genera were significantly associated with obesity (Additional file 1: Table S4), and 29 genera were significantly associated with birthplace and relocation age (Additional file 1: Table S5). Cross-classification of these two sets of results identified 10 bacterial genera that showed significant associations with both birthplace/relocation age and obesity (Oscillospira, Acidaminococcus, Megasphaera, Anaerotruncus, Unclassified.Ruminococcaceae, Unclassified.Coriobacteriaceae, Unclassified.Clostridiales, Unclassified.Christensenellaceae, Unclassified.YS2 (Cyanobacteria), and Unclassified.Victivallaceae, Table 6 and Additional file 1: Figure S6). Of these 10 bacterial genera, 2 were positively associated both with obesity and with early-life exposure to the mainland USA, and 6 were negatively associated both with obesity and early-life exposure to the mainland USA. Others, including Oscillospira and Anaerotruncus, were similar to Prevotella to Bacteroides ratio in that they displayed the paradoxical pattern of being associated both with normal weight and with early-life US exposure.

Fungal ITS1 classification yielded 16 class-level, 49 order-level, 109 family-level, 192 genus-level, and 396 species-level taxa (Additional file 2: Table S6). Analysis of fungal taxa (Additional file 1: Table S7) revealed a few differences comparing those born in the mainland USA versus those born in Latin America (|LDA score| > 104) (Aspergillus, Cyberlindnera, Tremellomycetes). Furthermore, in analysis of relocation age, among the 23 predominant fungal genera with relative abundance > 0.01% and present in more than 5% of individuals, Candida achieved an FDR-adjusted P value of 0.046 (Additional file 1: Table S8), while four others met nominal but not FDR-adjusted P value < 0.05 (Cyberlindnera, Aspergillus, Mrakia, Saccharomyces). We did not find any fungal correlates of obesity, with only Debaryomyces achieving a nominal P value < 0.05 (P value = 0.299 after FDR correction) (Additional file 1: Table S9).

The study of the human microbiome provides a new approach to understand health consequences of the environment across different geographic regions. Prior data suggest that gut microbiomes of Hispanic/Latino adults appear as a distinct cluster when analyzed alongside a collection of USA and worldwide populations [7, 23]. The results presented here describe characteristics of GMB variation and their determinants within the US Hispanic population. GMB heterogeneity among the US Latino study population was significantly accounted for by differences between the “first-generation” (Latin America-born) and “second-generation” (mainland US-born) groups. Each group had its own distinct microbiome pattern which was dependent both upon place of birth and timing of geographic relocation to the mainland USA (e.g., “relocation age”). People who relocated to the mainland USA from Latin America, particularly those who did so relatively late in life, were characterized by a relatively high ratio of Prevotella to Bacteroides. This accounts for the fact that migration- and acculturation-related variables were among the leading explanatory variables in Bray-Curtis distance clustering analyses of 16S sequence data when ranked by explained variation (Fig. 2, R2). There was also evidence for increased GMB diversity of both bacterial and fungal components in arrivals from Latin America, particularly among those who arrived in the USA during middle to late adulthood as opposed to early life. Our data are consistent with the prevailing tendency for people in lower-income countries to have different gut microbial characteristics [24] including a Prevotella-dominant microbiome [4], when compared with the US population. In contrast to the Latin America-born, the US-born Latino population had low Prevotella to Bacteroides ratio and low fungal alpha diversity.

Strengths of the study setting include an extensive platform of clinical, biometric, behavioral, and sociodemographic variables which are of potential relevance to interactions among the host’s resident microbiome and the environment. Another design feature which lends credence to these comparisons was the approach of sampling all study participants from four US communities using random population-based recruitment methods and conducting assessments in a uniform manner across four US locations. The parent HCHS/SOL cohort had a relatively high participation rate of over 40%, which is notable considering that the cohort was inducted into a lengthy research program by door-to-door community recruitment. The participants were not selected from a diseased population, which allows us to address a large array of disease and biometric characteristics across a range of disease severity.

In summary, this study shows that early-life migration and length of stay in mainland USA significantly affect key components of the GMB of Hispanic/Latino groups, which differ from other groups in the USA in microbiome features. In addition, obesity was associated with low bacterial alpha diversity consistent with other studies, but the findings of higher Prevotella to Bacteroides ratio in obese individuals was enigmatic suggesting a unique aspect of the GMB-host relationship in Latinos. This in turn suggests the hypothesis that particular aspects of the microbiome may explain unusual epidemiological patterns observed among the Latino community, such as high prevalence of diabetes, obesity, and asthma [47, 54, 55], concurrent with a paradoxical propensity for longevity [56].

HCHS/SOL is a prospective, population-based cohort study of 16,415 Hispanic/Latino adults (ages 18–74 years at the time of recruitment during 2008–2011) who were selected using a two-stage probability sampling design from randomly sampled census block areas within four US communities (Chicago, IL; Miami, FL; Bronx, NY; San Diego, CA) [57, 58]. The HCHS/SOL Gut Origins of Latino Diabetes (GOLD) ancillary study was conducted to examine the role of gut microbiome composition on diabetes and other outcomes, enrolling participants for this analysis from the HCHS/SOL approximately concurrent with the second in-person HCHS/SOL visit cycle (2014–2017). The study was conducted with the approval of the Institutional Review Boards (IRBs) of Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine at Northwestern University, Miller School of Medicine at the University of Miami, San Diego State University, and University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. Written informed consent was obtained from all study participants.

A number of participant characteristics were ascertained by questionnaire at entry into HCHS/SOL, conducted by bilingual interviewers using the language preferred by the respondent. Self-reported variables included Hispanic/Latino background, place of birth, age at relocation (here termed “relocation age”), and years living in the mainland USA (with the US territory of Puerto Rico considered to be part of Latin America). Following previously described approaches, we used a combination of self-reported, objective monitoring, and clinical examination and blood laboratory components to define sociodemographic factors [59], medical history and medication use [60], physical activity including sedentary time and moderate-to-vigorous physical activity (MVPA) derived from 7-day hip worn accelerometry (Actical version B-1 model 198-0200-03; Respironics, Inc., Bend, OR) [61], and diet [62]. Sedentary time was classified according to quartiles, while MVPA was categorized according to whether participants met the 2008 US guidelines [63]. Diet variables were derived from the average of two 24-h dietary recalls that were collected at the HCHS/SOL baseline visit. The first recall was collected in person, and the second recall was collected by telephone within the following 3 months. Diet recalls were conducted using the Nutrition Data System for Research software (version 11) developed by the Nutrition Coordinating Center, University of Minnesota, (Minneapolis, Minnesota). Health insurance was defined according to participant self-report. Childhood economic hardship was assessed by the question, “Did your family ever experience a period of time when they had trouble paying for their basic needs, such as food, housing, medical care, and utilities, when you were a child? / Spanish: ¿Su familia alguna vez tuvo dificultades para pagar sus necesidades básicas como comidas, vivienda, cuidados médicos, o servicios públicos, cuando usted era niño(a)?” Access to sanitation during childhood was assessed by, “When you were growing up, did your home have the following basic utilities?... plumbing, septic tank. / Spanish: ¿Cuándo usted estaba creciendo, la casa donde vivía tenía los siguientes servicios públicos? Plomería, Drenaje/fosa séptica.” English or Spanish language preference was defined by the participant’s choice of English or Spanish written and spoken language in data collection encounters. Dietary acculturation was a self-reported measure stating whether a typical Hispanic, non-Hispanic (“American”), or blended style diet was consumed (“Of Hispanic/Latino and American food, do you usually eat...? Mainly or Mostly Hispanic/Latino foods” / Spanish: “De la comida hispana/latina y la comida americana, ¿por lo general come usted...? Principalmente comidas hispanas/latinas, or Mayormente comidas hispanas/latinas y algunas comidas americanas”.) We administered a modified 10-item version of the Short Acculturation Scale for Hispanics (SASH) which has 5-point Likert scale responses. The derived score for social acculturation was an average of the four SASH items regarding socialization practices and preferences [64]. Higher SASH response values represent greater acculturation to the dominant US culture. The overall SASH reliability was acceptable in the full sample (Cronbach’s α = .90), and for both English and Spanish language versions (αEnglish = .76; αSpanish = .85). The reliability of SASH was similar across Hispanic/Latino background groups (ranging from αSouth Americans = .85 to αMexicans = .89). In addition, the use of antibiotics or probiotic supplements and dietary preferences within the prior 6 months, as well as stool characteristics (Bristol scale), were ascertained via directed questions on self-administered questionnaire at the time of stool sample collection.

Enrolled participants were provided with a stool collection kit. For each participant, a single fecal specimen was self-collected using a disposable paper inverted hat (Protocult collection device, ABC Medical Enterprises, Inc., Rochester, MN). Participants were instructed to collect a sample of the specimen with a plastic applicator attached to the cap, to place the applicator into a supplied container with a stabilizer (RNAlater, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) and 0.5-mm-diameter glass beads, and then shake the container to mix stool and preservative [65]. Samples were shipped to Albert Einstein College of Medicine, aliquoted into 1-ml tubes and frozen at − 80 °C. Each aliquot was barcoded A–C and stored in a separate box.

The following method was used to randomize the samples sent to the Knight Lab for microbial sequencing. Using a team of three, three boxes were randomly selected from the set of all boxes containing the “A” sample using a random number generator. From a chosen box containing 81 samples, each person randomly selected three rows (9 tubes per row) of tubes and placed them randomly in one 96-well tube rack (1 rack per person; total 3 racks). The boxes were then rotated among the group, and the process was repeated twice resulting in three trays of 81 tubes consisting of 27 samples from each box. The process took less than 5 min and the tube racks were immediately returned to − 80 °C. The tubes from each rack were scanned in the randomized order creating a spreadsheet listing sample ID and location, placed in a new, labeled freezer box, and then returned to − 80 °C until shipment. Samples were shipped on dry ice via FedEx overnight delivery to the Knight lab for further analysis.

DNA extraction, 16S rRNA gene and ITS1 amplicon sequencing were done using Earth Microbiome Project (EMP) standard protocols (http://www.earthmicrobiome.org/protocols-and-standards/) [66]. Briefly, DNA was extracted with the Qiagen MagAttract PowerSoil DNA kit as previously described [67]. Amplicon polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was performed on the V4 region of the 16S rRNA gene using the primer pair 515f and 806r with Golay error-correcting barcodes on the reverse primer. Amplicon PCR was performed on the ITS1 region using primer pair ITS1f and ITS12 as described in the Earth Microbiome project (http://www.earthmicrobiome.org/protocols-and-standards/ITS1/). ITS1 amplicons were barcoded and pooled in equal concentrations for sequencing. The amplicon pool was purified with the MO BIO UltraClean PCR (Qiagen, Venlo, Netherlands) cleanup kit and sequenced on an Illumina MiSeq sequencing platform. Sequence data were demultiplexed and minimally quality filtered using the Quantitative Insights Into Microbial Ecology (QIIME) 1.9.1 [68] script split_libraries_fastq.py, with a PHRED quality threshold of 3 and default parameters to generate per-study FASTA sequence files.

Bioinformatic processing steps and statistical analyses were conducted in R versions 3.4.1 and 3.4.3 [69]. 16S sequence reads were clustered into operational taxonomic units (OTUs) based on ≥ 97% similarity by the UCLUST algorithm, matched against the GreenGenes reference database (version. 13_8) [70, 71]. Phylogenetic reconstruction was performed by PyNAST [72] with the information from the centroids of the reference sequence clusters contained in the GreenGenes reference database. Sequences that failed to align (e.g., chimeras) were removed. Data were then rarefied and subsampled to a coverage depth of 10,000 reads per sample for downstream analyses. Rarefaction curves are presented in Additional file 1: Figure S8.

Using multivariable adjusted models, we isolated independent correlates of GMB outcomes. Linear modeling was performed using the base R [25] lm function with the dependent variable defined as the metrics of GMB including Shannon index, Prevotella to Bacteroides ratio, and the first two principal coordinates of Bray-Curtis distance. We performed log transformation as appropriate to improve model fit. We used the approaches of stratification combined with multivariable adjustment to address the relationship among multiple correlates of GMB in order to isolate associations with the variables of primary interest and exclude confounding. Adjustment variables were chosen based on a combination of empiric data on correlates of the main predictor and outcome variable, and knowledge of risk factor and disease relationships. These covariates included age (except for analyses with the primary predictor of interest defined as relocation age), gender, and study center for the initial adjusted models, and for the fully adjusted models, we added intake of vegetables without potatoes, intake of whole fruit, intake of whole grains, moderate-to-vigorous physical activity (continuous), BMI (six groups), diabetes/pre-diabetes/normoglycemic defined by American Diabetes Association criteria applied to study glucose and hemoglobin A1c levels (three groups), length and frequency of visits back to the participant’s country of origin (continuous), education level (four groups), income level (five groups), antibiotic use in the last 6 months (binary), and metformin use (binary). Next, in order to exclude confounding effects of age at the time of study, we examined the associations of relocation age with GMB across strata of current age at the time of GMB collection. This analysis was done after excluding individuals who relocated to the USA beyond age 26 years old in order to remove the strong correlation between relocation age and current age. A leave-one-out approach was also used to determine whether any single Hispanic background group was responsible for our main findings, and the Mexican subgroup of the HCHS/SOL was deemed large enough to allow analyses to be repeated in this group alone. To avoid false inferences due to small sample size, we excluded participant subgroups that had a small number of participants (for example, some of the mainland US-born groups separated out by Hispanic background). The final set of analyses examined the independent associations of GMB metrics and individual bacterial (16S) and fungal (ITS1) defined taxa with body mass index (obesity) and birthplace and migration. Significance testing followed a P < 0.05 criteria, and q values were used to control for multiple testing in R according to the method of Storey (http://github.com/jdstorey/qvalue).



Kevin Pang was the primary editor on this article and managed its editorial process and peer review in collaboration with the rest of the editorial team.

The review history is available as Additional file 3.

Publisher’s Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Supplementary information accompanies this paper at 10.1186/s13059-019-1831-z.

