Effects of a high fat diet on gut microbiome dysbiosis in a mouse model of Gulf War Illness

Gulf War Illness (GWI) is a chronic health condition that appeared in Veterans after returning home from the Gulf War. The primary symptoms linked to deployment are posttraumatic stress disorder, mood disorders, GI problems and chronic fatigue. At first glance, these symptoms are difficult to ascribe to a single pathological mechanism. However, it is now clear that each symptom can be linked individually to alterations in the gut microbiome. The primary objective of the present study was to determine if gut microbiome dysbiosis was evident in a mouse model of GWl. Because the majority of Gulf War Veterans are overweight, a second objective was to determine if a high fat diet (HF) would alter GWI outcomes. We found that the taxonomic structure of the gut microbiome was significantly altered in the GWI model and after HF exposure. Their combined effects were significantly different from either treatment alone. Most treatment-induced changes occurred at the level of phylum in Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes. If mice fed HF were returned to a normal diet, the gut microbiome recovered toward normal levels in both controls and GWI agent-treated mice. These results add support to the hypotheses that dysbiosis in the gut microbiome plays a role in GWI and that life-style risk factors such as an unhealthy diet can accentuate the effects of GWI by impacting the gut microbiome. The reversibility of the effect of HF on the gut microbiome suggests new avenues for treating GWI through dietary intervention.

Soon after the end of hostilities in the Gulf War (August 1990–April 1991), a series of health issues began emerging in Gulf War Veterans and have persisted to the present day. The health issues reported are a perplexing and complex constellation of symptoms now known as Gulf War Illness (GWI). Over the past two decades, the Institute of Medicine has completed a series of studies on GWI and Health and the most recent review concluded that “Evidence is sufficient to conclude that a causal relationship exists between being deployed to the Gulf War and a health outcome” (p. 31). When considering all symptoms that have been reported to be part of GWI, posttraumatic stress disorder was the only condition judged to have sufficient evidence of a causal relationship. The other symptoms for which evidence was sufficient to establish an association with deployment were mood disorders (anxiety, depression), GI symptoms (irritable bowel syndrome [IBS], dyspepsia) and chronic fatigue syndrome1. These disparate outcomes make it difficult to attribute GWI to a single mechanism until consideration is given to the gut microbiome.

It remains perplexing that the symptoms of GWI are so chronic. In this preliminary report, we hypothesize that life-style risk factors, and specifically an unhealthy diet, could contribute to the persistence of GWI symptoms. It is known that Gulf War Veterans are often overweight or obese, both of which contribute to chronic health conditions17,18. Moreover, it is well known that a fat-laden diet causes dysbiosis within the human gut microbiome19,20, alters GI transit21 and can contribute to chronic low-grade gut inflammation (see22 for review). Animal studies have reported that energy dense23 and fat- or sugar-enriched diets24 not only cause significant alterations in the gut microbiome and fat accumulation but can also lead to changes in memory, brain inflammation and gut-brain communication. Germ-free mice colonized by fecal transfer from obese mice25 or obese humans26 develop significant increases in body fat, showing the importance of the microbiome in obesity. In this study, mice were exposed to a GWI model (pyridostigmine bromide (PB) and permethrin (PER)) and then fed either a normal diet (ND) or high fat diet (HF) to mimic conditions in Veterans with GWI. The results confirm that the gut microbiome is altered in an animal model of GWI and reveal that a HF further alters the dysbiotic gut microbiome in this model.

An established mouse model of GWI, as effectively employed by Crawford and colleagues27–30, was used in the present studies. This model has been extensively validated31 and has been deemed a GWI-relevant animal model in The Gulf War Illness Landscape (https://cdmrp.army.mil/gwirp/pdfs/GWIRP_Landscape.pdf) published by the DoD GWI Research Program. Male C57BL6/J mice (8 weeks of age) were purchased from Envigo (Indianapolis, I.N.) and housed individually in a room with constant temperature and humidity and with alternating 12 hr periods of light and darkness. All mice used in these studies were from the same cohort and assignment to treatment groups was random. Half of the mice were injected with 50 μl of GWI agents in final doses of 0.7 mg/kg of pyridostigmine bromide (PB) and 200 mg/kg of permethrin (PER) solubilized in 100% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). Drug solutions were further diluted with sterile physiological saline to a final DMSO concentration of 3% just prior to intraperitoneal injection. The other half served as controls and received intraperitoneal injections of 3% DMSO in sterile physiological saline. Injections were administered once daily for 10 days. Several studies consistently show that in rodents, exposure to PER + PB results in neurobehavioral alterations (i.e. anxiety and mood impairment) that are similar to symptoms reported by Veterans with GWI28. Thus, anxiety and depression-like behaviors were tested as specified below. During treatment, all mice were given ad libitum access to water and normal rodent laboratory chow ((ND); D12450K with 10 kcal% from fat, Research Diets, New Brunswick, NJ). On the last day of treatment, the GWI and control groups were split into 3 same sized groups (N = 7–9 mice per group) and fed the following diet regimens: one group on a ND and two groups on a high fat diet ((HF); D12451 with 45% kcal from fat, Research Diets, New Brunswick, N.J.) known to induce obesity in mice32,33). After 3 weeks, one of the HF fed groups was switched back to a ND while the two other groups were continued on their original HF or ND for an additional 3 weeks. Hereafter, the treatment/diet groups are referred to as Con-ND-ND, Con-HF-HF and Con-HF-ND for controls and GWI-ND-ND, GWI-HF-HF and GWI-HF-ND for PER + PB treated mice. To validate the GWI model at the specific post-treatment time of 6 weeks that mice were exposed to diets, the Con-ND-ND and GWI-ND-ND groups were evaluated for depression- (splash test) and anxiety- (elevated plus maze) like behaviors prior to sacrifice. These are two of the core components of mood disorders present in individuals with GWI1. The splash test was performed according to our previously reported work34. Briefly, this test involves spraying a 10% sucrose solution onto the dorsal coat of the mouse in its home cage. This mildly sticky solution induces self-grooming, and the time the mouse spends grooming is considered a direct measure of self-motivated care. The elevated plus maze was also performed according to our previous reports35. In this test, the time spent in both the open and closed arms of the maze was recorded for each mouse in 5 min sessions using a motion-sensitive digital video camera and EZ Video freeware Software (Ezvid, Inc, Los Angeles, CA; https://www.ezvid.com/ezvid_for_windows). Mice were sacrificed by decapitation and the contents of the caecum were harvested and frozen at −80°C. Stressors such as noise and handling by multiple persons were avoided and mice were monitored daily for signs of distress or injury until the experimental endpoint. The Institutional Care and Use Committee of Wayne State University approved the animal care and experimental procedures (IACUC 17-08-0307). All procedures were also in compliance with the NIH Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and were conducted in compliance with ARRIVE guidelines and under IACUC-approved protocols.

DNA was extracted from caecum contents (~200 mg wet weight) using QIAamp PowerFecal DNA kits and sample DNA concentrations were determined using a Qubit 4 Fluorometer (range 70–100 ng/µl). Samples were sequenced in duplicate on an Illumina MiSeq system using a 2 × 250 cycle V2 kit with Illumina reagents and Illumina sequencing procedures detailed by Kozich and colleagues36. The 16S rRNA gene primers targeted the V4 region of the gene (forward primer: 5′-GTGCCAGCMGCCGCGGTAA-3′; reverse primer: 5′-GGACTACHVGGGTWTCTAAT-3′). The 16S rRNA gene sequences from the paired fastq files were trimmed, screened and aligned using mothur37, in accordance with the MiSeq SOP established by Schloss and colleagues (https://www.mothur.org/wiki/MiSeq_SOP). After de-multiplexing and quality control (e.g., truncating reads with >2 adjacent low quality base calls; discarding reads containing any ambiguous base calls in surviving sequences), sequences were binned into operational taxonomic units (OTUs) based on percent sequence identity (97%). The OTUs were taxonomically classified in mothur, and the bacterial community data were thereafter visualized and statistically analyzed using PAST software (v3.2038). Microbiome diversity was characterized in terms of α-diversity using the Chao1 (i.e. community richness) and Shannon and Simpson (1-D) (i.e. community heterogeneity) indices. The number of sequences and Good’s coverage values were analyzed using one-way ANOVA. β-diversity was assessed using the Jaccard (i.e. shared composition) and Bray-Curtis (i.e. shared structure) indices based on relative abundance data. High-dimensional class comparisons were carried out with linear discriminant analysis effect size (LEfSe) in an on-line interface39 using default parameters except that the minimum LDA score was set to 3.6. Heat maps were generated using MetaboAnalyst 4.040.

Data from splash test was analyzed with an unpaired student’s t test using GraphPad Prism (v6.07) for Windows (GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA, USA, www.graphpad.com). Time spent in each set of arms of the elevated plus maze was analyzed by two-way ANOVA and subsequent Sidak’s multiple comparison tests. Food and body weight data were analyzed with two-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc tests using Prism The indices for α-diversity were obtained using PAST software (v3.20; free software for scientific data analysis, Oyvind Hammer, Natural History Museum, University of Oslo, Norway; https://folk.uio.no/ohammer/past/). The results were analyzed statistically with a one-way ANOVA and subsequent Tukey’s post hoc comparisons, using Prism. The indices for β-diversity were also calculated, and statistical analyses were carried out, using PAST software as well. The results were analyzed using a two-way NPMANOVA, and post hoc comparisons were made using one-way NPMANOVAs. Taxonomic distributions at the phylum level (treatment X phylum) and lower taxonomic levels (treatment X time) were analyzed with a two-way ANOVA followed by post hoc comparisons using Tukey’s tests in GraphPad Prism.

Figure 1 shows that the GWI model used in this study recapitulates some of the key features of the condition, such as mood alterations. Mice treated with PER + PB showed decreased self-motivated care reflected as a shorter grooming time in the splash test compared to controls (p < 0.05; Fig. 1A). This is associated with a depression-like phenotype in rodents. Two-way ANOVA analysis of anxiety-like behaviors tested with the elevated plus maze test revealed a main effect of treatment (F1,20 = 6.64, p < 0.05), time in each set of arms (F1,20 = 633.2, p < 0.0001) and these two factors interaction (F1,20 = 13.51, p < 0.01). The time animals treated with PER + PB spent in the closed arms of the maze was significantly longer compared to controls (p < 0.01, post hoc Sidak’s test), whereas no differences were found in the time spent in the open arms (Fig. 1B). These results are indicative of anxiety-like phenotype in the mice treated with PER + PB.

Figure 2 A shows food intake measures for all groups and analysis by two-way ANOVA revealed significant main effects of time (F11,484 = 72.71, p < 0.0001), treatment (F5,44 = 65.82, p < 0.0001) and their interaction (F55,484 = 5.57, p < 0.0001). The GWI agent-treated group displayed a significantly higher food intake of the ND compared to controls fed equally (post hoc Tukey’s test; p < 0.0001). The consumption of HF impacted the food intake as Con-HF-HF mice had a lower intake compared to Con-ND-ND mice (post hoc Tukey’s test; p < 0.0001) and to Con-HF-ND (post hoc Tukey’s test; p < 0.0001). Con-ND-ND mice did not differ from Con-HF-ND. In mice treated with GWI agents, both groups fed with HF showed a decreased intake compared to mice fed with ND (post hoc Tukey’s tests for both GWI-HF-HF and GWI-HF-ND vs GWI-ND-ND; p < 0.0001). No differences were detected when comparing the GWI-HF-HF group to the GWI-HF-ND mice. While HF was associated with a lower food intake, body weight followed the opposite trend (Fig. 2B). Both treatment groups fed the HF (Con-HF-HF and GWI-HF-HF) gained on average 10 g over the 6 week test period, whereas both groups fed the ND (Con-ND-ND and GWI-ND-ND) gained ~3 g. Body weight was not altered by treatment with GWI agents as Con-ND-ND was not different from GWI-ND-ND, and Con-HF-HF was not different from GWI-HF-HF mice. When mice initially fed a HF diet were switched to the ND for 3 weeks, both groups lost significant amounts of weight (~6–7 g). However, the Con-HF-ND group achieved a significant reduction in body weight sooner after the diet switch (post hoc Tukey’s test; p < 0.001 at day 27) than the GWI-HF-ND group (post hoc Tukey’s test; p < 0.001 at day 31), and the GWI agent-treated mice ultimately lost less weight than controls (post hoc Tukey’s test; p < 0.05 at day 41). The main effects of time (F11,528 = 64.8, p < 0.001) and treatment (F5,528 = 115.9, p < 0.001) as well as their interaction (F55,528 = 7.3, p < 0.001) were significant (2-way ANOVA). These data establish that the HF led to significant gains in body weight that were of the same magnitude in controls and mice treated with GWI agents. Both groups lost significant weight when switched back to ND, although weight loss was more pronounced among controls.

The number of sequences obtained were as follows: 117,212 ± 7,509 for Con-ND-ND, 103,432 ± 17,384 for Con- HF-HF, 128,772 ± 9,319 for Con-HF-ND, 100,369 ± 10,433 for GWI-ND-ND, 111,781 ± 32,363 for GWI-HF-HF, and 128,371 ± 32,694 for GWI-HF-ND. There were no statistically significant differences among these groups with respect to sequence numbers. Good’s coverage values ± SD were the following: 99.63 ± 0.043 for Con-ND-ND, 99.7 ± 0.056 for Con-HF-HF, 99.67 ± 0.025 for Con-HF-ND, 99.63 ± 0.025 for GWI-ND-ND, 99.71 ± 0.06 for GWI-HF-HF, and 99.69 ± 0.079 for GWI-HF-ND.

Figure 6 presents results from linear discriminant analysis effect size (LEfSe) analysis and highlights the effect sizes of the treatments and diets on affected taxa. LEfSe compares each group to all others simultaneously and generates bar plots that include taxa that are distinctly relatively abundant in each specific treatment and diet group. Segata et al.39 propose LEfSe as a means for biomarker discovery by finding OTUs that consistently explain the differences between two or more types of microbial communities. Two main outcomes from this analysis are apparent. First, the groups treated with GWI agents are demarcated by more taxonomic biomarkers than controls for each diet condition. Second, most treatment groups were distinguished by taxa in the order Clostridiales within the phylum Firmicutes (i.e., Con-ND-ND, Con-HF-ND and GWI-HF-ND). However, the GWI-ND-ND group was represented primarily by taxa in the order Bacteroidales within the phylum Bacteroidetes, the Con-HF-HF group was singularly characterized by taxa within the order Desulfovibrioales, and the GWI-HF-HF group was represented by taxa within the orders Lactobacillales and Erysipelotrichales. The HF diet shifted the predominant taxa for the GWI-ND-ND group from Bacteroidetes to Firmicutes. All of the control groups regardless of diet were distinguished by taxa within Firmicutes and the relatively most abundant taxa in the group fed a ND were in the Clostridium XIVa and IV clusters. Controls fed the HF diet were characterized by taxa within the genera Desulfovibrio and Pseudoflavonifractor and the control group shifted to a ND from the HF diet was distinguished by Porphyromonadaceae and Lachnospiraceae. Treatment- and diet-induced biomarkers were observed down to the level of family or genus as shown in the cladogram (Fig. 6).

Figure 7 illustrates treatment effects at the phylotype level. Treatment and diet effects on specific bacterial phyla are presented as percent relative abundance. The main effect of phylum was significant (F7,352 = 2616, p < 0.0001) but the treatment main effect was not. The phylum X treatment interaction was also significant (F35,352 = 50.6, p < 0.0001) by two–way ANOVA. Post hoc comparisons revealed that virtually all treatment groups differed significantly from one another (p values ranging from 0.05 to 0.0001). The observed changes occurred only within the prominent phyla Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes (Fig. 7). The only groups that did not differ were Con-ND-ND vs GWI-ND-ND within Firmicutes and Con-ND-ND vs GWI-ND-ND within Bacteroidetes. The results of all pairwise statistical tests for % relative abundance of Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes among treatment groups are presented in Supplementary Table S2.

Because the observed differences in % relative abundance occurred within the Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes phyla, and in light of the findings that the ratio of Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes (F/B) is higher in obese and overweight humans than in lean controls41, we calculated this ratio for all treatment groups and the results are presented in Fig. 8. The main effect of treatment was significant (F5,44 = 50.8, p < 0.0001). Specifically, the HF diet caused significant increases in the F/B ratio for controls and GWI treated mice (Tukey’s test, p < 0.0001 for both). The increase in the F/B ratio was significantly greater in the control mice than the GWI agent-treated mice (Tukey’s test, p < 0.001). When groups fed the HF were shifted to the ND, the F/B ratio decreased to levels observed in the respective ND-ND controls (Tukey’s test, p < 0.0001 for both).

The effects of treatments and diets on taxa below the level of phylum were also probed in view of the likelihood that changes at the highest taxonomic level may have not reached statistical significance because of increases and decreases of equal magnitude within phyla in percent relative abundances of bacteria at lower taxonomic levels. Figure 9 shows these results and indicates that effects at the taxonomic levels of class and order vary in a complex manner that is dependent on the combined influence of treatment and diet. The main effect of treatment in each panel of Fig. 9 was significant by one-way ANOVA with p values ranging from 0.035 (for Bacilli) to 0.0001 (for all remaining taxa). In general, the effects of the HF on bacterial taxa were more prevalent than those of GWI-agents treatment. The Con-ND-ND group did not differ from the GWI-ND-ND group, whereas both control and GWI agent-treatment groups fed ND-ND were significantly different from the respective HF-HF groups for most taxa. The complexity of the changes are most evident for Desulfovibrionales and Clostridia, where the relative abundances of these taxa were increased in HF-HF groups compared to ND-ND groups, and in Betaproteobacteria and Bacteroidia, which were both greatly decreased in abundance in the HF-HF groups. Two additional unique changes can be seen in Fig. 9A where the abundance of Mollicutes in GWI-HF-ND group was significantly increased compared to the other groups, and in Fig. 9D where the abundance of Betaproteobacteria was significantly decreased for most groups compared to the Con-ND-ND group.

Each of the OTUs from the LEfSe analysis (Fig. 6) was subjected to analysis using the Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) in an attempt to identify taxa that were differentially abundant among treatments at the species level (i.e. the consensus sequence of the OTU had >99% sequence identity with the sequence of a bacterial species within the BLAST taxonomy database). The results presented in Table 1 show that all groups except Con-HF-ND were represented by specific bacterial species. The Con-ND-ND group was characterized by Muribaculum intestinale whereas Fusimonas intestini was characteristic of the GWI-ND-ND group. The Con-HF-HF group was represented by Flintibacter butyricus and Bacteroides intestinalis and the corresponding GWI-HF-HF group was demarcated by Bacteroides vulgatus, Mucispirillum schaedleri and Parabacteroides goldstenii. Finally, the biomarkers Paramuribactum intestinale, Duncaniella muris and Bacteroides acidifaciens emerged in the GWI-HF-ND group.

The goal of the present study was to determine if a HF would interact with PER and PB to further alter the gut microbiome in a mouse model of GWI. The rationale for this pilot study was the fact that a majority of Gulf War Veterans are overweight or obese17,18, and that fat-laden diets can lead to changes in memory, GI and brain inflammation and gut-brain communication19,20,23,24. In this regard, it was important to rule out that an increased caloric consumption of the HF diet rather than its fat component itself was responsible for the observed effects. Thus, the energy density for the groups fed with HF versus ND was calculated. According to manufacturer’s specifications, the energy density for the ND is 3.8 Kcal/g, whereas for the HF it is 4.7 Kcal/g. Using an average of the intake of each diet group over the entire experiment, the caloric densities were surprisingly higher for the ND groups (490.96 Kcal for Con-ND-ND and 530.1 Kcal for GWI-ND-ND) than for the HF groups (443.1 Kcal for Con-HF-HF and 444.4 Kcal for GWI-HF-HF). This is evidence that the number of calories was not the causative factor for the effects we reported. The experimental results established that PER and PB caused a significant dysbiosis, as did exposure to a HF, and their combined effects led to an altered gut microbiome that was significantly different from the effect of either treatment alone. These results are even more impactful when considering the relatively short-term period over which mice were fed the HF (i.e., 3 or 6 weeks). Consumption of the HF for only three weeks caused significant increases in body weight in groups treated with PER + PB or controls compared to mice maintained on a ND. Two additional observations link these effects to alterations in the gut microbiome as a mediating factor. First, the Gulf War agents PER and PB did not alter water intake or the amount of food consumed on either diet. Second, when mice in both treatment groups were shifted from the HF to a ND for three additional weeks, mice treated with PER + PB lost significantly less weight than controls.

In summary, additional studies on the role of the gut microbiome in GWI are called for in light of emerging findings that significant enteric dysbiosis has been documented in Veterans with GWI as well as in animal models of this disorder. Each of the major symptom clusters of GWI has been linked individually to alterations in the gut microbiome so it is plausible that an altered gut microbiome could contribute to all major symptoms of this disorder. It is clear that the symptoms of GWI persist long after the toxicants to which military personnel were exposed in the Gulf War (e.g., PER and PB) have been removed from the body. Therefore, emphasis should also be placed on assessing various life-style risk factors for their ability to potentiate and/or extend the chronicity of the symptoms of GWI. There is no medically validated or effective treatment for GWI and if additional substantiation can be gathered for a role for gut microbiome dysbiosis, new and non-invasive therapies that target restoration of the gut microbiome in Veterans with GWI (e.g., probiotics, dietary interventions, fecal transplantation) could be tested as therapies.



Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

is available for this paper at 10.1038/s41598-020-66833-w.

