Dietary Patterns and Associated Microbiome Changes that Promote Oncogenesis







The recent increases in cancer incidences have been linked to lifestyle changes that result in obesity and metabolic syndrome. It is now evident that these trends are associated with the profound changes that occur in the intestinal microbiome, producing altered microbial population signatures that interact, directly or indirectly, with potentially pro-carcinogenic molecular pathways of transcription, proliferation, and inflammation. The effects of the entire gut microbial population on overall health are complex, but individual bacteria are known to play important and definable roles. Recent detailed examinations of a large number of subjects show a tight correlation between habitual diets, fecal microbiome signatures, and markers of metabolic health. Diets that score higher in healthfulness or diversity such as plant-based diets, have altered ratios of specific bacteria, including an increase in short-chain fatty acid producers, which in turn have been linked to improved metabolic markers and lowered cancer risk. Contrarily, numerous studies have implicated less healthy, lower-scoring diets such as the Western diet with reduced intestinal epithelial defenses and promotion of specific bacteria that affect carcinogenic pathways. In this review, we will describe how different dietary patterns affect microbial populations in the gut and illustrate the subsequent impact of bacterial products and metabolites on molecular pathways of cancer development, both locally in the gut and systemically in distant organs.

Cancer is one of the leading causes of mortality amongst all ages and ethnic groups worldwide. The incidence of cancer has been increasing every year, with a particularly dramatic increase in developing countries. In fact, over the last two decades, 55% of total cancer incidences were documented in developing countries. It is predicted that by the year 2050, this number will reach to 70% (Bray et al., 2018; Sung et al., 2021). With this current trend, GLOBOCAN predicts the cancer burden to rise to 27.5 million new cases per year by 2040 (Sung et al., 2021). Globally, lung, breast, and colon cancers are the most frequently occurring cancers. This recent increase in cancer incidence has been linked to changes in lifestyles that have resulted in an increase in obesity and the metabolic syndrome, which are among the leading risk factors for cancer (Hulvat, 2020).

Of late, research on the microbiome has garnered enormous attention from the scientific world, as well as from the public. Although microbiome research is still in its infancy, it has already been established that the microbiome has a direct influence on almost all the pathophysiological processes in the human body (Asnicar et al., 2021; George et al., 2021). The composition of the gut microbiome and its interaction with the cellular processes in the gut epithelium have been shown to predispose an individual to certain diseases, including but not limited to colorectal, liver, and other cancers, inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and other autoimmune and neurologic diseases including Alzheimer’ (Tedelind et al., 2007; Nosho et al., 2016; Vogt et al., 2017). However, due to the tremendous diversity of gut microbiome, and the heterogeneity of cancer pathophysiology, the direct link between microbiome composition and cancer pathogenesis is yet to be established (Scott et al., 2019). The purpose of this review is to summarize recent research into the relationship between dietary patterns and the gut microbiome and associated metabolome, and how they directly regulate pro-carcinogenic pathways. We look at the effect of altered gut microbiome locally in the gut colonic tissue and environment and systemically, where microbiome-derived toxins and metabolites affect distant organs via portavenous and arterial circulation. For comparison, this review also focuses on the beneficial effects of a healthier, “plant-rich” diet.

It is challenging to define an absolute dietary pattern, particularly as most observational and research studies traditionally focus on key components of certain types of diet, excluding the overall effects and the synergy between dietary components (Klement and Pazienza, 2019). However, in the real-world, and as direct consequence of globalization making every type of diet accessible in nearly every country on-demand, people do not consume isolated products. Moreover, due to the global coverage of the food manufacturing industry, consumers in many countries are not given the information necessary to understand what the exact constituents and additives of their foods are. Today, nutritional epidemiology is trying to observe the changes in human health due to the overall dietary composition, since the predominance and the trend of specific diets is more important than consumption of certain isolated foods (Hosseinkhani et al., 2021). Researchers studying nutrition and health often use food frequency questionnaires (FFQs) to track the frequency of foods consumed over a fixed period of time. The FFQs are then evaluated using different dietary indices, that quantitatively measures an individual diet’s adherence to dietary guidelines in order to correlate a person’s diet history with various health outcomes such as obesity or biomarker concentrations (Supplementary Table S1). In this review, the term “dietary pattern”, will be used to segregate and draw the line between “Western type of diet” and “Plant-based diet”.

The relationship between dietary patterns and the microbiome has been investigated by many studies, with the significant recent addition of the extensive Arivale/Institute for Systems Biology study (Manor et al., 2020) and the international multicenter PREDICT-1 study (Asnicar et al., 2021). The Arivale study analysed 3,409 individuals enrolled in a wellness program with extensive characterization of metabolic markers, lifestyle, diet, and stool microbiome 16S amplicon sequencing. They found that specific microbial populations with increased diversity were associated with improved cardiometabolic markers and plant-based dietary patterns (health-related group). Conversely, they found that specific microbial populations with less diversity were associated with worse cardiometabolic and lifestyle markers (disease-related group). The health related group had increased genera Coprococcus, Lachnospira, Faecalibacterium, and unclassified genera from the Ruminococcaceae and Clostridiales family/order. The disease-related group had increased abundance of the genera Bacteroides, Ruminococcus, Sutterella, Bilophila, Acidaminococcus, and Megasphaera. PREDICT-1 investigators analyzed stool microbiome metagenomic sequencing data from 1,098 individuals from the UK and United States, and correlated the results with demographic variables, detailed dietary logs, and cardiometabolic blood markers (Asnicar et al., 2021). Major findings from the study included that the intrasample alpha diversity, or an estimate of the total number or richness of bacterial species in a sample, significantly correlated with 56 of 295 tested correlations with personal characteristics, habitual diet and metabolic markers. Microbiome species richness was positively correlated with favorable high-density lipoprotein levels, whereas body-mass index (BMI), visceral fat, and probability of fatty liver were inversely correlated with species richness. Data from individual food diaries were evaluated using validated dietary indices such as the alternate Mediterranean diet score (aMED), Healthy Eating Index (HEI) and the Plant-based Dietary Indices (PDI) that have previously been shown to correlate with reduced risk of chronic diseases (Supplementary Table S1). These indices showed a tight correlation with microbial composition, demonstrating how habitual diets influence the microbiome. Out of the 30 bacterial species that showed the strongest overall correlation with markers of nutritional and cardiometabolic health, 15 species were positively associated with healthy plant-based diets and negatively associated with visceral fat, liver fat probability, and high-risk metabolic markers. These included F. prausnitzii, Proventella copri, Roseburia, Oscillibacter, and several Firmicutes species. Conversely, the other 15 bacterial species were negatively associated with healthy diets, and positively associated with increased visceral fat, liver fat probability, and high-risk metabolic markers. These included Clostridia species, R. gnavus, and F. plautil. The repertoire of 30 bacterial species represents a novel composite quantitative marker of the link between dietary patterns and cardiometabolic health, and broadly support a dichotomous clinically relevant separation of healthy “plant-based” and less healthy “western, high fat” dietary patterns with the associated “healthy” microbiome or eubiosis and the “unhealthy” microbiome or dysbiosis (Table 2) (Asnicar et al., 2021). Furthermore, diet and gut microbiome has been directly linked with the circulating metabolome of human serum (Bar et al., 2020). Bar et al. found that over 50% of the observed variance in 1,251 human serum metabolites was explained by diet and microbiome variables, in a study of 491 subjects who were carefully phenotyped according to genetics, gut microbiome, diet and lifestyle measures (Bar et al., 2020). Finally, a recent longitudinal study of 307 well characterized subjects correlated adherence to the plant-based Mediterranean diet with specific microbial and functional patterns which in turn correlated with favorable cardiometabolic markers (lipids, c-reactive protein, and hemoglobin A1C) (Wang et al., 2021). These studies strongly suggest the mechanisms whereby adherence to a Mediterranean diet results in reduced cardiovascular, metabolic, and cancer related outcomes demonstrated in the PREDIMED randomized clinical trial (Estruch et al., 2018; Toledo et al., 2015). More prospective randomized intervention trials of dietary components and specific bacterial communities are needed to further test the link between dietary composition, microbiome structure/function parameters, and cardiometabolic and oncogenic outcomes.

The gut microbiome and the human intestinal immune system have co-evolved over evolutionary time to stay in balance and to regulate each other, the ideal status quo that corresponds to a healthy state. This balance is composed of four elements (Figure 1). First, the bacteria pathogens are suppressed and are kept compartmentalized from the intestinal epithelium by a thick mucus layer, the release of antimicrobial peptides (RegIIIg) and secreted IgA to protect the epithelial surfaces from invasion, and the presence of intraepithelial immune cells and neutrophils that can migrate into the intestinal lumen. Second, the intestinal epithelium has tight junctions that form the epithelial barrier that are strengthened by luminal metabolites (Biragyn and Ferrucci, 2018). Third, inputs from luminal antigens regulate intestinal macrophages to become hyporesponsive and exhibit tolerance, producing IL-10 and less inflammatory cytokines (Round and Mazmanian, 2010; Vinolo et al., 2011). Fourth, there is active suppression of microbe reacting effector T-cells by Foxp3b Treg cells and Roc-3-Tr1 cells via IL-10; and intraepithelial immune cells use MHC to present bacterial antigens and down regulates reactive CD4b T cells (Geuking et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2019).

Furthermore, interaction between SCFAs and intestinal epithelial cells leads to the elevated secretion of NLRP3 inflammasome that further results in increased secretion of IL-18, hence facilitating the improvement of tight junction’s homeostasis (Macia et al., 2015; Nowarski et al., 2015). Moreover, SCFA-receptors are also present on Paneth, Goblet and L cells, hence binding of SCFAs to these receptors’ triggers production of molecules of defending nature. When SCFAs bind GPCR on Goblet cells, it triggers the activation of NLRP6, as well as mTOR/STAT3 signaling pathway to increase mucus production in the gut lumen (Wlodarska et al., 2014; Li et al., 2019b). Simultaneously, butyrate acts via Paneth cell GRP43 receptor resulting in the production of key anti-microbial peptides, such as RegIIIγ and β-defensin (Birchenough et al., 2016). These two cascades of reactions, also lead to an improved barrier junction, as well as elevated innate response to the continuous flow of pathogens. Interestingly, enteroendocrine L cells, that are part of the colonic epithelium and express SCFA receptor on their surface, upon the interaction with acetate and butyrate, produce glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) and fasting peptide YY (PYY) peptides (Brooks et al., 2017; Zhao et al., 2018) These peptides are thought to increase energy intake while decreasing appetite, hence these peptide are involved in the gut-brain axis and are potential therapeutic agents in treating conditions like obesity. In summary, the majority of research studies support that SCFA derived from dietary fiber plays a key role in epithelial defenses and immune regulation in the colon, however further research is essential to better understand benefit-based stratification amongst various dietary fiber types. For instance, a recent study by Singh et al. has demonstrated that diet rich in soluble inulin fiber provoked icteric hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in dysbiosis mice models (Singh et al., 2018).

Direct effects of dietary constituents, microbiota, and microbial products are thought to play a causative role in colorectal carcinogenesis though multiple mechanisms, including genotoxic, inflammatory, immune mediated, and metabolic (Scott et al., 2019) In addition to being associated with a distinct microbial signature, western-type diets are characterized by certain dietary constituents (N-nitroso compounds, heterocyclic amines, and heme) and increased secondary bile acids and other metabolic products derived from enriched bacterial species that can directly promote a local pro-inflammatory and pro-carcinogenic environment in the colon. In addition, the lack of dietary fiber in western-type diets results in metabolic shifts that impact epithelial defense against inflammation (Bhaskaran et al., 2018).

Although the review is focused on the microbial composition in the gut lumen, it is important to highlight arising areas of mycobiome and virome and how much they contribute to oncogenesis. Both fungal and viral composition in the gut, has been shown to be altered in patients with cancer in comparison to healthy individuals (Vallianou et al., 2021). It has also been found that CRC patients show virome dysbiosis, however more studies are required in order to fully elucidate the contribution of eukaryotic viruses in cancer development (Massimino et al., 2021).

F. nucleatum is a Gram-negative commensal anaerobe that in the past decade has drawn a lot of attention due to its strong association with the development of colorectal neoplasia (Abu-Ghazaleh et al., 2021). There are numerous studies linking F. nucleatum overpopulation in the gut microbiome to local and distant cancers in the human body. Recent population-based studies have demonstrated overpopulation and presence of F. nucleatum in biopsies of colorectal adenomas, and patient stool screening in comparison to the healthy individuals (Mima et al., 2016b; Mehta et al., 2017). To understand how F. nucleatum potentially causes carcinogenesis both locally in the colon and systemically, it is important to establish the interaction of metabolites produced by F. nucleatum and the cells of the colonic epithelium.

Several studies have shown that F. nucleatum -infected CRCs have a higher rate of proliferation. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is an antigen found on the cell-wall of F. nucleatum. This key proinflammatory, immunogenic bacterial metabolite, a well-known inducer of the Toll-like Receptor (TLR) and NF-κB pathways that lead to inflammation and oncogenic changes both locally and systemically (Salcedo et al., 2010; Yang et al., 2017a). Activated NF-κB transcription factor, results in activation of MYD88 signaling pathway and promotes an increased expression of the microRNA 21 (miR-21), which in turn inhibits the activity of RAS GTPase—RASA1 (Ciesielska et al., 2021). miR-21 was found to significantly downregulate the production of RASA1, a member of RAS GTPases family that plays a key role in inactivating set of oncoproteins such as RAS (Salcedo et al., 2010). When RASA1 is downregulated, the MAPK signaling pathways is further activated and results in CRC cell proliferation and eventual metastasis. Moreover, apart from inhibiting the production of RASA1, miR21 also downregulates Pdcd4, which is a key tumor suppressor (Yang et al., 2017a).

Escherichia coli is a symbiotic and commensal bacterium, widely occurring in oral, vaginal and intestinal microflora. Certain strains of E. coli can induce carcinogenic changes on the cellular level (Arthur et al., 2012). An E. coli strain from the B2 phylogroup that possesses polyketide synthase island (pks+), was found to colonizes a healthy gut microbiome in response to a shift and continuous adherence to a Western dietary pattern. Recent studies have confirmed an increased level of pks + E. coli strain in patients with advanced CRC (Kohoutova et al., 2014). pks + E. coli produces colibactin, an extremely virulent secondary genotoxin. Multiple in vivo studies have confirmed that colibactin introduces DNA double-strand breaks leading to genomic instability and thereby considerably elevates the risk of acquiring further mutations (Cougnoux et al., 2014; Wilson et al., 2019).

Mechanistically, colibactin induces damage due to the presence of a cyclopropane ring within its structure. Wilson et al. have demonstrated in vivo evidence of colibactin activity causing DNA adducts and alkylation, leading to eventual DNA damage. The study demonstrated the strong link between colibactin structure and ability to cause DNA double stranded break, through creating DNA interstand cross-link, leading to genomic instability, and further accumulation of distinct mutation leading to CRC (Wilson et al., 2019; Xue et al., 2019).

B. fragilis is a commensal Gram-negative anaerobe, that exists in a symbiotic fashion with the host organism (Gagnaire et al., 2017). Recent studies have strongly linked adherence to the HFD Western diet to the elevated population of Bacteroides fragilis in the gut microbiome (Abu-Ghazaleh et al., 2021). Due to the sharp increase in CRC cases worldwide, numerous studies have been looking at the interaction of B. fragilis with the colonic epithelium. The colonization of colonic epithelium with B. fragilis is one of the key signatures of the microbiome in CRC patients. Although the causality of the events is yet to be fully determined, recent population-based studies have shown increased level of B. fragilis strains in patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and colitis (Dejea et al., 2018; Rashidan et al., 2018). B. fragilis normally comprises up to 2% of total microbiome volume (Wu et al., 2007), but only a certain strain, Enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis (ETBF), is associated with the development of CRC and can be characterized as carcinogenic (Liu et al., 2020; Mohseni et al., 2020). ETBF releases the zinc-metalloprotease B. fragilis toxin (BFT), that binds a receptor on the colonocyte and induces favorable conditions for CRC progression. This occurs by establishing chronic inflammatory microenvironment with activating a set of oncogenes and initiating production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) (Hernández-Luna et al., 2019). Upon interaction between BFT and epithelial cell receptor, β-catenin molecule dissociates from the E-cadherin complex and travels to the nucleus (Chung et al., 2018). Abundant of unphosphorylated β-catenin in the nucleus initiates the NF-ĸB/AP1 transcription machinery, causing the overexpression of pro-inflammatory cytokine like IL-8 and oncogenes such as C-MYC (Cheng et al., 2020). Moreover, BFT triggers the STAT3 signaling pathway, giving rise to the continuous production of IL-17 and IL-23, significantly increasing the extent of inflammation locally in the gut (Thiele Orberg et al., 2017; Chung et al., 2018). This continuous production of BFT promotes proliferation of CRC cells and maintains chronic inflammation at the sites of colonic epithelium. Furthermore, ETBF infected colonic cells produce reactive oxygen species (ROS), leading to the progressive genomic instability, exponentially elevating risk of acquiring new mutations, and development of CRC (Cheng et al., 2020).

Another example of a potentially pathogenic species enriched in CRC samples is Peptostreptococcus anaerobius. This species have been shown in cell culture to have direct inflammatory and pro-oncogenic impacts by binding to integrin α2/β1 integrin receptors on cell surfaces, activating PI3K, Akt, and NF-κB to enhance proliferation, proinflammatory cytokines, and T cell suppression (Long et al., 2019).

Dysbiosis is implicated as a bridge between changing gut microbiome composition and the incipient manifestation of extraintestinal tumors. The microbial balance shifts away from commensal bacteria in the gut, creating a favorable environment for chronic inflammation as well as the suppression of immune surveillance (Zhou et al., 2020; Kovács et al., 2020). Intriguingly, it has been hypothesized that pathogenic bacteria, bacterial products, and metabolites escape into the systemic circulation via increased leakiness of tight junctions and contribute to promoting inflammatory pathways in other organs. This amounts to an organismal-level of carcinogenic circulatory signaling instigated by the diet-deregulated microbiome. Contemporary efforts in this field have examined the contribution of the gut metagenome to the development of conditions such breast, liver, and pancreatic cancers (Figure 3) (Chen et al., 2019; Jain et al., 2021).

Ma et al., has recently demonstrated that increase in natural killer T cells population inhibits the tumor progression in liver (Ma et al., 2018). It was observed that increase in Clostridium Cluster XIV abundance promoted secondary bile acid production, inhibited NKT cells, consequently leading to the progression of liver tumorigenesis. By administrating vancomycin antibiotic treatment researchers were able to deplete Gram-positive bacterial population in mice microbiome. Antibiotic treatment allowed reduced production of secondary bile acid and an increase in the translocation of CXCL16 ligand from the gut to the liver. CXCL16 is the key regulator of liver sinusoidal endothelial cells, by elevating the levels of CXCL16 researchers were able to improve the liver barrier from the gut circulated blood. This evidence supports the association between gut microbiome composition and liver homeostasis. Microbiome composition influences every organ and system in the entire body, however the majority of studies focused on specific microbes out of entire microbial populations, perhaps limiting the understanding of the microbial activity in certain diseases. Therefore, taking more systematic approach and trying to mimic entire gut microbiome signatures may unravel new avenues in cancer research.

Alcohol use is common worldwide across most dietary patterns. Estimates from an international WHO survey indicate that the mean lifetime prevalence of alcohol use in all countries is 80%, with a range of 3.8–97.1%. The combined average population lifetime prevalence of alcohol use disorders is 8.6%, ranging from 0.7% in Iraq to 22.7% in Australia. As of 2016, the WHO estimated that 2.3 billion people were current drinkers and 283 million people (5.1% of adults) had alcohol use disorder. Since alcohol use is so common, most studies on the effect of specific diets on the intestinal microbiome likely include both alcohol and non-alcohol users. Approximately 4% of all cancers are caused by the overconsumption of alcohol, primarily including cancers of the upper aerodigestive tract, liver, colorectum, and breast. Alcohol has a myriad number of toxic and proinflammatory effects (Rumgay et al., 2021) that are beyond the scope of this review, we will focus here on microbiome-related changes.

The changes in the microbiome associated with heavy alcohol use have been correlated with worse medical outcomes in individual patients. Lang et al., have shown that patients with alcoholic cirrhosis have reduced fungal diversity and an overgrowth of Candida species compared with healthy individuals and non-alcohol-related cirrhosis. In the alcoholic cirrhosis subjects, this is accompanied by increased systemic fungal antigens and higher risk for death (Lang et al., 2020). These findings are duplicated in mouse models of alcoholic hepatitis with demonstration of increased circulating fungal antigens and increased liver inflammation via stimulation of C-type lectin like receptor CLEC7A on hepatic Kupffer cells resulting in cytokine IL-1b release (Yang et al., 2017b; Yang et al., 2019). Furthermore, qualitative differences in fecal viral taxa are associated with worse 90-days survival in patients with alcoholic hepatitis (Jiang et al., 2020). Currently there is much interest in whether interventions targeting the specific fungal and virome changes associated with poor prognosis can improve patient outcomes. To demonstrate the feasibility of this approach, Duan et al. showed that patients with alcoholic hepatitis have increased abundance of cytolysin-positive Enterococcus faecalis, which correlates with increased mortality (Duan et al., 2019). Germ free mice colonized with cytolysin-positive E. faecalis from patients with alcoholic hepatitis had worse liver disease in a model of alcohol induced liver disease. Mice were treated with bacteriophages that target and destroy cytolysin-positive E. faecalis and they showed that this could ameliorate alcohol induced liver disease in mice. Further studies targeting specific pathogenic bacteria implicated by metagenomics in human diseases are needed.

In addition to diet, host genetics is an important factor that influences the gut microbiome, predisposing individuals to microbiome-modulated pathologies. A genetic bias for microbiome composition is suggested by studies of association and heritability of certain bacterial species in related individuals. Monozygotic twins have higher correlation of microbiome signatures than dizygotic twins (Goodrich et al., 2016). Host genetic factors can influence the microbiome in mice (Benson et al., 2010). Genome-Wide Association Studies (GWAS) of the microbiome have revealed only limited links to host genetics. The detection of only a small number of associated loci is primarily due to inter-individual variability, microbiome heterogeneity, and potential overshadowing of host-genetics factors by the contributions of the diet, environment, and lifestyle to microbiome composition (Kurilshikov et al., 2021). While the link between host genetics and microbiome diversity may be weak, genetics can modulate specific microbiome-diet, microbiome-environment, and microbiome-lifestyle interactions in ways that lead to specific disease outcomes which are traceable to specific molecular interactions between host- and microbiome-derived components. Well-controlled studies, especially those utilizing homogenous populations, may be able to reveal these impacts more easily. Despite these limitations, meta-analyses of GWAS have proven effective in identifying specific molecular mechanisms connecting the microbiome to numerous diseases, including cancer. In particular, TMAO, the microbiome-generated metabolite of red meat and fat previously connected with cardiometabolic risks, was additionally linked to CRC risk by this approach (Xu et al., 2015). Aside from colon cancer, other cancers, including bladder and prostate cancer, show clear associations with the microbiome in GWAS. These signals were identified through correlating significant disease-associated genetic variants from GWAS with microbiome data. The putative causative relationships do not just go “From microbiome to cancer”, as they also go the other way around: “From cancer to microbiome.” Atrial fibrillation, chronic kidney disease, and prostate cancer, as predicted by host genetics, have potential causal effects on the abundance of specific gut microbiome components (Xu et al., 2015). This bidirectionality of the cancer-microbiome axis is important to take into account, because—while the idea that the microbiome can regulate, or influence disease pathogenesis is more intuitive and widely accepted—it means that a disease state can also influence the microbiome (with potential downstream feedback effects on the disease).

The specific molecular mechanisms that are responsible for, and mediate, the existence of multiple directional nodes joining microbiome-derived and host RNA-derived edges in the microbiome-cancer regulatory network should be characterized in future work, so that they can be rationally targeted for therapeutics.

In this review we discussed recent studies that highlight role of microbiome, in particular abundance of certain pathogenic bacteria including F. nucleatum and pks + E. coli, that drive the process of carcinogenesis through induction of DNA damage, overexpression of oncogenes like Myc and triggering production of highly pro-inflammatory agents like IL-6. This review allows the reader to clearly grasp the main metabolic and molecular events that lead towards intestinal and systemic carcinogenesis upon adherence to low fiber, high fat Western dietary pattern. To compare, this review describes recent studies that uniformly demonstrate plant-based diet as a protective factor from set of metabolic conditions including obesity and from various types of cancer, including CRC. Due to the limitations of space the review is primarily focused on human studies, and extensive review of many animal studies related to microbiome and cancer are not included. The protective properties of plant-based diet are associated with the increased production of SCFAs by the commensal bacterial in the gut. The SCFAs are one of the key regulators of immune tolerance, improved gut barrier junctions, and the intestinal clearance. The depletion of SCFA producers or SCFA receptors result in adverse effects including high-grade inflammation and poor cancer prognosis. In contrast, elevating the abundance of SCFA producing bacteria in the gut microbiome through the dietary intervention, results in downregulation of inflammation and inhibition of tumor microenvironment. Although microbiome-cancer axis has been extensively studied in the past three decades, there is tremendous amount of vital information that is yet to be discovered. This review indicates that diet is the major regulator of gut microbiome and can act as a first line preventive measure from developing carcinogenic conditions. Moreover, major bacteria and metabolites that are associated with detrimental effects of Western diet on intestinal and systemic homeostasis that were discussed in this review, can serve as a potential therapeutic targets in a variety of diseases, especially cancer. Diet, as a key component of our life should not be regarded only from the nutritional point of view. Being selective, consistent, and conscious about the personal diet may prevent a one’s spectrum of health conditions and improve the quality of life. Growing numbers of studies are focusing on manipulation of gut bacterial composition to enhance the efficacy of anti-cancer therapies. Several recent studies have shown significant improvement in anti-CTL4 and anti-PD1 based therapies, via alternating gut microbiome composition towards certain commensal bacterial species, including Bifidobacterium species (Sivan et al., 2015; Vetizou et al., 2015). Using dietary intervention, to enhance certain commensal bacteria population, can be a supportive measure in vast array of diseases, including cancer. Personalized targeted microbial therapy is one of the most promising novel therapeutics. Currently used antibiotics are of a broad spectrum and are detrimental for both commensal and pathogenic bacteria in the gut microbiome. In situations like cancer, antibiotic established dysbiosis is a potential threat to the successful cancer therapy. Using novel bioinformatic tools and established metagenomic and metabolomic data, we can now begin to create a more personalized approach to cancer therapy and prevention. Soon we will be able to monitor and shift microbial signatures to high SCFA and anti-inflammatory metabolite producers, and target specific harmful bacteria using selective antibiotics, bacteriophages, or competitor probiotic species. Numerous randomized trials of specific gut microbiome therapeutics will be needed to expand and prove these concepts.

All authors listed have made a substantial, direct, and intellectual contribution to the work and approved it for publication.

This research was supported by the Mohammed Bin Rashid University of Medicine and Health Sciences and in part by the Al Jalila Foundation.

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fcell.2021.725821/full#supplementary-material

