Geography, Ethnicity or Subsistence-Specific Variations in Human Microbiome Composition and Diversity

One of the fundamental issues in the microbiome research is characterization of the healthy human microbiota. Recent studies have elucidated substantial divergences in the microbiome structure between healthy individuals from different race and ethnicity. This review provides a comprehensive account of such geography, ethnicity or life-style-specific variations in healthy microbiome at five major body habitats—Gut, Oral-cavity, Respiratory Tract, Skin, and Urogenital Tract (UGT). The review focuses on the general trend in the human microbiome evolution—a gradual transition in the gross compositional structure along with a continual decrease in diversity of the microbiome, especially of the gut microbiome, as the human populations passed through three stages of subsistence like foraging, rural farming and industrialized urban western life. In general, gut microbiome of the hunter-gatherer populations is highly abundant with Prevotella, Proteobacteria, Spirochaetes, Clostridiales, Ruminobacter etc., while those of the urban communities are often enriched in Bacteroides, Bifidobacterium, and Firmicutes. The oral and skin microbiome are the next most diverse among different populations, while respiratory tract and UGT microbiome show lesser variations. Higher microbiome diversity is observed for oral-cavity in hunter-gatherer group with higher prevalence of Haemophilus than agricultural group. In case of skin microbiome, rural and urban Chinese populations show variation in abundance of Trabulsiella and Propionibacterium. On the basis of published data, we have characterized the core microbiota—the set of genera commonly found in all populations, irrespective of their geographic locations, ethnicity or mode of subsistence. We have also identified the major factors responsible for geography-based alterations in microbiota; though it is not yet clear which factor plays a dominant role in shaping the microbiome—nature or nurture, host genetics or his environment. Some of the geographical/racial variations in microbiome structure have been attributed to differences in host genetics and innate/adaptive immunity, while in many other cases, cultural/behavioral features like diet, hygiene, parasitic load, environmental exposure etc. overshadow genetics. The ethnicity or population-specific variations in human microbiome composition, as reviewed in this report, question the universality of the microbiome-based therapeutic strategies and recommend for geographically tailored community-scale approaches to microbiome engineering.

We share our body space with around 100 trillion microorganisms, collectively known as microbiota (Turnbaugh et al., 2007; Consortium, 2012). The growing perception that our genetic landscape is a summation of the genes embedded in our own genome as well as in genomes of our microbiota (the microbiome), and that our metabolic features present an assemblage of human and microbial traits has led to the launching of numerous microbiome projects worldwide. Recent advancement of culture-independent, high throughput next generation sequencing technologies has enhanced our ability to characterize the human microbiome at various states of health and disease (Turnbaugh et al., 2007; Consortium, 2012). Large-scale endeavors such as the Human Microbiome Project (HMP) have been initiated for characterization of healthy human microbiome (Turnbaugh et al., 2007). Studies are being conducted to explore the plausible disease links of microbiome and efforts are being made to understand how microbiome varies with host lifestyle, genetics, age, nutrition, medication, and environment (Turnbaugh et al., 2006; Blaser et al., 2008; Gao et al., 2008; Islami and Kamangar, 2008; Garrett et al., 2010; Tana et al., 2010; Castellarin et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2011; Kostic et al., 2012; Li et al., 2014; Blekhman et al., 2015; O'Keefe et al., 2015; Falony et al., 2016; Goodrich et al., 2016; Zhernakova et al., 2016).

If we think globally the human microbiome studies are partial, representing for the most part from US, Europe and other so-called WEIRD countries (i.e., Western, Educated, Industrialized, Rich, and Democratic countries) which generally represent urban population (Morton et al., 2015). Only recently, some national and international initiatives have been taken for characterization of human microbiome in diverse ethnic populations and there is a fast growing collection of data describing the microbiome structures in various non-US or non-Western populations (Figure
1) (Moossavi, 2014). These studies have shown significant variations in microbiome composition in healthy individuals from different race and ethnicity categories (Nam et al., 2011; Nasidze et al., 2011; Yap et al., 2011; Yatsunenko et al., 2012; Mason et al., 2013; Li et al., 2014; Schnorr et al., 2014; Leung et al., 2015; Obregon-Tito et al., 2015; Van Treuren et al., 2015; Gomez et al., 2016). Between-group differences in susceptibilities to many health conditions from preterm birth to type 2 diabetes, obesity and even cancer are being linked to microbiome diversity (Peek and Blaser, 2002; Ley et al., 2005; Turnbaugh et al., 2006; Blaser et al., 2008; Gao et al., 2008; Islami and Kamangar, 2008; Garrett et al., 2010; Tana et al., 2010; Castellarin et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2011; Kostic et al., 2012; Blekhman et al., 2015; O'Keefe et al., 2015; Goodrich et al., 2016). It is an established fact that microbiome composition is linked with various diseases, which motivates the scientific community to identify the microbiome based biomarkers for diagnostic and clinical purposes, but population based variation in microbiome composition between healthy individuals makes it difficult. In case of gut microbiome Falony et al. reported a decrease in the number of core genera from 17 to 14 when they analyzed the gut microbiome data from the populations of Papua New Guinea, Peru, and Tanzania with that of a western dataset including data from Flemish and Dutch cohorts, as well as from UK and US populations (Falony et al., 2016). Population based variation in microbiome profile depends on various population based factors for example, Dutch people consume high milk and low antibiotics compared to other populations of Europe (Zhernakova et al., 2016). So population based variation in microbial profile in healthy individuals must be considered to identify the microbiome based biomarkers for particular diseases. In recent times, a number of reviews have been published summarizing microbiome research from various perspectives, but a comprehensive account of the observations made on geography, ethnicity or life-style-specific variations in microbiome composition is long overdue. The present review attempts to address this issue. It will discuss the major findings on cross-population variations in microbiome composition of various biogeographic spaces considering the five major human body habitats—Oral cavity, Respiratory Tract, Gut, Urogenital Tract (UGT) and Skin. The present article also aims to characterize the geographical-core (present in all populations under the study) microbiota at different body habitats of human (Tables S1–S3). Some recent studies attributed variations in microbiome profiles to methodological biases (DNA extraction, primer choice and amplification methods) (Brooks et al., 2015; Walker et al., 2015; Gerasimidis et al., 2016; Vebo et al., 2016). In the present review, most of the included studies are similar in methodology and despite such similarities in methodology, significant variations were observed in the microbiome profiles of different populations. Thus the methodological biases, if any, could not affect the observations made in this review (Table S4). Geography represents an ensemble of genetic, environmental and cultural factors and the degree to which the microbiome is shaped by each of these factors remains debated. It is not clear yet which factor plays a dominant role in shaping the microbiome—nature or nurture, host genetics or his environment, traditions and life-style? The present review has made an attempt toward identification of the factors responsible for geography-based alterations in microbial communities. Possible links between the microbiome structure and the disease susceptibility of the host population has also been discussed. Our work clearly indicates the need for the global association studies between human microbiota and different geographic locations for a proper assessment of the relative importance of diet, ancestry and locations in sculpting the human microbiome architecture.

In humans, the gastrointestinal microbiome, especially the gut microbiota (GM), has the largest number of microbes and the greatest variety of species compared to other body habitats. The GM constituents, as predicted from the fecal microbiome, vary substantially across healthy individuals (Consortium, 2012). GM dysbiosis is associated with numerous metabolic and inflammatory disorders like obesity, diabetes, allergy etc. (Adlerberth and Wold, 2009; Armougom et al., 2009; Anderson et al., 2011; Clemente et al., 2012). Cross-population studies on GM usually attempt to address any of the two major issues: (a) influence of host ethnicity and/or life-style on microbiome structure (De Filippo et al., 2010; Yatsunenko et al., 2012; Mardanov et al., 2013; Tyakht et al., 2013; Schnorr et al., 2014; Martinez et al., 2015; Morton et al., 2015; Obregon-Tito et al., 2015; Rampelli et al., 2015; Sankaranarayanan et al., 2015; Gomez et al., 2016) and (b) plausible correlations between variations in GM structure and disease susceptibility (O'Keefe et al., 2007; Ou et al., 2013).

There are many other studies demonstrating geography or ethnicity-specific divergences in GM composition (Figure
1). For instance, American community, both Japanese and Korean communities and Chinese community showed high abundances of Firmicutes, Actinobacteria, and Bacteroidetes, respectively in their GM (Nam et al., 2011). At the genus levels, Japanese (Nishijima et al., 2016) showed high abundances of Bifidobacterium and Clostridium, Chinese of Bacteroides and Korean of Prevotella and Faecalibacterium in their GM. Nishijima et al., showed dominance of Prevotella in Malawi, Venezuela, and Peru; Bacteroides in USA, China, Denmark, Spain, and France; Eubacterium in Russia; Clostridium in Sweden and Blautia in Austria (Nam et al., 2011; Nishijima et al., 2016). Bacteroides genus dominated in American and Jamaican populations while Prevotella genus dominated in Indian population (Kao et al., 2016). Ruminococcus, Roseburia, Veillonellaceae dominated in gut microbiome of healthy individuals from the Netherlands (Bonder et al., 2016). Three robust clusters (enterotypes) based on gut microbiome composition were identified by Arumugam et al. but populations specific variations were not well explored (Arumugam et al., 2011).

Microbes that colonize at several niches within our oral cavity after birth and form a stable ecosystem are collectively called oral microbiome. Diseases like periodontitis, teeth reduction, caries and even cancer are known to be associated with imbalance in oral microbiome composition. The fact that susceptibility to these diseases often shows ethnic biases, has inspired the investigators to explore the geographical variations in oral microbiome and its potential impact in oral health. Blekhman et al. observed a link between variation of microbiome composition in oral cavity and host genetic variation when different populations (African vs. American, African vs. European, African vs. Asian, American vs. European, and American vs. Asian) were compared by considering the FST (Fixation Index) values. Similarly, Li et al. (2014) also showed that saliva microbiome of genetically different populations from Alaska, Germany and Africa were significantly different in alpha (within sample) and beta (between samples) diversity for microbiome composition in saliva. Mason et al. compared the oral microbiome composition between the healthy populations from major races/ethnic groups residing in the United States namely non-Hispanic blacks, non-Hispanic whites, Chinese and Latinos and found that 33 of 77 genera significantly differ in abundance between these four populations (Mason et al., 2013). The study demonstrated ethnicity-specific clustering of microbial communities in saliva and subgingival biofilms and using a machine-learning classifier, it had been possible to identify an individual's ethnicity from sub-gingival microbial signatures with a 100% sensitivity and 74% specificity in African American, 67 and 80% in Latinos and 50 and 91% in Caucasians (Mason et al., 2013). As African Americans and Caucasians share similar environmental factors including food, nutrition, and lifestyle over several generations, it was suggested that the distinct composition of their oral microbiome could be due to the variations in tooth and root morphologies across different ethnic populations as well as to their innate immune responses to infectious agents (Lavelle, 1970, 1971; Cruz et al., 2009; Dewhirst et al., 2010; Mason et al., 2013; Wade, 2013).

A comparative study on salivary microbiome composition in Alaskans, Germans, and Africans revealed more similarities between native Alaskans and Germans than between either group and Africans both at the genus and OTU levels (Li et al., 2014). Abundance of the Firmicutes was highest in Alaskans and Germans, while in Africans, Proteobacteria was the most abundant phylum. Six common genera—Neisseria, Campylobacter, Granulicatella, Megasphaera, Selenomonas, and Actinomyces-were shared by both Alaskans and Africans but only three genera namely Actinobacillus, Aggregatibacter, and Capnocytophaga were shared by Germans and Africans (Li et al., 2014). Beta diversity was highest in Africans but alpha diversity in Germans (Li et al., 2014). Four Alaskan groups, located in different regions of Alaska and habituated to distinct diets, did not reveal any significant differences in their saliva microbiome composition. But substantial differences could be observed in the microbiome diversity among three African groups (Nasidze et al., 2011; Li et al., 2014). The Batwa Pygmies, a former hunter-gatherer group from Uganda, showed higher diversity in saliva microbiome than that in the agricultural groups from Sierra Leone and the Democratic Republic of Congo, which may be attributed to the ancient subsistence pattern and protein-rich diet of the pygmies (Nasidze et al., 2011; Li et al., 2014). People of Sierra Leone and Congo, who are geographically distant but have similar life style and diet, showed a higher degree of similarity to each other than with the Batwa. The Batwa population had low incidence of dental caries, presumably due to higher occurrences of Haemophilus, which is known to play an important role in pH homeostasis in oral cavity (Nasidze et al., 2011; Li et al., 2014).

The human respiratory tract is subdivided physiologically into two parts i.e., Upper Respiratory Tract (URT) composed of oropharynx, nasopharynx and nasal cavity and Lower Respiratory Tract (LRT) containing lungs. LRT were traditionally assumed to be sterile, when identification of microorganisms relied on culture based methodologies. But recent advancement of culture independent molecular methodology changed this notion and indicated the presence of microbes in LRT (Charlson et al., 2011). Discovery of human airways microbiome opened the opportunity for understanding the disease onset, exacerbation and progression of chronic respiratory diseases which might be associated with dysbiosis in microbiome (Martin et al., 2015).

Most studies of airways microbiome characterization were focused on URT and few studies of LRT microbiome characterization in healthy human have been restricted to Western European and North American populations (Charlson et al., 2011). The healthy lung microbiome was found indistinguishable from URT except the exclusive presence of Tropheryma whipplei in lungs microbiome (Charlson et al., 2011). URT microbiome has been characterized in geographically diverse populations from USA, South Korea (Yi et al., 2014), Netherlands (de Steenhuijsen Piters et al., 2016), and Canada (Stearns et al., 2015) and found mostly similar in all populations. URT microbiota is usually dominated by Firmicutes, Actinobacteria, Proteobacteria, Bacteroidetes, and Fusobacteria phyla, which contain species from Streptococcus, Neisseria, Gemella, Corynebacterium, Alloiococcus, and Haemophilus genera. The healthy adult lung (LRT) microbiome in US population was dominated by Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes and Proteobacteria phyla, which included the species from Streptococcus, Veillonella, Prevotella, Pseudomonas, Haemophilus, and Neisseria (Charlson et al., 2011; Morris et al., 2013; Allen et al., 2014; Botero et al., 2014; Bassis et al., 2015; Dickson et al., 2015a,b; Tarabichi et al., 2015). There is no significant difference identified in lung microbiome from eight geographically different cities in USA (Morris et al., 2013).

The skin is the largest body organ of the human, composed of distinct habitats that differ by skin thickness, folds, the density of hair follicles and type of glands. Millions of microbes, mostly commensal, colonize on skin and disruption of this healthy microbiota may cause various diseases (Noble, 1984; Roth and James, 1989; Chiller et al., 2001; Fredricks, 2001; Cogen et al., 2008; Tagami, 2008; Grice and Segre, 2011). Studies suggested that diseases like atopic dermatitis, psoriasis, rosacea, acne etc. are often caused not because of pathogens but due to disruption in normal skin microbiota (Ong et al., 2002; Nomura et al., 2003a,b; de Jongh et al., 2005; Gudjonsson et al., 2009).

A study on Hong Kong population has implemented the concept of pan microbiome—the total number of microbial species in a specific population (Leung et al., 2015). In this study, the investigators found a steady increase in the size of the pan microbiome, as populations from US, Tanzania and China were included in the dataset, indicating variations in skin microbiome across the countries (Leung et al., 2015).

The urogenital tract (UGT) microbiome has been characterized mainly in samples from female subjects derived from vaginal sites. Lactobacillus species are known to be the major component of the healthy vaginal microbiota but some studies indicated that Gardnerella, Atopobium, Prevotella, Pseudomonas, or Streptococcus species are predominant in some healthy women instead of Lactobacillus (Hyman et al., 2005; Zhou et al., 2007; Fettweis et al., 2014).

Whether the variation along ethnic lines is a reflection of genetics or environment remains a matter of conjecture. Zhou et al. proposed that host genetic factors, including the innate and adaptive immune systems, may be more important in shaping the composition of vaginal microbiota than the cultural and behavioral differences among ethnic groups such as multiple sex partners, douching, and the use of contraception devices (Zhou et al., 2007). The vaginal bacterial communities of Japanese women resemble those of women in other racial groups (white and black women from North America) (Zhou et al., 2010). But in other ethnic populations (African American and European) Fettweis et al. found significant correlation not only of ethnicity, but also of no-pregnancy and less-alcohol use with the higher relative abundance of bacterial vaginosis associated species (Fettweis et al., 2014).

Apart from a detail discussion of geography, dietary habits, ethnicity or local environment (rural/urban) specific variations in human microbiome, the present article also aims to characterize the geographical-core (present in all populations under the study) microbiota at different body habitats of human. This is totally based on the published data on relative abundance of microbial communities at distinct body niches in healthy human subjects (Figure
3, Tables S1–S3). The core microbiota of a specific body site of human refers to the set of the genera, which are commonly found in that specific body site of all populations studied so far, irrespective of their geographic locations, ethnic background or places of dwelling. In 2016, Falony et al. also identified a core microbiome (based on individuals) but in this present analysis we considered the populations instead of individuals for estimating the geographical-core microbiome (Figure
3, Tables S1–S3) (Falony et al., 2016). Size of the geographical core indicates the effect of geographical factors on microbiome composition that might be useful to understand the geographical exclusiveness of a specific microbial community.

With a view to identify the primary causes of variations in the core microbiome composition (relative abundances) of specific body niches across different populations, we have conducted the Principal Component Analysis (PCA) of the core microbiota composition in stool, saliva and vagina using abundances of core microbiome of 12, 15, and 7 different populations, respectively. Figure
3 depicts the Axis 1 vs. Axis 2 plot of PCA of the stool (Figure
3A), saliva (Figure
3B) and vaginal (Figure
3C) microbiome of different populations, where the directions of increase of various bacterial genera are indicated by specific arrows, which indicates the population specific dominance of a specific microbial community (Figure
3). These observations clearly indicate that though there exists a core microbiome in each specific body-niche, distinct bacterial genus/genera dominate in healthy individuals of different geographical and/or ethnic populations. Figure
3 showed that most of the variance is accounted by first two principal components in vaginal microbiome (~99%), stool (~85%), and saliva (~75%). All geographical populations are grouped in different clusters on respective PCA plots for example, gut microbiome is grouped in 3 main clusters as shown in Figure
3A (Cluster 1 [Bacteroides dominance]: Denmark, Spain, USA and China; Cluster 2 [Prevotella dominance]: Peru, Venezuela, Russia and Malawi; Cluster 3 [Ruminococcus and Blautia dominance]: Austria, Sweden, Japan, and France); saliva microbiome also clustered into 3 groups as shown in Figure
3B which comprise differential dominance of microbial genera for example, Cluster 1: Streptococcus, Neisseria, and Haemophilus (USA-Louisiana, USA-California, Germany, and China); Cluster 2: Prevotella and Veillonella (USA-Alaska, South Africa, Poland, Turkey, Philippines, and Argentina); the vaginal microbiome is clustered into 2 groups (Cluster 1 [Lactobacillus dominance]: USA-Black and USA-Hispanic; Cluster 2 [Prevotella dominance]: Canada, Japan, USA-Asian and USA-White) but Belgium population is segregated from both groups (Figure
3C).

Studies conducted on human microbiome so far revealed some general trends observed in variations in micro-ecology at distinct body habitats across various countries/populations around the world (Figure
1). It appears that there had been a gradual transition in the gross compositional structure and decrease in diversity of the human microbiome, especially in the gut microbiota, as the human populations passed through three stages of subsistence—foraging, rural farming and industrialized urban life. Higher microbial diversity in nomadic hunter-gatherers had probably endowed them with greater stability and flexibility, enabling them to cope with challenging ecology. Changes in human diet, lifestyle and traditions brought about by the Neolithic revolution have been reflected in the microbiota, especially in the gut microbiome of the traditional agriculturalists. With time, urbanization and industrialization have gradually led to modern people of developed countries, adapted to indoor-based secured life-style, consumption of refined high protein foods, improved sanitation, less exposure to soil, forest or domestic animals and habitual use of antibiotics—all having a dramatic impact on the functional role of the western microbiome.

The debate on “nature” vs. “nurture” remains to be resolved. Some of the geographical/racial variations in microbiome structure have been attributed to differences in host genetics and innate/adaptive immunity, while in many other cases, cultural/behavioral features like diet, hygiene, environmental exposure etc. overshadow genetics. Especially the diet and subsistence mode of the host population often inscribe their signatures in the gut microbiome diversity and composition, irrespective of the geographic origin, ethnicity or local environment of host population. The fact that despite large geographic and ethnic divergences, the hunter-gatherer populations like the Hadza from Africa and the Matses from South America or the rural agriculturalists like the Tunapuco from Africa and the Malawi and Venezuela from South America exhibit similarity in their gut microbiome structure advocates for the dominance of nurture over nature (Nam et al., 2011; Schnorr et al., 2014). On the contrary, host genetics and immunity are considered to be the major factors in shaping the UGT (vaginal) bacterial profiles, though hygiene, mode of pregnancy or alcohol addiction seems to have substantial influences (Zhou et al., 2010). Taken together, these conjectures motivate the need for larger association studies to assess the relative importance of host ancestry, diet, hygiene and other life-style factors in sculpting the human microbiome architecture.

Reports on ethnicity or population-specific variations in human microbiome composition question the universality of the microbiome-based therapeutic strategies and recommend for geographically tailored community-scale approaches to microbiome engineering. Generic microbiome manipulations, designed on the basis of studies on WEIRD societies, may have unintended, and even adverse consequences in non-western populations. However, designing a geographically tailored therapeutic approach would need an in-depth understanding of how population and environmental parameters can affect the microbial communities and their metabolic potentials, which, we hope, may be attained in near future through construction of pan microbiome of human populations around the globe.

VG developed the first draft of this review. SP provided suggestions for expansion and new direction and final editing. CD guided, coordinated the study and revised the manuscript critically for important intellectual content. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

Funding. This work has been supported by the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), Government of India. (CSIR Network projects GENESIS (BSC0121) and HUM (BSC0119). SP is supported by Ramanujan Fellowship from Department of Science and Technology (DST), Govt. of India.

The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fmicb.2017.01162/full#supplementary-material

