Gut Microbiome Structure and Association with Host Factors in a Korean Population



Characterizing the gut microbiome in the healthy population is the first step in elucidating its associations with host health conditions. Populations with different diet patterns, lifestyles, and genetic backgrounds harbor different gut microbes. In this study, we characterized the gut microbiome of 890 healthy Koreans using 16S rRNA sequencing. The Korean population harbored a relatively large fraction of the Prevotella enterotype and presented a distinctive gut microbiome, compared to that in the populations of other countries. Additionally, we determined the clusters of cooccurring microbes that were quantitatively correlated with each other. We found that microbe composition of the gut was strongly associated with age. We identified that the abundance of members of Bacteroidia and Clostridia differed with the host dietary patterns, body mass index, and stool frequency. The gut microbiome data obtained in this study would be an important resource for future studies addressing microbial contributions in health and disease.

IMPORTANCE Comparing the gut microbiomes of healthy controls and disease patients showed that the composition of the gut microbiome is associated with various host health conditions. The gut microbiome in healthy Western populations is well characterized, while that of non-Western populations, with different diet patterns, lifestyles, and genetic backgrounds, is not clearly defined. In this study, we characterized the microbiome of 890 healthy Korean individuals using 16S rRNA sequencing and found that Koreans have a gut microbiome different from that in the individuals of neighboring countries. The members of Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes cooccurred and were quantitatively associated with each other. Additionally, we found that the gut microbial composition is strongly associated with the host’s age. The microbiome data presented here represent the gut microbiome of a healthy Korean population and could be used to unveil gut microbiome-associated host conditions in this population.

The gut microbiota plays a crucial role in human health and diseases, such as infections, allergies, obesity, diabetes, and even cancer (1). This has sparked interest in the study of the microbiome and its potential application for enhancing the diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment of microbiome-related diseases. However, recruiting participants, collecting fecal samples, selecting case and control groups, and analyzing the associations between microbes and diseases have been challenging. The last two problems ensue because individuals harbor a wide variety of microbes and the normal status of the microbiome is not clearly defined. Large-scale studies have been conducted to characterize the normal microbiome in various countries, such as the United States (2, 3), China (4), Belgium (5), and the Netherlands (6). The gut microbiome differs among countries (7, 8), and there are significant regional variations within a country (4). Therefore, to accurately explore microbe-host associations, it is essential to obtain microbiome data from many individuals who share similar genetic backgrounds and lifestyles. Previous studies on Koreans demonstrated that the gut microbial composition of Koreans was different from that of the Americans, Chinese, and Japanese (9, 10). However, these studies targeted a small number of Korean individuals, 19 and 20 samples. It is necessary to determine the microbial composition from a larger number of Korean samples. South Korea is a place where nearly half the population live in the metropolitan area of Seoul and have a rice-based diet enriched with fermented foods and vegetables (11). Due to these distinctive traits, it would be valuable to characterize the gut microbiome of the Korean population.

Here, we aimed to characterize the microbiome composition of the normal gut of the Korean population living in the metropolitan area of Seoul using 16S rRNA sequencing. The microbiome from healthy Korean donors was compared to that of those from other countries including neighboring countries, such as China and Japan, and the interactions among the microbes were investigated. In addition, we evaluated the influence of host factors in the development of the gut microbiome. The gut microbiome data set provided in this study delineates the gut microbial compositions of healthy Koreans, and it could be utilized as the control group for case-control studies, for understanding the interaction between the gut microbes and the host.

We recruited 890 healthy volunteers from the Seoul metropolitan area (77.5% female; mean age [SD] of the population, 55.6 [15.0] years; see Table S1 in the supplemental material). Their gut microbiome was profiled using 16S rRNA sequencing and amplicon sequence variant (ASV) analysis. We named the ASVs after their lowest-level assigned taxonomy name and their rank of total read count. For example, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii ASV 1 is the most abundant ASV among ASVs annotated as F. prausnitzii, and Bacteroides ASV 2 is the second most abundant ASV among the ASVs classified as Bacteroides but not classified at the species level. Additionally, in this study, the prevalence of taxonomic groups, or ASVs, refers to the proportion of individuals having nonzero reads for a taxonomic group.

Prevotella copri can be grouped into four clades—A, B, C, and D—depending on their genetic structure; clade A was ubiquitously found among both the Westernized and non-Westernized populations, while clades B, C, and D were predominantly found in non-Westernized populations, whose diet contains more fibers and complex carbohydrates (12). As Koreans consume more vegetables than the Western populations (11), we evaluated whether the Korean population has P. copri clades typical of non-Westernized populations. Consequently, we found that P. copri ASVs of the Korean gut microbiome mostly belonged to clade A. This indicates that the gut microbiome of the Koreans is similar to that of the Westernized populations, pertaining to the P. copri clade (Table S2).

We compared the gut microbiome from the Korean population to the gut microbiomes of the populations from other countries. Data sets from China (two data sets with 412 and 25 samples) (13, 14), Japan (n = 468) (15), Spain (n = 40) (16), Chile (n = 41) (17), and Nigeria (n = 48) (18) were analyzed. Only data sets targeting the V3-V4 region of the 16S rRNA gene were included in the analysis to minimize methodological artifacts.

We compared the Korean Prevotella ET samples with that from each of the other countries. The Korean Prevotella ET samples were significantly different from the Chinese (Beijing/Hangzhou), Chilean, and Nigerian Prevotella ET samples (PERMANOVA, P < 0.001, for each of the three data sets). There were only a small number of Prevotella ET samples from Chinese (Shanghai), Japanese, and Spanish populations, and therefore, it is unclear whether the Prevotella ET samples of these populations are similar or dissimilar to those of the Korean population.

We investigated the interactions among the microbes that constitute the Korean gut microbiome. Such interactions can be determined by the statistical analysis of microbial abundance correlations and niche overlapping (19,–21). We determined the pairs of ASVs, which were present in the same sample with positively correlated abundances. These ASV pairs were used to construct the interaction network of ASVs. In this network, ASVs within the same phylum tended to be connected to each other (Fig. S2). We grouped those ASVs and defined them as microbial clusters, which were named after the taxonomic name of the most abundant ASV in the cluster (Fig. 3).

We further investigated the pairs of microbes whose abundances were positively correlated with each other, regardless of their cooccurrence. The abundances of ASVs belonging to the same phylum were strongly correlated (Fig. S3A and B). However, a relatively small number of ASVs were negatively correlated, and such associations were found mostly between Bacteroides ASVs and P. copri ASVs (Fig. S3C).

We investigated the host-gut microbe interactions by analyzing the statistical association between host factors and the prevalence and abundance of ASVs. At first, the associations of the gut microbiome with the two major demographic variables, age and sex, were evaluated. A number of ASVs, such as F. prausnitzii, were more prevalent in the older groups than in the younger groups, regardless of sex (hypergeometric distribution, false-discovery rate [FDR] < 0.1) (Fig. 4A). Age positively correlated with the alpha diversity in both the sexes (Spearman’s correlation test, male P = 1.7 × 10−5, female P = 9.0 × 10−6) (Fig. 4C). However, some ASVs like Bifidobacterium longum 1 ASV and Oscillospira 6 ASV were more prevalent in the youngest populations (Fig. 4A). Correlation analysis between age and ASV abundance revealed that the abundances of ASVs in Lachnospiraceae C1 and C2, Oscillospira, Bacteroides C1, and Bacteroides C3 clusters decreased with age while ASVs’ abundance in Streptococcus, P. copri, and Klebsiella clusters increased with age (Fig. 4B). The difference in the prevalence of ASVs between the male and female individuals was smaller than that observed among the different ages; however, P. copri ASVs and Sutterella ASVs were more frequently found in males, while Clostridium ASV 1 and Clostridium symbiosum ASV 1 were more frequently observed in females (hypergeometric distribution, FDR < 0.1) (Fig. 4A).

We examined the associations of ASV abundance with host health status and lifestyle factors. During the analysis of the microbe-host factor association, the contribution of age was considered if the age was significantly associated with the host factor (Wald test). A number of ASVs were significantly associated with host factors including stool frequency, waist circumference, body mass index (BMI), and food intake patterns (FDR < 0.2) (Table S3).

The ASVs that showed significant associations with BMI and stool frequency were analyzed. The abundances of P. copri 1 and P. copri 2 ASVs, in the P. copri cluster, were positively associated with BMI, while Bacteroides uniformis 1 and Bacteroides 10 ASVs, in the Bacteroides C3 cluster, and the four ASVs in the Ruminococcaceae cluster were negatively associated with BMI (Fig. 5A). In the Lachnospiraceae C2 cluster, the abundance of Blautia obeum 1 ASV was negatively associated with BMI, but that of Blautia 2 and Collinsella aerofaciens 1 ASVs were positively correlated with BMI (Fig. 5A). The abundances of 11 ASVs of the Ruminococcaceae cluster and five ASVs of the Bacteroides C3 cluster were negatively associated with stool frequency (Fig. 5B).

The microbial composition is affected by the diet of the host (22, 23); we evaluated which microbes were affected by this factor. A relatively small number of ASVs was associated with a single dietary group (Table S3). However, 17 and 3 ASVs were associated with the second and the first principal components of dietary pattern, respectively (Table S3). The first principal component (PC1) was largely dominated by grain intake, while the second principal component (PC2) differentiated the Westernized diet—marked by the intake of noodles, snacks, and meat—from the traditional diet—marked by vegetables, seaweed, and soybean intake—and was negatively associated with age (Spearman’s correlation coefficient = −0.51, P = 3.54 × 10−61) (Fig. 6A and
B). Three ASVs were positively associated with the diet PC1 at an FDR of <0.2: Sutterella ASV 4 (Wald test, P = 3.4 × 10−4), Coprococcus ASV 6 (P = 5.3 × 10−4), and Paraprevotella ASV1 (P = 5.8 × 10−4). The diet PC2 was positively associated with Lachnospiraceae ASV 14 (P = 6.3 × 10−6) and Dorea longicatena ASV1 (P = 9.6 × 10−6) and negatively associated with Streptococcus ASV 3 (P = 4.0 × 10−6) and Haemophilus parainfluenzae ASV 5 (P = 8.7 × 10−4) (Fig. 6C).

We characterized the gut microbial compositions of healthy donors of the Korean population living in the Seoul metropolitan area using 16S rRNA sequencing. The Korean gut microbiome consisted of two enterotypes, Bacteroides and Prevotella. The Korean diet includes a wide variety of vegetables; therefore, we investigated whether the high abundance of P. copri ASVs in the Korean population was linked to the Prevotella clades B, C, and D, which are predominantly found in the hunter-gatherer societies that consume abundant fiber and complex carbohydrates (12). The P. copri ASVs in the Korean gut microbiome predominantly belonged to clade A, indicating that the Korean gut microbiome was similar to the gut microbiome of Westernized populations. Although the Korean diet consists of various side dishes, including a variety of vegetables, the staple is boiled rice, and therefore, the consumption of fiber and complex carbohydrates might not be sufficient to foster the growth of Prevotella clades B, C, and D.

In this study, we reported the characteristics of the gut microbiomes of a healthy Korean population, especially focusing on ASVs and microbial clusters. Additionally, we found their associations with age, host dietary pattern, BMI, and stool frequency. We also demonstrated that the microbiome of the Korean population is different from that in the populations from other countries, including a higher proportion (40%) of the Prevotella enterotype in the Korean samples. These findings emphasize the importance of microbiome data collection in each country for developing microbiome-based diagnosis or therapeutics for a specific population. We believe that the data set from this study could be used as a control in future studies aiming to explore the role of gut microbes in health and disease.

Healthy subjects were recruited from the health care center of Chung-Ang University Hospital (Seoul, South Korea). The exclusion criteria included individuals who were administered antibiotics within 3 months before the start of the study, those who had a history of major gastrointestinal surgery or active uncontrolled gastrointestinal disorders or diseases, or those diagnosed with a cancer or a chronic clinically significant cardiovascular, pulmonary, renal, or hepatic disease. Women who were pregnant or lactating were also excluded. In total, 897 volunteers were recruited, but data from seven participants were excluded from the analysis due to poor 16S rRNA sequencing results that did not pass the quality threshold described under “ASV analysis” below.

All participants underwent blood tests and anthropometrical measurements at the clinic. They also completed a questionnaire addressing their lifestyle and clinical history and a food frequency questionnaire covering 106 food items (38). The daily intake of each food item was calculated based on the intake frequency and portion size indicated in the questionnaire and then divided into 17 food groups. Among the metadata, quantitative categorical attributes were mapped to numeric values, and nominal categorical attributes were converted into Boolean variables using one-hot encoding. The entire list of 82 metadata variables used in this study is shown in Table S4 in the supplemental material. The blood test data of two participants were partially missing, and they were excluded from the associational analysis.

The participants collected fecal samples at home within 48 h of the study using the OMNIgene-GUT tubes (DNA Genotek, Ottawa, Canada), according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

DNA extraction and 16S rRNA sequencing were performed as described previously (39). Briefly, DNA was extracted from the fecal samples using a QIAamp DNA stool minikit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). Each fecal sample (250 μl) was transferred to a 2-ml tube containing 0.3 g sterile 0.1-mm zirconia beads (BioSpec, Bartlesville, OK, USA) and 1.2 ml ASL lysis buffer (Qiagen). After vortexing for 3 min, the samples were heated at 95°C for 15 min and then bead beaten twice at a frequency of 30 Hz for 1 min using a Qiagen TissueLyser II sample disruptor. After centrifuging, 1.2 ml of the supernatant was treated with an InhibitEX tablet. The subsequent DNA extraction steps were performed using a QIAcube system (Qiagen). The extracted DNA samples were stored at −20°C until use. Library construction of the V3-V4 hypervariable regions of the bacterial 16S rRNA gene was performed following the 16S metagenomic sequencing library preparation Illumina protocol (part no. 15044223 rev. B; Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA). Amplicon libraries for each sample were pooled at equimolar quantities, and they were sequenced using a MiSeq 2 × 300 instrument (Illumina).

(i) ASV analysis. Sequencing data for the 16S rRNA gene were converted into a frequency table of ASVs. Briefly, we filtered out short sequences that did not match either the forward or reverse primer sequence, by aligning primer sequences onto the short reads and removing the matched region. The short reads with five or more mismatches to the primer sequence were also excluded. An ASV table was generated using the DADA2 pipeline (40) of the QIIME2 software (version 2019.01) (41), with forward and reverse truncation lengths of 270 and 220, respectively. Samples with >10,000 reads were included in the analysis. Default values were used for the other options.

(iii) Diversity analysis and enterotype detection. Alpha-diversity and principal-coordinate analysis were performed using the “diversity” (core-metrics-phylogenetic) module of the QIIME2 platform (41). Among the beta-diversity measures, the results based on weighted UniFrac distances were used in this study. The Adonis function in the Vegan package (version. 2.5-6) was used for the permutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) (44). The enterotypes were generated by clustering samples with the Gaussian mixture model in the “Scikit-learn” Python package (version 0.22.1) (45), using the weighted UniFrac distance matrix.

The reconstructed genome sequences of Prevotella copri by Tett et al. (12) were collected and converted into a BLAST database using the BLAST+ package (46). The sequence of each ASV was queried to the database using BLAST (version 2.9.0+) (46), and the reconstructed genomes containing the ASV sequence (perfect matches) were retrieved. The clades of these genomes were assigned as the clade of the ASV.

To compare the Korean gut microbiome data with the data of healthy populations from other countries, we used 16S rRNA sequence data targeting the V3-V4 regions from the National Center for Biotechnology Information: BioProject PRJDB4360 (Japan) (15), PRJNA480547 (China, Beijing/Hangzhou) (13), PRJNA382861 (China, Shanghai) (14), PRJEB16755 (Chile) (17), and PRJNA350839 (Spain) (16). Data from Nigerian subjects were retrieved from MG-RAST (mgp83994) (18). We used only data from healthy adult samples, samples from healthy control groups (case-control studies), or “before” samples (intervention studies).

For the quality control, we checked the presence of two short sequences (5′-TATTGGACAATGGGCGC-3′ and 5′-CCTGTTCGCTCCCC-3′), instead of the primer sequences. These sequences are well conserved and located at the tips of the V3-V4 region, which enabled us to incorporate data sets for which the primer sequences were already trimmed off. Forward and reverse truncation lengths of 250 and 200, respectively, were applied during the sequence filtering step of the DADA2 pipeline.

The data sets of the populations from South Korea and other countries were merged into a single data set, and ASV analysis, taxonomy annotation, and diversity analysis were performed together. The weighted UniFrac distance matrix generated from this single data set was used to compare the Korean gut microbiome with that of the populations from the other countries. The samples from other countries were designated Bacteroides ET or Prevotella ET based on the enterotypes of the Korean samples with the shortest UniFrac distance to them. The statistical difference of the Bacteroides ET ratios was evaluated using chi-squared tests, with the chi2_contingency function of the “SciPy” Python package (version 1.4.1) (47).

The association between the pairs of ASVs was evaluated with respect to two aspects: whether they were statistically more or less frequently found together and whether they were quantitatively associated. For the evaluation of cooccurrence, Fisher’s exact test was performed using the contingency table with the numbers of samples in which the two ASVs were observed together, only one ASV was observed, and none was observed. Quantitative association was evaluated by calculating the P values for the Spearman correlation coefficients between the logarithm-transformed nonzero abundances of the two microbes. In the quantitative association analysis, only the samples with nonzero reads for both ASVs were used in order to highlight quantitative association. In cooccurrence and quantitative association analyses, only the ASVs that were observed in 10% or more of samples were used. The statistical significance of cooccurrence and quantitative association was defined at the false-discovery rate (FDR) of 10−6 and 10−3, respectively. A stringent statistical cutoff was applied for cooccurrence evaluation in order to keep a balance between the number of cooccurring and quantitatively correlated associations. The number of associations for the two statistical cutoffs is listed in Table S5. The “SciPy” Python package (version 1.4.1) was used for the statistical analysis (47).

We constructed a network using the cooccurring and quantitatively correlated ASV pairs as edges and the ASVs as nodes. We sought for the cliques with size 3, or three mutually connected nodes, and the connected cliques were merged into groups. We manually disjointed the groups to have the same phylum and joined the ASVs that are connected to an ASV with the same taxonomic label. The groups were then designated microbial clusters, and the clusters were labeled according to the taxonomic name of the most abundant ASVs.

The statistical significance of a microbe being more or less prevalent in a specific demographic group was evaluated using the hypergeometric distribution. It was assumed that n samples in the demographic group were drawn from the entire data set with N samples, where K samples possess the microbe. The P value of finding k samples having the microbe was calculated. The statistical significance of the identified microbe-demographic group association was adjusted using the Benjamini-Hochberg method to control the FDR under 0.1. The “SciPy” Python package was used for the statistical analysis (47).

(i) Feature transformation. Before the association analysis, outliers in the host factor metadata were identified and their values were replaced with the outlier cutoff values. For each numeric feature, the interquartile range (IQR) was calculated, and samples of which value is smaller than the first quartile minus 1.5 times IQR (lower cutoff) or larger than the third quartile plus 1.5 times IQR (upper cutoff) were regarded as outliers. The value of outliers was replaced with the lower and upper cutoff values accordingly. This transformation was employed to limit the influence of outlier data points on the final association outcome as the f-statistic based on the residual sum of squares was used to search for the associations.

(iii) Graphical representation of the feature association. The ASV interaction network was converted into Cytoscape XML format files, with nodes representing microbes at the ASV level and with edges representing the quantitative associations, using in-house Python script (Python version 3.6.9). The statistical association of ASV abundance with each host factor was visualized as the color of the nodes. The microbial clusters and their association with host factors were illustrated with Cytoscape (version 3.8.0) (48).

This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) of Chung-Ang University Hospital (IRB number 1750-002-281). All participants gave written informed consent.

The data set supporting the conclusions of this article is available in the European Nucleotide Archive repository, under accession no. PRJEB33905.

