Gut Feelings Begin in Childhood: the Gut Metagenome Correlates with Early Environment, Caregiving, and Behavior

Psychosocial environments impact normative behavioral development in children, increasing the risk of problem behaviors and psychiatric disorders across the life span. Converging evidence demonstrates that early normative development is affected by the gut microbiome, which itself can be altered by early psychosocial environments. However, much of our understanding of the gut microbiome’s role in early development stems from nonhuman animal models and predominately focuses on the first years of life, during peri- and postnatal microbial colonization. As a first step to identify if these findings translate to humans and the extent to which these relationships are maintained after initial microbial colonization, we conducted a metagenomic investigation among a cross-sectional sample of early school-aged children with a range of adverse experiences and caregiver stressors and relationships. Our results indicate that the taxonomic and functional composition of the gut microbiome correlates with behavior during a critical period of child development. Furthermore, our analysis reveals that both socioeconomic risk exposure and child behaviors associate with the relative abundances of specific taxa (e.g., Bacteroides and Bifidobacterium species) as well as functional modules encoded in their genomes (e.g., monoamine metabolism) that have been linked to cognition and health. While we cannot infer causality within this study, these findings suggest that caregivers may moderate the gut microbiome’s link to environment and behaviors beyond the first few years of life.

Childhood is a formative period of behavioral development that can influence the trajectory of psychiatric disorders and problem behaviors across the life span (1). Research has recently clarified the profound impact that a child’s economic, social, and caregiving environment plays in determining such outcomes (2, 3). For example, exposure to particular environmental factors early in life, such as growing up under low socioeconomic status (e.g., low income to needs ratio) or experiencing high family disruption and turmoil, can increase a child’s risk of developing psychiatric disorders and associated problem behaviors (4). Caregivers, however, are one of the most proximal influences on and predictors of child wellbeing and can modify how these environmental risk factors, especially socioeconomically linked risk factors, impact the child’s neurobiological and behavioral development (5). Across species, caregivers serve to protect their offspring’s development from exogenous stressors and modify childhood behavioral responses to adverse economic and social environments (3). Indeed, responsive and predictable caregiver behaviors are linked to improved child outcomes (6). Conversely, negative caregiver behaviors, such as perceived parental stress or disrupted parent-child relationships, can leave children more vulnerable to biological perturbations and behavioral dysregulation (7). Identifying early risk factors or correlates of childhood behavioral dysregulation is particularly important given that childhood is a time when mental health symptoms begin to emerge.

We generated shotgun metagenomic data from a cohort of children and determined how both the microbial taxa and the specific genetic functions they encode associate with subclinical child behavioral dysregulation symptoms (hereafter “behavioral dysregulation”), socioeconomic risk, and caregiver behaviors. We first tested if concurrent socioeconomic status associated with the child microbiome and whether self-reported parental behaviors statistically interacted with this association to explain additional variance. In addition, we examined how the child microbiome is associated with parent-reported child internalizing and externalizing behaviors and whether self-reported caregiver behavior statistically moderated this association. Finally, we investigated if there were specific microbial taxa and metabolic pathways associated with different metrics of socioeconomic risk and child behavioral dysregulation. To our knowledge, this is the first study to assess the linkage between the microbiome, a child’s environment, and behavioral dysregulation symptoms during the 5- to 7-year-old age range of formative behavioral and biological development. In so doing, this study reveals that exogenous factors, including self-reported parental behavior, impact the gut microbiome beyond the first few years of life and that the microbiome associates with behavioral dysregulation, even at subclinical thresholds.

In order to profile the microbiome, we collected stool from 40 children from a midsize city in the Pacific Northwest of the United States that were already participating in a larger study (25). Parents of the children filled out questionnaires regarding five covariate categories: socioeconomic risk, behavioral dysregulation, caregiver behavior, demography, gut-related history (i.e., factors known to influence microbiome composition, such as antibiotic use), and a week-long diet journal. DNA was extracted from the fecal samples, sequencing libraries were prepared, and shotgun metagenomic sequencing was conducted according to standard protocols (see Materials and Methods). Unique metagenomic sequences were assigned, if possible, to the bacterial species level, which resulted in 213 unique taxon assignments after quality control. Using these assignments, we estimated the taxonomic composition of the microbiome. Sequences were also assigned to molecular functional groups using the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database. These assignments are referred to as KEGG orthologs (KOs) and represent individual functions within larger genomic modules, which are components of functional pathways. The sequence set was assigned to 13,183 unique KOs after quality control. Using these taxonomic and functional assignments, we constructed community tables (matrices of taxon or KO relative abundances by sample) to test associations between the microbiome and our covariates of interest in a statistically rigorous manner (see Materials and Methods and Supplemental Methods for specific details regarding participants, sample collection, molecular methods, and sequence analysis).

Because the questionnaires filled out by parents encompassed more potential covariates (n = 52) than microbiome samples (n = 40), we began our analysis by selecting the covariates within each covariate category that explained a statistically significant amount of variance in the microbiome composition between samples (see Materials and Methods). This covariate selection process returned a set of 17 significant covariates for taxonomic composition and 10 covariates for functional composition of the microbiome (see Table 1). In order to test our hypotheses that socioeconomic risk, behavioral dysregulation, and caregiver behavior covariates significantly associate with the composition of the microbiome, we utilized a constrained correspondence analysis (CCA) to create ordinations. This method is particularly appropriate for our study design because it accounts for the variance in the microbiome explained by factors that prior research indicates may have a strong effect on the composition of the microbiome but which are not the direct focus of this research (i.e., demography, gut-related history, and diet). We then ran a permutational analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) on the remaining, unexplained variance to test the significance of the relationships between covariates and the composition of the microbiome. Selected covariates within each category (e.g., demography, gut-related history, diet, child dysregulation behaviors, socioeconomic risk, and caregiver behavior) were determined by the envfit model. For each set of covariates, we tested their association with both the taxonomic (species) and functional (KO) composition of the microbiome.

We first examined whether metrics of socioeconomic risk and caregiver behavior significantly explain the observed variance in overall microbiome diversity and composition. In addition, we investigated whether these associations manifested at the level of the taxonomic identities of the microbiome constituents or the functional potential of the metagenome. We started by testing the associations between the taxonomic composition of the microbiome and the selected socioeconomic risk and caregiver behavior covariates. To maximize scientific rigor, we constructed a CCA model, which is based on a Euclidian distance, that first accounted for the selected gut-linked (previously shown to influence gut [25,–28]) and diet covariates (see Table 1 for specific covariate names) by determining the amount of variance explained. The gut-linked and diet covariates accounted for 24.9% of the total variance in taxonomic composition. The socioeconomic risk and caregiver behavior covariates that remained in the best model according to the Akaike information criterion explained a further 13.6% of the variance, leaving 61.5% of the variance unexplained. A PERMANOVA test on this CCA model revealed a significant association between taxonomic composition and parent-child dysfunction (F = 1.82, P = 0.0140; Fig. 1A; Table S2a) as well as a significant interaction term between parent-child dysfunction and income to needs (F = 1.82, P = 0.0157; Fig. 1A; Table S2a).

As noted previously, the metagenomic (as opposed to amplicon-based) methodology we employed made it possible to test the associations between socioeconomic risk, caregiver behavior, and the functional composition of the microbiome. We set the demography and diet covariates (see Table 1) as conditional variables, which explained 12.5% of the total variance in functional composition. The socioeconomic risk and caregiver behavior covariates that remained in the best model accounted for 22.3% of the total variance in functional composition, while 65.3% remained unexplained. A PERMANOVA test on this model found that the caregiver covariate parent-child dysfunction significantly interacted with both turmoil events (F = 2.82, P = 0.0053; Fig. 1B). These results provide evidence that, in terms of the microbiome’s functional potential, caregiver behavior can moderate the associations between socioeconomic risk covariates and the microbiome.

In order to address our second question, whether metrics of behavioral dysregulation and caregiver behavior significantly explain the observed variance in overall microbiome diversity and composition, we applied the same analysis pipeline as above but substituted selected child behavioral dysregulation symptom covariates for the socioeconomic risk covariates. The analysis of the taxonomic composition of the microbiome revealed no significant associations (Table S2c). The conditional covariates (from the gut-related history and diet categories) explained 25.3% of the variance in taxonomic composition, while the focal covariates explained an additional 9.0%.

For the functional composition of the microbiome, the conditional covariates (from the demography and diet categories) explained 12.5% of the variance in composition, and the focal covariates explained an additional 33.7%. The analysis revealed a significant association between functional composition and impulsivity (F = 2.02, P = 0.0302; Fig. 2A; Table S2d). The analysis also found that the caregiver behavior covariate parent-child dysfunction significantly interacted with two child behavioral dysregulation symptom covariates: ability to inhibit impulses (inhibitory control; F = 3.91, P = 0.0005; Fig. 2B; Table S2d) and depression (depressive problems; F = 2.37, P = 0.0149; Fig. 2C; Table S2d). Again, these results provide evidence that the microbiome is associated with particular types of behavioral dysregulation and that caregiver behavior may moderate these associations. However, the evidence produced from this population of individuals suggests that it is the composition of functional groups within the microbiome, more so than the taxonomic composition of the microbiome, which correlates with behavioral dysregulation and caregiver behavior.

The above analyses assessed covariates of the overall composition and diversity of the gut microbiome. To obtain a finer resolution on the interactions between the gut microbiome, socioeconomic risk, and behavioral dysregulation, we employed pairwise compound Poisson generalized linear models (CPGLM) to regress a specific taxon or KO relative abundance in the gut against each socioeconomic risk or behavioral dysregulation covariate. A comprehensive set of results of the pairwise relationships that maintained significance after false discovery rate (FDR) correction can be found in Tables S3 and S4. Briefly, we found 63 significant pairwise relationships between covariates and taxa identified at the species level (46 for behavioral dysregulation, 17 for socioeconomic risk covariates; Fig. 3). For these taxon-covariate relationships, we found numerous associations involving butyrate-producing bacteria as well as other taxa of interest, including Bacteroides fragilis and Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, which have demonstrated anti-inflammatory effects in mice and humans (30). We found FDR-corrected significant relationships between 7 socioeconomic risk and 13 child behavioral dysregulation symptom covariates and 690 functions defined at the KO level. Of these 690 pairwise results, 88 KOs were grouped within defined metabolic modules (Fig. 4). Consistent with prior studies, for the KO-covariate relationships, we found numerous associations involving monoamine metabolism (including tryptophan, tyrosine, glutamate, and leucine) and microbe-host antagonism (types II, III, and VI secretion systems).

The present study provides novel insights into the relationship between the gut microbiome and both the psychosocial environment and behavioral dysregulation in a cross-sectional sample of early school-aged children (Fig. 5). Furthermore, this is the first study to assess if caregiving behaviors modify the association between a child’s gut microbiome and their level of socioeconomic risk exposure and behavioral dysregulation. As such, this work provides a potentially new avenue of research into the mechanisms of behavioral intervention, though it would behoove such exploration to first replicate these findings in larger populations.

Regardless, our study reveals supportive evidence that the psychosocial environment continues to shape not only the taxonomic composition, but also the functional potential of the microbiome beyond the initial gut microbial colonization that occurs in the perinatal period. Notably, the behavioral dysregulation symptoms measured in this study occurred at thresholds not necessarily indicative of psychiatric disorders of childhood. That these relationships were observed at subclinical levels of behavioral dysregulation symptoms suggests that the microbiome may indicate or drive the emergence of dysregulated behavior (i.e., providing early associative relationships prior to reaching clinical thresholds). This study was cross-sectional, and therefore we cannot determine which children later developed a psychiatric disorder. Future studies should seek to expand on these findings through longitudinal metagenomic investigations. Moreover, this study associated the microbiome with behavior dysregulation symptoms and cannot discern a causal role of the microbiome on such symptomatology. Therefore, investigations are needed to determine if the microbiome indeed drives the symptomatologic variation observed here.

As shown in Fig. 1A and
B (Tables S2a and b), both the taxonomic structure and functional capacity of the gut microbiome varied as a function of how parent-reported parent-child dysfunction related to two metrics of socioeconomic risk: income-to-needs ratio in the case of microbiome structure, and family turmoil in the case of microbiome functional capacity. These results are consistent with prior literature showing that both economic and social forms of adversity associate with different microbial profiles (31,–33) and underscore the potential for caregivers to affect how socioeconomic risk exposure impacts the developing gut microbiome. For example, adverse postnatal environments that are often comorbid with socioeconomic risk, such as frequent antibiotic use or toxicant exposure, associate with altered microbial composition and intestinal permeability (31, 34). Such differences in microbial exposure in early development associate with different profiles of immune function (32). Our results are further consistent with proposed models of how caregivers serve as protective moderators of outcomes in children that face adversity (31, 32) and suggest that a caregiver’s ability to buffer the effect of environmental stressors extends to the child’s gut microbiome beyond the first few years of life.

When we tested whether the relationship between the gut microbiome and behavioral dysregulation was statistically moderated by the parent-child relationship, our analyses only found significant associations for the functional capacity of the microbiome (Fig. 2A to
C; Table S2d). In this case, the nature of the relationship between the functions encoded in the gut microbiome and two measures of behavioral dysregulation—depressive problems and inhibitory control—were modified by the quality of the parent-child relationship (a third behavioral dysregulation metric, impulsivity, had a significant main effect). This observation aligns with prior literature that found that behavioral dysregulation in childhood spans internalizing (e.g., depression and anxiety) and externalizing (e.g., impulsivity and aggression) dimensions (33). The lack of any significant behavioral dysregulation for microbiome structure may indicate either that this study is underpowered at the taxonomic level or that these relationships are more dependent on the metabolic capabilities of the whole microbiome than attributes associated with specific taxa. In either case, these patterns suggest that intervening to improve the parent-child relationship may influence the functional capacity of the microbiome more strongly than its taxonomic composition. Future work should seek to tease apart the mechanisms by which parenting behaviors may influence the microbiome in later periods of development.

As noted above, our use of correlative methods means that we cannot disentangle the nature of the associations described here. For example, it is possible that socioeconomic risk and behavioral dysregulation symptoms moderate the association between the microbiome and caregiver behavior. Moreover, factors that potentially confound caregiver behavior, such as the child’s diet (which we did take into account in these models to a limited degree) and environmental exposure from socioeconomic risk, are challenging to disentangle without nuanced study designs. While our study cannot definitively conclude that the quality of caregiving impacts the microbiome’s association with socioeconomic risk or behavioral dysregulation, it offers unique insight that importantly guides future work designed to test these specific hypotheses.

To understand which specific gut taxa might link to the socioeconomic risk and behavioral dysregulation covariates measured in our study, we conducted pairwise comparisons between these covariate scores and the relative abundance of each microbial taxon observed in the gut (Fig. 3; Table S3). The taxon that associated with the greatest number of socioeconomic risk and behavioral dysregulation covariates was Bacteroides fragilis. Interestingly, B. fragilis associated with reduced levels of aggressive behavior, emotional reactivity, externalizing behavior, sadness, and impulsivity, as well as with an increase in inhibitory control (i.e., better mental health). B. fragilis was also associated with lower reported incidents of family turmoil (and total Life Events Checklist [LEC] score). These results are noteworthy because studies in mice have found that B. fragilis modulates the immune system and protects against pathogen-induced inflammation, specifically through the production of polysaccharide A (30, 35). A close relative of B. fragilis, B. thetaiotaomicron, has also been shown to have anti-inflammatory effects in the mammalian intestine (36); our study also finds that B. thetaiotaomicron associates with decreases in anxiety problems and externalizing and internalizing behaviors as well as the overall score for negative behavioral dysregulation Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL) total. Recent psychological research links chronic intestinal inflammation to depression and anxiety (37, 38). In light of these observations, we hypothesize that the anti-inflammatory properties of Bacteroides may impact intestinal inflammation in children to subsequently influence behavior. Future work is required to assess this hypothesis.

Our pairwise correlations identified three known butyrate-producing taxa—Coprococcus comes, Eubacterium rectale, and Roseburia inulinivorans—that associate with various aspects of socioeconomic risk or behavioral dysregulation. The production of butyrate from plant-derived polysaccharides by the gut microbiome is understood to be an important mechanism through which high-fiber diets promote beneficial health effects (39, 40). There are, however, only certain taxa that have the ability to produce butyrate (41). Surprisingly, two of the butyrate-producing species in our samples, C. comes and E. rectale, positively associated with elevated anxious depression and reduced inhibitory control, respectively. This observation defies our expectation given that prior animal work points to butyrate’s important role in maintaining gut health and behavior dysregulation (42). It is possible that these taxa carry other functions that overwhelm the effects of their butyrate production on symptoms of behavioral dysregulation, that overall butyrate production is reduced even though the relative abundances of these two taxa are high in certain microbiomes, or that butyrate production links to adverse behaviors under some contexts. On the other hand, the third butyrate-producing taxon in our samples, R. inulinivorans, associated with a decrease in depressive problems. This observation is consistent with prior literature that suggests that increases in butyrate production improve overall mental health (42). Future work should seek to disentangle butyrate’s specific role in mediating behavioral dysregulation and how its production by different taxa or in conjunction with different diets impacts this role, particularly with human developmental populations.

To determine if there exist specific functional properties of the gut metagenome that link to socioeconomic risk and behavioral dysregulation, we also used pairwise regression to associate measures of these covariates with specific microbiome functions at the module and KO levels (Fig. 4; Table S4). These microbiome functions can be broadly grouped into two major functional categories, functions that are putatively involved in inducing intestinal inflammation and functions involved in the production of monoamine precursors.

Notably, these findings provide the foundation for future studies to replicate with larger samples and to assess longitudinal changes to better tease apart causal relationships. This study offers a fundamental step toward translating animal models to sensitive periods of human development, providing a proof of concept design to determine if the microbiome is linked to behavioral dysregulation and socioeconomic risk. Importantly, diet could be an important factor that confounds the relationships between the gut microbiome and socioeconomic risk or parent behavior beyond what we were able to measure within the scope of this study. Future work should build upon these findings to specifically interrogate the impacts of diet. If diet proved to be a mechanism driving these relationships, it could provide a targeted direction to include within psychosocial intervention designs.

We tested associations between socioeconomic risk, child behavioral dysregulation, and the microbiome in terms of both taxonomic structure and functional potential in a cross-sectional sample of 5- to 7-year-olds. In doing so, we discovered that not only are there significant associations between metrics of socioeconomic risk and behavioral dysregulation with the microbiome, but that the quality of the parent-child relationship (here parentally reported) and parental stress statistically moderated these relationships. Furthermore, we uncovered associations between individual taxa (e.g., B. fragilis) and functional groups (e.g., monoamine metabolism) within the microbiome and metrics of socioeconomic risk and behavioral dysregulation. These taxa and functional groups represent potential mechanisms through which the microbiome interacts with the psychosocial environment and, if replicated, potentially influence the development of behavior.

The results of this study suggest that when examining the trajectory of child psychological development, we need to consider biology, physiology, psychosocial environment, and the microbiome. All of these factors can elicit mutual effects, indicating that the way one factor impacts the psychological development of a child may change depending on the nature of one or more of the other relationships. Future studies, utilizing both human and animal models, should seek to tease apart specific behavioral links with the microbiome and extend this design to a wider range of behavioral symptomatology and socioeconomic risk.

Parents were instructed to collect a small stool sample from their child using a clean plastic collection device and OMNIgene-Gut collection tube (DNA Genotek, Ottawa, ON, Canada). Collection tubes were packaged and mailed at ambient temperature to the University of Oregon (Eugene, OR), where they were transferred to –80°C upon receipt. See Supplemental Methods for greater detail, including measures of diet and health.

Socioeconomic risk was indexed using metrics of socioeconomic status and the Life Events Checklist (LEC) (67). The Life Events Checklist was used to provide an index of adverse home environment exposure. This provides a total score and subscales to identify specific components of adverse life events. Subscales included poverty, turmoil, family illness, neighborhood violence, family separation, and an overall total score. Household poverty was indexed by the income-need ratio. See Supplemental Methods for the range, mean, and SD of subscales.

Caregiver behavior was indexed via the parent reports Parenting Stress Index (PSI) (70) and Interpersonal Mindfulness in Parenting (IEM-P) (71) and the Five Factor Mindfulness Questionnaire (FFMQ) (72). These questionnaires provided a range of perceived parental stress and wellbeing, both in general and within the parent-child relationship. See Supplemental Methods for the range, mean, and SD of subscales.

DNA was extracted from 250-μl aliquots of the OMNIgene-Gut samples using the MoBio PowerLyzer PowerSoil kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) with the following protocol modifications: following the addition of solution C1, a 1-minute bead-beating step was performed on a Mini-BeadBeater-96 (BioSpec Products, Bartlesville, OK, USA), followed by a 10-minute incubation at 65°C; in the final step, DNA was eluted in two stages for a combined total of 100 μl.

Raw metagenome sequences were prepared for analysis using the Shotcleaner workflow (73), which follows the Human Microbiome Project Consortium data processing guidelines (74). All raw sequences can be accessed through the NCBI at BioProject PRJNA496479, and the code for all of the analyses can be accessed at https://github.com/kstagaman/flannery_stagaman_analysis.

The above methods can analyze the relationships between the covariates of interest and the overall composition of the microbiome (in terms of taxonomy and functional potential), but they may miss important relationships between covariates and individual taxa or microbial functions. To determine if such relationships exist in this data set, we conducted pairwise regressions between the abundance of each taxon or KO and each socioeconomic risk and child behavioral dysregulation covariate. We included in each regression model the same demographic, gut-related, and dietary terms to account for their variance as well. The regression method used was a compound Poisson generalized linear model (CPGLM) (79), which uses a distribution that has a point mass over zero, allowing it to better handle the sparseness of functional and taxonomic community data (53). After all pairwise regressions, we adjusted the P values using the false discovery rate (FDR) with a cutoff of q = 0.05. We then removed any pairs where the taxon or KO was absent from half of the samples or more and presented the results in Tables S3 and S4.

Citation Flannery JE, Stagaman K, Burns AR, Hickey RJ, Roos LE, Giuliano RJ, Fisher PA, Sharpton TJ. 2020. Gut feelings begin in childhood: the gut metagenome correlates with early environment, caregiving, and behavior. mBio 11:e02780-19. https://doi.org/10.1128/mBio.02780-19.

