Exposure to soil environments during earlier life stages is distinguishable in the gut microbiome of adult mice



Environmental exposure during earlier life stages can govern the assembly and development of gut microbiota, yet it is insufficiently understood. In this study, ex-germ-free mice were cohoused with distinct soil-microbiota (from desert, steppe, and forest) beddings within 60 days after birth and subsequently transferred to new soil beddings from 60 to 90th day. Using metagenomic shotgun sequencing, firstly, we found soil microbes from natural environments (birthplace) greatly influenced the gut community assembly in the housing experiment. About 27% microbial species and 12% functional components that associated with birthplaces at Day 60 were still discriminatory of birthplaces after transferring mice to new environments. Moreover, prior soil-exposure types are associated with the magnitude of temporal microbiome change due to environmental shifts. The appropriate soil-exposure (e.g., steppe) might help mice gut microbiome adapt to changing environments or host development. Our study demonstrated the continuous soil-exposure history earlier is associated with the gut microbiome individuality and development later.

Environmental exposure, especially in the earlier life stages, has a profound influence in human health. It has been suggested that such effect is, at least in part, mediated by shaping the individual gut microbiota, while in turn, microbial colonizers in the gastrointestinal tract affect the host physiology/development in the life span.1–4 The advances in the related field could further guide development of new approaches for modulating the risk for ecological invasion by various natural-environment-derived microbes related to human migration, deepen our understanding of how environmental microbial exposures shape the development of our immune systems,5–7 and help direct the design of more effective strategies for microbiome modification.

In the present study, to assess the colonization and competition potential of components of soil microbiota that reside in distinct habitats, we developed a gnotobiotic mouse model that mimics soil microbiota colonization and development in the mouse gut during emigration-like environmental changes. Totally, 90 germ-free mice were randomized into three groups (30 per group) and each group was raised under an assigned-simulated environment for 60 days, using different natural soil samples collected from steppe, forest or desert habitats. In addition, two-thirds of mice were randomly selected at Day 60 from each group and transferred to new cages with bedding soil from the other two environments, respectively, for 30 more days while the rest 10 mice (as a control group) were housed under the original environment they were initially housed. Stool samples were collected again at Day 90 for further analysis, for the purposes of examining the microbial interaction between soil environment and gut. Our study inquired how soil microbes colonize and develop in the mice gut introduced by environmental exposure rather than well-documented transplantation. This approach can further facilitate identification of environmental-dependent soil-derived colonizers in mammalian host gut that affect any aims related to modulating gut microbiota toward a “health” state.

We introduced soil microbiota from different habitats (steppe, forest, and dessert) to separate groups of germ-free (GF) mice (Figure 1a; Methods) right after birth. Newly born GF mice were raised in the simulated environments (steppe, forest, and dessert) for 60 days. Soil samples used for cage bedding were collected from Gele Mountain Forestry Park, Chongqing (106.45° E/29.53° N, forest), Xilin Gol Grassland Nature Reserve, Inner Mongolia (113.83° E/42.23° N, steppe) and Kubuqi Desert Park, Inner Mongolia (109.79° E/39.62° N, desert, Methods). We first assessed and compared the colonization ability of components of microbiota that reside in distinct birthplaces (habitats). Shotgun metagenomics sequencing technique was applied to explore the functional and taxonomic differences in mouse gut microbiome between the three groups (Figure 1b, Methods): (1) Microbial alpha diversity analysis (i.e. Shannon diversity) revealed significant functional and taxonomic differences in gut-selected microbiome among three groups, (Figure 2a, Kruskal-Wallis Test, Taxonomy: p = .023 Function: p = .001); (2) Principal coordinates analysis (PCoA) based on the Jensen-Shannon distance metric primarily clustered gut microbiomes from three groups of mice both taxonomically and functionally (Figure 2b, 2c); (3) PERMANOVA results indicated the birthplace/living-environment derived clustering based on gut functional diversity is more distinct than that based on taxonomical diversity, even though they were both strongly influenced by living condition. Therefore, we reasoned that birthplace profoundly shaped the compositions and metabolic functions of gut microbial communities in mice during the early stages of life.

To elucidate what exogenous microbiota members were selected by mice gut when continuously exposed to distinct environments (soil) during earlier life stages, we compared the difference in the diversity of soil microbiota and gut-selected microbial communities in gnotobiotic mice at Day 60 (Figure 1b). First, the gut communities selected from desert and forest soil environments maintained a greater proportion of microbial richness relative to environmental “input” microbiota than did those from the steppe environmental microbiota. In the dessert soil, a total of 352 microbial species (mean Shannon index: 3.23) were identified while 251 species (71.3% relative abundance) out of them further established in the mice gut and accounted for 99.2% abundance of host gut microbiotas (mean Shannon index: 2.25) averagely. Likewise, 211 (76.2%) out of 290 species (mean Shannon index: 2.63) in forest soil were colonized in the mice gut accounting for on average 95.4% abundance of gut-selected microbiota (mean Shannon index: 2.11). In contrast, among 443 species (mean Shannon index: 1.36) identified in steppe, 209 species (47.2%) established and accounted for on average 98.3% abundance of gut microbiota (mean Shannon index: 1.81) of steppe born mice. Secondly, we further found gut microbial communities selected from desert and forest soil maintained a smaller beta diversity (Jensen-Shannon distance = 0.19 and 0.34) of taxonomic profiles relative to their “input” community than did communities from steppe (Jensen-Shannon distance = 0.60) soil environments.

We further identified environment indicative microbial colonizers in the earlier life (i.e., Day 60 after birth, Figure S2a S2b left panel). Firstly, we identified birthplace-specific microbes in the mice gut. Mice in steppe group contain 19 unique species accounting for 0.03% relative abundance in steppe mice gut microbiota (unique properties were not shown in the figure); forest mice contain 29 unique species (relative abundance is 0.07%) and dessert mice contain 57 (relative abundance is 0.13%). Secondly, among the remaining 140 shared species, we found 37 species were differentially abundant among the three groups. 16 species belonging to Firmicutes, Proteobacteria, and Spirochetes were enriched in steppe-born mice compared to the other two groups. Seven species from Firmicutes, and two species from Actinobacteria had higher abundances in desert born mice compared with other two groups. The remaining 11 taxa showed significantly more abundant in forest born mice.

Next, we characterized the functional properties of the mice gut-selected microbiota by examining differentially abundant microbial genes and enriched metabolic pathways among desert-, forest- and steppe-born mice on Day 60 (Methods). Shotgun Illumina reads generated from fecal community DNA were used to query the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes for KEGG Orthology group (KO). Reads collected from all gut-selected microbiomes were assigned to a total of 4011 KOs, among which 3883 KOs were shared among different environments, and 3893 KOs were differentially abundant among the three groups. In the following KEGG pathway enrichment analysis, we identified 31 significantly enriched metabolic pathways in successful colonizers among distinct soil environments, which were dominantly enriched in steppe-born mice gut (Figure S3), involving bacterial chemotaxis (ko02030) and flagellar assembly (ko02040), two-component system (ko02020) etc., suggesting that the microbial metabolic functions are likely correlated with environmental adaptation. Remarkably, active hydrocarbon metabolic processes in gut microbiota in the steppe group mice can be evident by the presence of enriched pathways involved in amino sugar and nucleotide sugar metabolism (ko00520), butanoate metabolism (ko00650), citrate cycle (TCA cycle) (ko00020), fructose and mannose metabolism (ko00051), glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis (ko00010), pentose, and glucuronate interconversions (ko00040), propanoate metabolism (ko00640), pyruvate metabolism (ko00620), starch, and sucrose metabolism (ko00500).

In the following experiment, we tested the capacities of taxa comprising birthplace-derived communities to compete for colonization of the mouse gut during cross-environment migration. After 60-day establishment of environmental microbes in the mice gut, two thirds of mice within desert, forest or steppe group (N = 60) were transferred to a different soil environment and housed for another 30 days, while one third of mice within each group (N = 30) stayed in the same environment for 30 days (as control). This experimental design allowed us to determine (1) whether/how migration can reshape indigenous gut microbiota established by birthplace-derived soil microbes; (2) whether/which organisms from the new environmental communities were capable of invading the established gut communities, while controlling temporal variations (such as age) in the gut microbiota development.

After transferring mice to a new environment, gut microbiome in all groups were significantly altered in both functional and taxonomic compositions from Day 60 to Day 90 as observed in the PCoA (Figure 3a left panel; Day 60 VS 90, taxonomy: F = 30.69, p = .001; function: F = 21.70, p = .001, PERMANOVA). Furthermore, birthplaces can determine the magnitude of the alterations in mice gut microbiome due to environmental transferring. We compared the taxonomic and functional profiles based on the Jensen-Shannon distance metric between host groups related to the soil microbiome types and before and after transferring. (Figure 3b). Based on the species-level taxonomic profiles, the migration-derived change in steppe-originated mice gut microbiome is significantly less than forest-originated (p = .0014, Wilcoxon rank-sum test) or dessert-originated mice (p = .0021, Wilcoxon rank-sum test). Moreover, from overall functional profiles of successful colonizers, we observed more pronounced birthplace-dependent differences related to environmental shifts. The least magnitude of change before and after shifts in the co-housing soil types was identified in the steppe-originated gut microbiome of mice (Figure 3c), indicating that the steppe-originated soil microbiome might establish and stabilize earlier in the gut, while highly resistant to other types of soil microbiota in the new environment. Interestingly, we next found that gut microbial communities originated from different soil types consistently converged toward the steppe-associated gut communities. The reproducible nature of these changes in all isolators suggests that non-stochastic, selective forces  that were potentially driven by the compatibility of the gut microbiome with host factors played an important role in shaping these communities.

Given a strong impact of soil exposure on gut microbiota during earlier life stages, and even post-migration phase, we further explored both microbial taxonomic and functional markers reflecting such birthplace-dependent differences. We performed the differentially abundant analysis, respectively, on microbiome data grouped by birthplace-environment types on Day 60, new environment types on Day 90, and birthplace environment types on Day 90 and further compared the microbial associations to original and new environmental types on Day 90 relative to those associating birthplace-environment types on Day 60. Further, a microbial birthplace-associated marker was defined as a microbe/functional gene significantly associated with environmental types at both Day 60 and 90 and with consistent directionality of enrichment.

Next, we explored birthplace-discriminatory functional components at Day 90 by associating microbiome profiles at Day 90 with birthplace environments. This result may indicate the functional capacity of the gut ecosystem to withstand environmental perturbances related to shifts in soil environmental types (i.e., resistance) in the co-housing experiment. Totally, 195 (12%) out of 1567 differentially abundant KOs among birthplaces’ environmental types on Day 90 had the identical directionalities of associations with those at Day 60, which involved in the 31 significantly enriched pathways. It suggested that approximately 12% of microbial functional signature of soil exposure during earlier life stages can be distinguishable in the extraordinarily long term even though the more environmental soil exposure later had greatly disturbed the functional profiles in the established gut microbiome.

Our study showed a clear yet soil-type-dependent effect of soil exposure during earlier life stages on the gut microbiota assembly and its development in response to a new soil environment. By housing experiment, we found extensive soil-dwelling microbiota from a variety of environmental types were able to successfully colonize on mouse gut. In addition, the earlier microbial colonizers can significantly impact the gut microbiome development during the abrupt environmental disturbances that are also suggested by “priority effect”. As a result, a set of microbial taxa/functions in the mouse gut can be persistently discriminative of birthplaces in the post-migration microbiomes (Phase II). However, the taxonomic and functional profiles developed over time (or with host selection) toward a consistent microbiome state in the adult mice in a soil-type-dependent pace. The gut-selected microbiomes from steppe soils may develop fastest to that microbiome state. Hence, our study found that the “priority effect” may only partially explain the impact of early soil exposure on the plasticity of gut microbiota in the later lifespan, while underscoring the role of soil-derived colonization history on the “normal” development of gut microbiome.

Collectively, we provided the clear evidence that soil living environment alone can have a long-term effect on the gut microbial structure and functions. We demonstrated that environment–gut interactions during the earlier life stages can explain the gut microbiome individuality in the following life. The strong developmental effect on gut microbiome probably derived from host was also noted in a transition between adolescent to adult mice. Intriguingly, the gut-microbiome developmental rate can strongly associate with earlier environmental exposure to different soil types. Thus, further investigations are needed to thoroughly understand the potential compatibilities of environmental microbiomes, resident gut microbiome and host factors that can be reflected in the overall host development.

In our study, to understand soil environmental factors that operate to allow microbes to colonize the mammalian gut, the soil samples were collected from three different environments in China including Gele Mountain Forestry Park, Chongqing (106.45° E/29.53° N), Xilin Gol Grassland Nature Reserve, Inner Mongolia (113.83° E/42.23° N) and Kubuqi Desert Park, Inner Mongolia (109.79° E/39.62° N) to simulate the three typical ecosystems of forest, steppe and desert. In the initial phase (Phase I), a total of 15 germ-free pregnant mice (BALBc, one mouse per cage) were randomized into three groups and each group was raised under an assigned soil environment before giving birth. Neonatal mice were born and breastfed in soil environments for the first 20 days. After weaning (on Day 20), mice were re-allocated into sex-dependent cages (four cages for each group/environment, 7 or 8 mice in one cage) and raised in the consistent environments until Day 60. To avoid any cross-groups contamination of soil microbes, mice cages from different groups were maintained in three independent aseptic isolators. In the “migration” phase (Phase II), 20 of 30 mice were selected randomly at Day 60 in each group and distributed to the other two environments for 30 more days while the rest 10 mice were bred under the original environment as a control group. At the beginning of Phase II, we first dumped in the equal volumes of new soil bedding from the designated environments to the new sterile cages, then transferred the mice from their previous soil environments into the new cages. To avoid microbial contaminations cross cages and environments, each of mice were separately raised in one cage and all mice were maintained in three new-environments-dependent isolators from Day 60 to Day 90. Autoclaved and radiated (with Cobalt-60) diet and water fed to mice were strictly controlled during the whole experiment. The composition of the normal diet includes (g/kg): Casein: 140, L-Cystine:1.8, Corn Starch: 495.692, Maltodextrin: 125, Sucrose: 100, Cellulose: 50, Soybean Oil: 40, t-Butylhydroquinone: 0.008, Mineral Mix: 35, Vitamin Mix: 10, Choline Bitartrate: 2.5.

This study was approved and carried out in accordance with the guidelines for the care and use of laboratory animals by the Inner Mongolia Agricultural University of China. The study protocol was also approved by the Ethical Committee of Third Military Medical University (Chongqing China). Every effort was made to minimize animal suffering.

The soil samples from the three different environments were packaged with aseptic bag while sampling, and then refrigerated at 4◦C before being transferred to the laboratory within 18 hours. Then the equal volumes of soil samples were transferred into each cage as initial bedding. Meanwhile, microbial DNA from the soil in each environment/group was extracted and sequenced (also see below). In both Phase I and II, the soil bedding in mice cages were replaced periodically (every 2 weeks) to remove the buildup of feces in the cages, respectively.

For environmental (soil) samples, a total of 10 g of soil was mixed with 90 mL sterile NaCl solution (0.85%, w/v), and then were homogenized for 10 min into a homogenous suspension. A combination of PowerSoil DNA Isolation Kit (MO BIO, USA) and bead-beating method was used to extract DNA from the suspension. The integrity and purity of the extracted DNA were evaluated by 0.8% agarose gel electrophoresis and the OD 260/280 was determined with a Micro-Ultraviolet Spectrophotometer to determine its concentration. All extracted DNA samples were stored at −20°C. For fecal samples collected at Day 60 and 90 from each of mice, the QIAamp® DNA Stool Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) was used for microbial DNA extraction. All of the DNA samples were stored at −80°C until further processing. In addition, stool samples were collected by stimulating anus directly without contact to the cage bedding.

Samples were metagenomically sequenced as one library each multiplexed through Illumina HiSeq 2000 machines using the 2 × 100-bp paired-end read protocol. Clean data were trimmed and filtered by Trimmomatic19 using the parameter SLIDINGWINDOW: 30:20. Then, host (mouse) and diet (corn and soybean) DNA were then removed using Bowtie220 to avoid their potential influence on the functional profiling. Taxonomic profiling was performed with Centrifuge v1.0.321 (reference is based on NT database and the profiling was performed with default parameters) on the 186 metagenomic samples that passed the quality control. Centrifuge uses whole genomes for taxonomically profiling shotgun metagenomic data and to quantify the clades present in the microbiome with species-level resolution.

After discarding of host and diet DNA, clean reads were used as input for bowtie2 to align against the mice gut functional gene catalog,22 which includes annotation of all mice functional genes from Kyoto by Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) databases. To estimate the relative gene abundance, we first normalized the sequencing coverage, the relative abundance instead of the raw read count was used to quantify the functional genes. The calculation process was as follows:

The calculations as mentioned above were completed using custom Python scripts.

Statistical analyses were performed mainly using R and Python. Kruskal-Wallis test, Wilcoxon rank sum test and PERMANOVA test were performed in R with the standard kruskal.test, wilcox.test functions and the adonis function in the R package vegan, respectively. Rarefaction analysis and Shannon diversity index were used to estimate the richness and diversity of species. The relative abundances of differential taxonomic groups were visualized by “pheatmap” in the “pheatmap” R package. Differences in the relative abundances of taxonomic groups at the species level between samples were evaluated with Wilcoxon rank sum test. False discovery rate (FDR) values were estimated using the Benjamini-Hochberg method to control for multiple testing. P-values less than 0.05 were considered statistically significant. Differentially abundant functional genes were tested with DESeq2.23 To evaluate the enrichment of specific KEGG pathways, we calculated a reporter Z score (Zadjustedpathway) for each KEGG pathway based on the Z-scores of individual KOs involved. A reporter Z score of ≥2 (95% confidence according to normal distribution) was set as the detection threshold for a significantly enriched pathway.24 Whether the pathway modules were enriched in the desert, steppe or forest group was further determined by comparing the number of individual KOs that was enriched in the specific direction using ternary analysis (triple graph).

The authors declare no competing interests.

H.Z., H.W. and C. M. designed the study and prepared the manuscript. J.Z., Z.S., S.H., C.C. M. and Y.Z. performed and analyzed experiments. C.M. and W.L. contributed intellectually to the analysis and interpretation of the data. Z.S., S.H. and W.L. wrote the manuscript.

Raw sequencing reads for all 186 samples described in this project have been deposited in the NCBI Sequence Read Archive under accession no. PRJNA542998. Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the corresponding author, H.Z. (moc.anis.piv@ddgnipeh).

Supplemental data for this article can be accessed on the publisher’s website.

