Sleep and Microbiome in Psychiatric Diseases

Objectives: Disturbances in the gut–brain barrier play an essential role in the development of mental disorders. There is considerable evidence showing that the gut microbiome not only affects digestive, metabolic and immune functions of the host but also regulates host sleep and mental states through the microbiota–gut–brain axis. The present review summarizes the role of the gut microbiome in the context of circadian rhythms, nutrition and sleep in psychiatric disorders. Methods: A PubMed search (studies published between April 2015–April 2020) was conducted with the keywords: “sleep, microbiome and psychiatry”; “sleep, microbiome and depression”; “sleep, microbiome and bipolar disorder”, “sleep, microbiome and schizophrenia”, “sleep, microbiome and anorexia nervosa”, “sleep, microbiome and substance use disorder”, “sleep, microbiome and anxiety”; “clock gene expression and microbiome”, “clock gene expression and nutrition”. Only studies investigating the relationship between sleep and microbiome in psychiatric patients were included in the review. Results: Search results yielded two cross-sectional studies analyzing sleep and gut microbiome in 154 individuals with bipolar disorder and one interventional study analyzing the effect of fecal microbiota transplantation in 17 individuals with irritable bowel syndrome on sleep. In patients with bipolar disorder, Faecalibacterium was significantly associated with improved sleep quality scores and a significant correlation between Lactobacillus counts and sleep. Conclusion: Translational research on this important field is limited and further investigation of the bidirectional pathways on sleep and the gut microbiome in mood disorders is warranted.

Sleep is not only necessary for recovery from physical and mental illness, but is also essential for a range of brain functions such as neural cell growth, synaptogenesis and memory function [1]. In a recent meta-analysis, insomnia was identified as an important predictor for the onset of depression, anxiety, alcohol abuse and psychosis representing the vital importance of sleep for mental wellbeing [2]. Nevertheless, the molecular underpinning of sleep is still not completely revealed and little is known about the bidirectional relationship between the microbiota–gut–brain axis (MGBA) and sleep in psychiatric disorders. The current review will give an overview on the neurobiological background of the circadian system and the MGBA in the context of sleep and psychiatric disorders with the focus on chronobiology and biochemistry.

All organisms on Earth have developed an inner circadian (24-h) clock, which regulates important body functions such as heartbeat, blood pressure, hormone secretion (e.g., cortisol, melatonin) and in particular, mood states, via transcription of a network of hundreds of clock gene controlled genes (CCGs). Disruption of sleep and circadian rhythmicity is a core feature of mood disorders, which was demonstrated in a UK study with 91,105 study participants published in LANCET Psychiatry [3]. Multiple clock gene variants predispose to psychiatric disorders such as major depressive disorder (MDD), bipolar disorder (BD), attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), schizophrenia and delirium. The nominal association between clock gene variants and affective disorders (MDD and BD) have been identified already by early gene-association and gene expression studies [4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15]. Also ADHD was associated with gene variants (e.g., rs1801260) in gene-association studies [16,17,18]. A post mortem gene expression study of the human dorsolateral prefrontal cortex by Seney et al. also showed that the diurnal rhythm in gene expression is different in subjects suffering from schizophrenia compared to the healthy control group [19]. Aside from the role of the circadian clock in psychiatric disorders, many cardiovascular functions such as blood pressure, heart rate, endothelial function and thrombus formation are influenced by a circadian rhythm. It is noteworthy that the onset of acute myocardial infarction, stroke and arrhythmias is also linked to the circadian clock [20] and various single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the clock genes ARNTL (Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor Nuclear Translocator Like. Syn.BMAL1) and CLOCK (circadian locomotor output cycles kaput) are associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus [21].

It is unsurprising that the molecular clock plays a crucial role in psychiatric disorders, given that mood and circadian rhythms are closely linked. Clinical experience shows that disturbed circadian rhythms provoked by jetlag or reduced sleep can trigger mood swings and sleep disorders [22,23,24]. The clock gene network, which is present in every living organism, operates over a period of 24 h in human beings. The 24-h clock is reset and synchronized every day by light, which is received by the retina. The light impulse is transmitted to the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) in the hypothalamus by the retinohypothalamic tract [25]. Each morning the transcription of cryptochrome (CRY1-2) and period (PER1-3) genes is activated by activating gene products encoded by the clock genes ARNTL (BMAL1) and CLOCK. Cryptochrome and period genes become phosphorylated in the cytoplasm, where they accumulate over approximately 12 h. Then the phosphorylated, cycle length determining CRY and PER proteins in the cytoplasm enter the nucleus, where they suppress the activating function of ARNTL and CLOCK, which stops the transcription of further CRY and PER genes (negative feedback loop) [22]. Therefore, core clock genes manage the molecular 24-h clock by an interlocked transcriptional–translational feedback loop, which generates the circadian regulation of important body functions such as hormone release (melatonin, cortisol etc.), body temperature, heartbeat and sleep. Melatonin production is intrinsically linked to circadian rhythms, with levels gradually increasing in the two hours before natural sleep onset and peaking several hours later [26]. Melatonin regulates various physiological and neuroendocrine functions through activation of MT1, coupled Gi/o-type proteins, and MT2 receptors coupled to Gq-type proteins. However, the underlying regulatory mechanism of melatonin release in the SCN remains elusive [27]. Aside from sleep regulation itself, the clock gene circle can directly affect mood by impacting neurotransmitter breakdown. There is a strong positive correlation between the clock gene ARNTL and the gene MAOA (monoamine oxidase A). The clock gene products of ARNTL and NPAS2 activate, as heterodimers, the transcription of the monoamine oxidase A (MAOA) gene. This has important consequences for the breakdown of neurotransmitters, which are metabolized by the enzyme MAOA and thus, for mood regulation [22,23,24]. Methylation of cytosines in regulatory regions of the promoter of ARNTL can affect ARNTL’s gene expression by silencing of the gene, which can hypothetically alter neurotransmitter breakdown. Previous results from Bengesser et al. showed that methylation of ARNTL differed significantly between bipolar disorder and controls [28]. Gene–environment interactions can affect gene expression regulation in the human body. As mentioned, hypermethylation of regulatory CpG islands around the promoter are associated with silencing of a gene. Methylation of cytosines in regulatory targets of DNA can be affected by diverse gene–environment-interactions such as chronic stress, aging, obesity, smoking, mood stabilizer intake, early life stress or trauma and nutrition [29,30]. Methylation of CpG islands (CG rich elements) can be favored by processed nutrients (e.g., polyphenols from green tea, cocoa or coffee) or by metabolites of gut-bacteria [31,32]. Thus, it is not surprising that there was a negative correlation between the bacterial diversity of the gut-microbiome and the methylation of ARNTL in fasting blood DNA of study participants with bipolar affective disorders [33]. Therefore, the gut-microbiome, which refers to the collection of genetic material of the gut microorganisms, affects the whole human organism including brain-health and sleep.

There is considerable evidence showing that the gut microbiome not only affects digestive, metabolic and immune function but also regulates sleep and mental states [34]. This is accomplished through the MGBA, in close interaction with emotions, physiological stress and circadian rhythms. Sleep patterns are affected by changes in intestinal permeability, immune system activation, inflammation, energy harvest and bacterial diversity [35,36]. The number of gut microbiota as well as the abundance of special species as Bacteroidetes and Clostridia oscillate during the light-dark cycle in mice [37]. Bacterial load is highest during their active phase with high abundance of Bacteroidetes, while the lowest bacterial load is observed during their rest phase with high abundance of the phylum Firmicutes [38,39]. Knockout of clock genes, including ARNTL as well as PER1/2 attenuate these oscillations [37,40]. Voigt et al. found that core clock gene mutations caused gut microbiome dysbiosis and that this was exacerbated by dietary intestinal stimuli in mice [41]. The potential impact of dietary composition and nutrient intake on gut microbiota composition and mental health has already been reviewed comprehensively by others [42,43]. Briefly, the gut microbiota composition is, besides other environmental and individual determinants, strongly modulated by dietary composition and nutrient intake. In particular, non-digestible carbohydrates such as fermentable dietary fibers, resistant starch and polyphenols, have been shown to act prebiotically since they are utilized by the resident microorganisms of the large intestine. These dietary components are likely to enhance alpha diversity and influence gut microbiota composition beneficially by selectively stimulating the growth of certain microorganisms [42]. A probiotic is a living microorganism, which when present in adequate amounts confers a health benefit to the host, such as fermented food like yoghurt, kefir, tempeh, kimchi, kombucha and others Probiotic bacteria can be consumed in the form of commercially-produced dietary supplements such as capsules, tablets or fortified dietary products. Additionally, dietary supplements containing certain strains of bacteria belong to probiotics. Since beneficial effects of probiotics on mental health are likely, they are also referred to as “psychobiotics” [44]. As mentioned before, probiotics seem to affect epigenetic mechanisms of gene expression regulation by influencing the methylation of CG sites in DNA. Methylation of cytosines in regulatory sequences near the promoter, the starting point of transcription, leads to silencing of a gene. Silencing of a gene consequently leads to gene expression and protein translation changes, which affects networks in the human body. It has been found that probiotics affect pathways that are necessary to create and transfer the methyl-group, e.g., the one-carbon (C1) metabolism. Certain probiotic bacteria (Lactobacillus helveticus R0052 and Bifidobacterium longum R0175) increased the donor for methyl-groups, S-adenosylmethionin (SAM), in an animal model of depression [45]. Methylation of DNA can also be affected by short chain fatty acids (SCFAs) such as butyrate, which are produced by gut-bacteria and can cross the blood–brain barrier. Also, nutrients such as folate and polyphenols from cocoa, green tea or certain fruit juices can affect epigenetic changes of DNA and consequently, gene expression and protein biosynthesis [31,32]. Thus, probiotics that alter microbiome diversity and, therefore, the gut-microbiome metabolites, have in theory the potential to positively influence gene expression regulation and the MGBA [31]. Nevertheless, to date transcriptomics- and metabolomics analyses before and after randomized, placebo-controlled, probiotics trials are to our best knowledge completely lacking in MDD, BD and psychotic disorders. There have only been a handful of studies carried out on healthy participants and patients with other medical disorders (e.g., autism, mastitis, inflammatory bowel diseases), which analyzed transcriptomics and metabolomics after probiotics trials [46,47,48,49,50,51].

As summarized in the current introduction, sleep is a basic physiological requirement and indispensable for the regeneration of both body and mind. Many patients with psychiatric conditions such as affective disorders show disrupted sleep patterns as well as alterations of the gut microbiota.

We performed a systematic review to analyze the interplay between disturbed circadian rhythms and the gut-microbiome only in psychiatric disorders (not in healthy controls). Search results were limited to publications in English from April 2015 to April 2020 due to the recent development of this field. We searched PubMed, Google Scholar, and Scopus for original articles analyzing the bidirectional cross-talk between sleep, circadian rhythms and the gut-microbiome in common psychiatric disorders using the following search terms: “sleep, microbiome and psychiatry”; “sleep, microbiome and depression”; “sleep, microbiome and bipolar disorder”, “sleep, microbiome and schizophrenia”, “sleep, microbiome and anorexia nervosa”, “sleep, microbiome and anxiety”; “sleep, microbiome and irritable bowel syndrome”, “clock gene expression and microbiome”, “clock gene expression and nutrition”. Reference lists of relevant articles were also reviewed to find additional literature Inclusion criteria were set a priori as follows: (1) cross-sectional studies analyzing sleep and gut-microbiome; (2) intervention studies analyzing sleep and gut-microbiome; (3) subjects had a diagnosis of depression, anxiety, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, anorexia nervosa or irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) adhering to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV) diagnostic criteria to study. Exclusion criteria were: (1) systematic reviews or meta-analyses; (2) subjects with unaltered mental health; or (3) studies investigating mouse gut-microbiota. This systematic literature review was conducted in accordance with PRISMA recommendations [65]. The database search with the mentioned keywords above revealed n = 181 results. After careful consideration 29 were chosen for further investigation, but of these 29 articles, only three were identified that met inclusion criteria for this review (after exclusion of reviews investigating psychobiotics as treatment for anxiety, depression and related symptoms; sleep and nutrition interactions: implication for athletes; the role of the microbiome in insomnia; circadian disturbance and depression; study protocols or animal testing studies and analyses in healthy controls or other medical disorders). The workflow of the systematic review process is depicted in Figure 1.

Only clinical, randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and cross-sectional studies investigating sleep and the gut-microbiome published between April 2015 and 15 April 2020 including study participants with psychiatric disorders (BD, MDD, schizophrenia, anorexia nervosa, anxiety and IBS) were included in our systematic review. Cross-sectional and intervention studies analyzing circadian rhythms and the gut-microbiome in healthy controls were excluded. Similarly, animal studies investigating sleep and the gut-microbiome were excluded, but were later on included in the discussion. Case reports describing a connection between sleep and the gut-microbiome were also excluded based on the low number of participants (mostly single observations). Studies investigating subjects with unaltered mental health or no reported intervention were also excluded.

Following a keyword search and elimination of excluded studies, 29 articles were found to discuss sleep and microbiome. Table 1 represents the searching results, which are depicted according to PICOS (population, interventions, comparisons, outcomes, study design) criteria and shows the final results of our systematic review, which includes only studies analyzing sleep and the gut-microbiome in psychiatric disorders in a cross-sectional, longitudinal or interventional design. Of these 29 articles only three studies were identified that met inclusion criteria (three cross-sectional studies analyzing sleep and gut-microbiome in individuals with depression and bipolar disorder and one interventional study analyzing sleep and gut-microbiome in individuals with IBS) [66,67,68].

Another study of Shunya Kurokawa et al. examined the effect of fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) on psychiatric symptoms including sleep among patients with IBS functional diarrhea (FDr) and functional constipation (FC). Changes in HAM-D and sleep-related items, Hamilton Rating Scale for Anxiety (HAM-A) and Quick Inventory for Depressive Symptoms (QUIDS) were measured between baseline and four weeks after FMT. For donors, healthy relatives within the second degree of relationship (≥20 years of age) were screened using stool and serology screening for bacterial, parasitic, and viral pathogens. Seventeen patients were evaluated over the course of FMT to analyze the impact of FMT on psychiatric symptoms and to look for a relationship between microbiota composition and psychiatric symptoms. Fecal samples for microbiome analysis were longitudinally collected from patients at week 0, 1, 2 and 4 after FMT, and from donors on the day of FMT. Methods were fecal sample collection, bacterial DNA extraction, and 16S rRNA gene sequencing and analysis. The impact of FMT on sleep was evaluated using the total score from 3 HAM-D sleep-related scores. Mean depression and anxiety levels were assessed with HAM-D, HAM-A and QUIDS and found to be significantly decreased after FMT. Psychiatric symptom change before and four weeks after FMT including the sleep-related scores with standard deviation from HAM-D (sleep) 2.24 ± 2.22 to 0.64 ± 1.27 (p = 0.005; FDR = 0.007; d = 0.885; r = 0.405). Among all patients, the baseline Shannon index for diversity of intestinal microbiota and microbiota composition had a negative correlation with HAM-D total scores. The HAM-D score change was positively correlated with microbiome diversity change following FMT. The results of the study, assessing the effect of FMT on depressive, sleep and anxiety symptoms showed that FMT might be effective for these depressive symptoms. Shannon index indicated that the patients with HAM-D ≥8 showed significantly lower microbiota diversity compared to that of the healthy donors and patients with HAM-D <8. HAM-D score and microbiome diversity at baseline were thus, negatively correlated. The diversity changes after FMT significantly correlated with improvement of HAM-D scores [68].

The aim of this review was to summarize the role of the gut microbiome in the context of circadian rhythms, nutrition and sleep disturbances in psychiatric disorders.

Methods to increase Faecalibacterium may include dietary approaches as described below. Targeting the microbiome may be an effective treatment paradigm for individuals with psychiatric disorders. There was a negative correlation between Lactobacillus counts and sleep [67]. Lactobacillus casei had beneficial effects on stress-induced sleep disturbance in healthy adults [71]. Lactobacillus brevis had beneficial effects on sleep rhythms in mice [72]. For the theoretical hypotheses and background as to why Lactobacillus, Bifidobacterium and Faecalibacterium are effective for sleep, as for their physiological increase, the impact of macronutrients on gut microbial composition is important. Plant-based protein has been associated with an increase in SCFA production, an improvement of gut barrier function and the beneficial modulation of the immune system by increasing regulatory T-cell expression and reducing inflammation. On the contrary, animal-based protein has been associated with an increase in trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO) that contributes to cardiovascular disease progression and a reduction in SCFA production. Additionally, the quality of fat consumed is of importance for gut microbial composition which is in turn associated with adipocyte metabolism. Unsaturated fats appear to influence the growth of intestinal bacteria (e.g., Lactobacillus, Bifidobacteria, Akkermansia muciniphila) that are associated with reduced inflammation in white adipose tissue (WAT) and toll-like receptor (TLR) activation, along with lowering plasma cholesterol and LDL-cholesterol levels, whereas saturated fats are likely to support an increase in the abundance of Bacteroides, Bilophila and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii which may contribute to a reduction in insulin sensitivity and increased inflammation in WAT and TLR activation [43]. Predominantly plant-based diets, such as the Mediterranean diet, are characterized by large amounts of fruits, vegetables and grains which contribute substantially to the intake of prebiotic nutrients. There is a considerable body of evidence that adherence to a Mediterranean diet is beneficial for gut microbiota composition by improving the Bacteroides to Firmicutes ratio and leading to increased SCFA production. By contrast, the Western diet contains larger proportions of saturated fats, salt, and added sugars which negatively influences the gut microbiota composition by reducing Bifidobacteria abundance and butyrate-producing bacteria [73]. It has been proposed that cognitive impairment is linked to dysbiosis caused by the Western diet with possible mechanisms for this link being reduced SCFA availability in the gut, consequent impairments in gut barrier integrity, and elevated bacterial antigen and endotoxin influx in the circulation. This inflammatory condition is proposed to disrupt the blood brain barrier. Furthermore, SCFA mediate neurotransmitter secretion in the enterocytes and influence neuroendocrine pathways [74]. Valles-Colomer et.al. 2019 found a potential contribution of microbial GABA production (which is the main inhibitory neurotransmitter of the CNS well established that activation of GABA(A) receptors favors sleep) in depression and the gut microbes’ ability of the dopamine metabolite 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid (a dietary polyphenol that is predominantly contained in berries, fruits and vegetables) synthesis that is associated with higher perception of mental quality of life [75,76]. As summarized here, results in human study participants with psychiatric disorders are limited. However, studies involving healthy individuals and animal models are promising, and relevant findings will be discussed in the following paragraphs.

Although studies involving human subjects are limited, the relationship between the molecular clock and microbiome has been analyzed in a variety of animal studies. Alongside other influences, feeding rhythms and diet composition are major factors influencing diurnal oscillations of the gut microbiota [77,78]. Chronic sleep fragmentation of mice has been reported to increase the Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes ratio as well as the relative abundance of members of Lachnospiraceae and Ruminococcaceae, while decreasing the relative abundance of Lactobacillaceae families [35]. SCFAs also impact clock genes, given that oral administration of SCFAs cause phase changes in the peripheral clock in mouse peripheral tissue [79]. In addition, the SCFA butyrate has been demonstrated to increase non-rapid-eye movement sleep (NREMS) in rodents [80].

Sleep and microbiome changes have been extensively investigated in healthy individuals. In novel bioinformatic analyses, such as redundancy analysis, co-occurrence analysis and artificial neural networks, it was demonstrated that the composition, diversity and metabolic function of the gut microbiota was significantly changed between those with insomnia and the healthy population. Random forest together with cross-validation identified two signature bacteria, which could be used to distinguish insomnia patients from the healthy population (Bactecteroides; Clostridiales). The gut flora interaction networks were significantly altered for patients with insomnia compared with the control group [81]. Smith et al. used actigraphy to quantify sleep measures coupled with gut microbiome sampling to determine how the gut microbiome correlates with various measures of sleep physiology. They found that total microbiome diversity was positively correlated with increased sleep efficiency and total sleep time along with positive correlations between total microbiome diversity and interleukin-6. Their analysis of the microbiome composition revealed that phyla richness of Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes were positively correlated with sleep efficiency and several taxa like Lachnospiraceae, Corynebacterium and Blautia were negatively correlated with sleep measures [82]. These quantified sleep measures differ clearly from the self rating measures described in the reviewed papers in patients with psychiatric diseases and clarify the need of objective measures in patients with psychiatric diseases. Jason R. Anderson suggested a possible relationship between sleep quality, gut microbiome composition and cognitive flexibility in healthy older adults. Regarding the quality and duration of sleep, an observational study showed a positive association with fruit and vegetable intake—which are the major dietary suppliers of prebiotic fibers and polyphenols. Young men with higher consumption of fruit and vegetables had better sleep quality and shorter time to fall asleep [83].

Psychobiotics have the potential to be a novel and well-tolerated treatment strategy in MDD, but only a few placebo-controlled probiotic trials have been performed in patients with psychological symptoms. Akkasheh and colleagues conducted a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial with 40 MDD patients to investigate the effect of probiotics capsules containing Lactobacillus acidophilus, Lactobacillus casei and Bifidobacterium bifidum. They discovered beneficial effects using measures of the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI), insulin levels and inflammation markers after eight weeks of probiotic intake [84]. Grünwald et al. analyzed 42 males and females suffering from stress and exhaustion, which improved after an RCT with a probiotic multivitamin preparation (L.acidophilus and B. bifidum and B. longum) [85]. In the study of Yu et.al., milk was fermented with the strain Lactobacillus brevis DL1-11 for which high GABA-producing capacity had been proposed. The effects on anxiety and sleep quality were evaluated in mice that were administered different doses of the GABA-containing fermented milk. Additionally, significant increases in Ruminococcus, Adlercreutzia and Allobaculum abundance and elevated levels of the SCFA butyric acid were observed. Thus, GABA-fermented milk may improve sleep by changing gut microbiota and SCFA levels [86].

Of note, most of the probiotics RCT studies only included healthy individuals, and were summarized by an excellent comprehensive review by Wallace and Millev [87]. In Figure 2 we roughly outline the important relationships between the molecular clock, the MGBA and nutritional psychiatry as future clinical implication. Thus, further research is necessary before starting the era of “psychobiotics” in psychiatric treatment. Currently, there are only few studies published that explicitly investigated microbiota-shaping ability of diet and its interplay with sleep quality. Thampson et.al focused on the potential impact of dietary prebiotics and bioactive milk fractions on sleep quality in a rat model. In rats that were fed a diet rich in prebiotics, lactoferrin and milk fat globule membranes, increased Lactobacillus rhamnosus abundance, improved NREM sleep and REM sleep quality after acute stressor exposure were noted, as well as a more stable gut microbial alpha diversity and diurnal rhythms [88].

Besides the possible impact of the gut-microbiota on sleep quality, eating habits may also affect sleep quality in a bidirectional manner.

Additionally, dietary patterns can also impact sleep [89,90]. Higher fat intake is associated with disordered sleep whereas the Mediterranean diet is associated with fewer sleeping problems. Additionally, skipping breakfast, irregular eating habits, low intake of vegetables and fish, and high intake of simple carbohydrates (such as sweets and noodles) have been associated with poor sleep quality in Japanese females [89].

Even though the reviewed topic belongs to a new area of psychiatric research, there has long existed a diverse range of psychotropic medications concerned with the remediation of disturbed circadian rhythms. Mood stabilizers such as lithium and valproate, both commonly used in the treatment of bipolar disorder, modulate circadian rhythms via inhibition of glycogen-synthase-kinase-3-beta (GSK3Beta), which phosphorylates the cycle length determining PER clock gene products. Lithium also inhibits the clock component REV-ERBα that inhibits ARNTL itself [91,92,93]. However, there are very few studies investigating the effect of lithium and valproate on the MGBA, Furthermore, new drug targets in the “sleep–gut axis” could potentially be of vital importance in addressing the widespread sleeping difficulties seen in psychiatric disorders.

In clinical practice, several psychological interventions to improve sleep quality are well evaluated and described: (1) sleep hygiene, (2) cognitive-behavioural therapy (CBT), and (3) relaxation, mindfulness and hypnotherapy [94].

In the psychological management of sleeping disorders, psychoeducational approaches and day structure interventions are also highly common and effective and aim to change circadian rhythms and improve psychological conditions including sleep quality [95]. An example is social rhythm therapy (SRTs) which focuses on stabilizing the daily activities (e.g., meal schedule, sleep/wake patterns, activity times), which could have a positive impact on the circadian system. Subsequently, the patient learns to structure the day cognitively and to plan possible changes in routines. Patients learn to adapt to the social rhythms of the environment and to correct irregularities in life habits. In particular, in bipolar disorder, interpersonal and social rhythm therapy (IPSRT) is well validated [96,97]. However, recent research highlights the positive effects of IPSRT on cognitive functioning in patients with major depression [98]. Additionally, manipulating the sleep–wake cycle seems to be a promising intervention in the clinical management of major depression and bipolar disorder [99,100].

Our systematic review confirmed that there are important crosslinks between disturbed circadian rhythms and the MGBA, which can affect well-being and symptomatology throughout the course of psychiatric disorders. This is an innovative approach in attempting to elucidate and understand disease mechanisms and has diverse clinical implications. However, currently, studies investigating the microbiome–sleep link in patients with psychiatric disorders are sparse. We could identify only four studies analyzing the bidirectional crosstalk between sleep and the gut microbiome in human study participants with psychiatric disorders. Future studies on a multi-omics level are necessary to analyze the interaction between circadian rhythms with regard to the gut microbiome, metabolomics, genomics and transcriptomics. Further integrative studies using machine-learning approaches in a holistic way are important to elucidate the sleep and the MGBA as the “via regia” to a harmonized biorhythm and wellbeing.

