Non-nutritive sweeteners and their impacts on the gut microbiome and host physiology

Non-nutritive sweeteners (NNS) are broadly incorporated into foods, especially those representing a growing share of the beverage market. NNS are viewed as a noncaloric and desirable alternative to sugar-based sweeteners and are thought to contribute to reducing overall caloric intake. While these compounds have been studied extensively and have long been considered inert, new research has presented a different view and raises new questions about the effects of NNS on human physiology. Namely, the influence on glucose responses, the gastrointestinal epithelium, and the gut microbiome. As the gut microbiome is now recognized as a major mediator of human health and perturbations to this community are generally associated with negative health trajectories or overt disease, interactions between NNS and the gut microbiome are of increasing interest to clinicians and researchers. Several NNS compounds are now hypothesized to affect human physiology by modulating the gut microbiome, though the mechanism for this action remains unclear. The purpose of this review is to discuss the history and current knowledge of NNS, their reported utility and effects on host physiology and the gut microbiome, and describes a model for investigating the underlying mechanism behind reported effects of NNS on the gut microbiome.

The increased abundance of processed foods among the diets of industrialized nations has led to the overconsumption of non-essential nutrients, such as added or free sugars. Processed food formulations often prioritize consumer perceptions of organoleptic properties of a product, leading many of these goods to contain high amounts of salt and/or sugar. Consequently, overconsumption of added sugar and salt has become a global concern (1–3). To address this concern regarding the consumption of common sweeteners (e.g., sucrose, glucose, natural sugar syrups, and high fructose corn syrup) and their known adverse health effects, food and beverage products now often use non-nutritive Sweeteners (NNS) as replacements for sugar sweeteners.

Overall, while the health risks associated with obesity and excess sugar consumption are well known (28–30), there is limited understanding as to whether or how these NNS affect human physiology, whether they may act directly on the host to do so, or if they act indirectly via modulation of the gut microbiome. This review will discuss and summarize the current literature regarding NNS and their chemistry, evidence of physiological impacts on the host, and their potential impact of NNS on the gut microbiome.

Non-nutritive sweeteners are perceived as a safe and affordable alternative to sugar sweetened beverages (SSBs), particularly in overweight and obese individuals with the goal of limiting caloric intake as well as improving weight management (31–34). Therefore, the prevalence of non-nutritive sweeteners in common diets continues to grow (9, 35). Currently, the US FDA has approved six NNS for use as food additives in the US. These include acesulfame K, advantame, aspartame, sucralose, neotame, and saccharin (Table 1). In addition to two naturally derived zero calorie sweeteners that are Generally Recognized as Safe (GRAS) by the FDA; stevioside and rebaudioside A from the extracts of the stevia plant (Stevia rebaudiana), and monkfruit extract (Siraitia grosernorii) (42, 43). Though these compounds share an effect of perceived sweetness, their chemical composition and the intensity of their perceived sweetness differs significantly.

Despite differences in chemical composition, the consensus of safety and regulatory approvals for NNS has led dietary recommendations and health organizations to encourage their use and the suggested beneficial outcomes – primarily as sugar substitutes with little to no caloric cost (44–46). The Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics (AND) has previously reviewed the techniques and evidence as favorable for use in adults with Type 1 and 2 Diabetes (47), if amounts of consumed NNS do not exceed that of the FDA proposed ADI (48). In addition, the AND supports the use of NNS as a strategy for various diet/health concerns including the limiting of carbohydrate and energy intake as well as blood glucose and/or weight management (49).

Non-nutritive sweeteners carry the advantage over typical sweeteners due to their presumed zero-to-negligible caloric load, as well as producing no direct glycemic effect (48). Despite their extensive usage, the supposed benefits have yet to be established, specifically with reducing body weight. The effects of NNS consumption in relation to body weight management have been largely divided over the main findings and randomized controlled trials in humans are limited (50). Several observational studies have reported weight gain (17, 51, 52), conflicting reports of weight loss (34, 53, 54), or negligible effects on weight (50, 55, 56). A key drawback to many of these studies is determining directionality of the interactions as well as accurate estimates of NNS intake, as these observational studies do not demonstrate causality (44, 57).

The widespread use of NNS has been contingent on the negligible caloric cost as well as no influence on post-prandial responses to appetite and energy, which is essential for both diabetic patients and overweight/obese individuals in search of added sugar replacements. To date, the current findings provide mixed results on the effect of weight management, as well as the effects of NNS on insulin, glucose intolerance, and GLP-1 responses. However, studies examining humans for these responses have not stratified participants by gut microbiome composition, which may explain some of the variability of responses among individuals.

The gastrointestinal tract (GIT) provides for the breakdown of most dietary components and enables efficient uptake of nutrients to meet the nutritional needs of the host (72). In contrast, the gut microbiome is a community of microbes which accesses dietary components during and after digestion and absorption and contributes to the fermentation of dietary components such as fiber (72). In doing so, these microbes facilitate the capture of energy from dietary components which the host is unable to access and facilitates the production of additional nutrients (e.g., vitamins) consequently accessible by the host (72). The influence of this community on host development, nutrition, and health is now being understood (72, 73), as more examples of ancient associations between humans and specific gut microbes are identified (74, 75). These ancient associations are significant relationships between humans and our gut microbes as these microbes were recruited and maintained over millennia to perform key functions in the gut (76).

Collectively, the outcomes from these studies investigating the impact of NNS on the gut microbiome suggest that not only is the gut microbiome affected by the consumption of NNS, but that these impacts on the gut microbiome have physiological consequences for the host (25, 88, 98), and that these consequences may be transmitted vertically, from mother to offspring. As NNS can be detected in milk (39), these findings raise questions as to whether these impacts on the gut microbiome of offspring are related to prenatal impacts on the maternal gut microbiome or maternal provision of NNS via milk (39, 125–128), as well as what other confounding lifestyle factors may shape the gut microbiomes of both mothers and their offspring (129).

While regulatory review of each sweetener includes extensive toxicology and safety data (14, 130–132), new research related to the gut microbiome has raised questions as to how these NNS have effects on host physiology. When considering the possible mechanism underlying these results, there are several potential routes by which these findings may be rationalized and supported in future work.

Together, the reported effects of NNS on human physiology (e.g., impaired glucose tolerance) can be conceptually differentiated to be (1) directly active on the host to influence physiological responses, (2) act on the host epithelium and indirectly influence the gut microbiome composition to influence host responses, or (3) act directly on the gut microbiome to influence its composition. While there is evidence of the first possibility, studies incorporating the microbiome composition of individuals and/or using microbiome transplantation experiments appears to more strongly support an effect of NNS on the gut microbiome, either directly or indirectly, which then influences host health, as generally reported in terms of glucose intolerance, increased body weight, or metabolic modifications (25, 123).

In this review, we assess the microbial and associated metabolic effects of non-nutritive sweeteners and recognize controversies/shortcomings of the existing evidence behind these structurally varied compounds and their use. While there is extensive safety evidence behind NNS, there are growing bodies of work which suggest that NNS in high concentrations may exert possible negative health outcomes within certain susceptible populations/individuals. In particular, susceptible populations may ultimately be identified by their gut microbiome composition, rather than obvious clinical features, given findings identifying responder/non-responder differences among individuals in a small saccharin challenge study (25, 82, 140).

Finally, despite previously unappreciated impacts of NNS, their value must be considered in the context of their role in limiting caloric intake, as alternatives to sugar-sweetened beverages. The value of NNS to efforts limiting the global health burden of obesity and obesity-related disease may outweigh potentially negative effects on human health. While observational studies have linked NNS consumption with an increased risk of cardiovascular disease (17, 143) and acute impacts on glucose responses have been described (16, 25), it is unclear whether short-term consumption is associated with the same outcomes. Further, if acute effects on glucose responses are reversible, and if NNS are consumed in moderation with concomitant caloric reduction, perhaps these food additives can be useful to reduce the significant health risks associated with obesity, which may outweigh the risks of NNS consumption (144). Further research is clearly needed to characterize and assess the potential for NNS to affect human health and the gut microbiome, as well as supporting mechanistic data to identify how these impacts occur. Future studies examining NNS should especially consider the gut microbiome of the study population, whether in animal models of human studies, to more closely determine the relative value of NNS in limiting obesity.

ILR and SAF wrote the manuscript. All authors approved the final manuscript.

The authors are supported by the University of Nevada, Reno College of Agriculture, Biotechnology, and Natural Resources (CABNR) and the Nevada Experiment Station; the University of Nevada, Reno Department of Nutrition; and the Office of the Vice President for Research and Innovation at the University of Nevada, Reno.

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

