Circadian Host-Microbiome Interactions in Immunity

The gut microbiome plays a critical role in regulating host immunity and can no longer be regarded as a bystander in human health and disease. In recent years, circadian (24 h) oscillations have been identified in the composition of the microbiota, its biophysical localization within the intestinal tract and its metabolic outputs. The gut microbiome and its key metabolic outputs, such as short chain fatty acids and tryptophan metabolites contribute to maintenance of intestinal immunity by promoting barrier function, regulating the host mucosal immune system and maintaining the function of gut-associated immune cell populations. Loss of rhythmic host-microbiome interactions disrupts host immunity and increases risk of inflammation and metabolic complications. Here we review factors that drive circadian variation in the microbiome, including meal timing, dietary composition and host circadian clocks. We also consider how host-microbiome interactions impact the core molecular clock and its rhythmic outputs in addition to the potential impact of this relationship on circadian control of immunity.

The circadian clock is a critical regulator of immunity, including homeostatic processes and responses to immune challenge (1–3). It is now very well established that intrinsic clocks within cells of the immune system regulate their function, influencing the manner in which they respond to a pathogen. However, extrinsic rhythmic signals also drive rhythmic behavior in immune cells. The gut microbiome is recognized as a major influence over the immune system, impacting on its development and daily function. Work over the last decade has established that this bacterial community exhibits 24 h oscillations in composition, biophysical localization and function. Furthermore, these oscillations are critical for driving rhythmic metabolic processes both within the gut and further afield in organs such as the liver. Here we examine the potential impact of circadian rhythms in the microbiome on immunity, and pose the question might rhythms in the microbiome influence circadian control of immunity?

Entrainment to the 24 h environment is vital to allow organisms to temporally arrange their daily functions (such as feeding, metabolism and sleeping) to align with optimal conditions. Nearly every cell of the body (including those of the immune system) contains the molecular machinery required to keep the clock ticking (4). However, organisms cannot set the time correctly without the help of environmental cues termed “zeitgebers” (meaning time-givers). The most important zeitgeber is the light-dark cycle, which entrains the central clock within the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN). Other zeitgebers, such as food availability (5), hormones (6), and body temperature (7) are also important, particularly for influencing peripheral pacemakers (8). Peripheral clocks are synchronized by the SCN, but continue to oscillate when uncoupled from the central clock, highlighting their ability to respond autonomously to changes in the local micro-environment (3, 9, 10).

The molecular clockwork machinery relies on transcriptional-translational feedback loops (TTFL), the duration of which dictates the period of the circadian rhythm. The primary TTFL involves activator proteins circadian locomotor output cycles kaput (CLOCK) and brain muscle arnt-like 1 (BMAL1) interacting with repressor proteins PERIOD and CRYPTOCHROME (4). CLOCK and BMAL1 heterodimerise and bind Enhancer-box (E-box) sequences on target genes for PERIOD and CRYPTOCHROME, which accumulate in the cytoplasm before translocating to the nucleus to inhibit further CLOCK-BMAL1 activity by negative feedback (11). The main TTFL is stabilized by an auxiliary feedback loop involving REV-ERBα and retinoid-related orphan receptor (ROR)α, which repress and activate BMAL1, respectively (12). In this review, we consider bi-directional interactions between the circadian timing system and the gut microbiome and how this influences immune function.

The microbiome is defined as an environment containing a heterogeneous community of microbes (including bacteria, fungi, and viruses) and the functional consequences of these microbes, such as their metabolic outputs and interaction with the host. By contrast, microbiota solely describes the community of organisms in isolation (13). It is generally accepted that the fetus develops in a sterile environment and first contact with microbes occurs during birth. An infant's microbiome is influenced by delivery route and method of feeding (14). The first 2–3 years of life oversee significant flux in the composition of the gut microbiome before assuming an adult-like profile, influenced by cessation of breast-feeding, increasing complexity of dietary nutrients and environmental exposures, including antibiotics (15, 16).

Our understanding of microbiome function is growing constantly, with main areas of interest in development, immunity and metabolism. Here we focus on the impact of gut microbiota rhythmicity in directing immunity.

The gut microbiota contribute to the development, maturation and regulation of the host immune system. The importance of the microbiome in shaping the immune system is perhaps best demonstrated by studies with germ free (GF) animals. GF mice have underdeveloped gut-associated lymphoid tissues, fewer and smaller Peyer's patches and mesenteric lymph nodes, and impaired development of isolated lymphoid follicles (22, 23). GF mice have reduced levels of secretory IgA in the intestine (24), and the morphology of the intestinal epithelial cells (IECs), which are normally in direct contact with the microbiota, is modified, with altered microvilli formation and slower cell turnover (25). Furthermore, the absence of a microbiota is associated with arrested capillary network formation within the intestines (26, 27).

Murine models of autoimmune-driven Type 1 diabetes mellitus, such as non-obese diabetic (NOD) mice are driven in part by activation of innate immune component toll-like receptors (TLR) (40). NOD mice with genetic deletion of MyD88, a common adaptor protein for TLR signaling, are protected from type 1 diabetes, but this protection is lost in GF conditions (41). In keeping, NOD mice treated with antibiotics from an early age demonstrate an increased incidence of type 1 diabetes mellitus (42, 43). Together, these data suggest the microbiome modulates innate immunity through TLR signaling to impact risk of autoimmune metabolic diseases such as diabetes in mice.

Many of the effects the microbiome has on immunity are attributable to the metabolic outputs of the gut microbiota (44, 45). Intestinal bacteria produce a wide range of metabolites, including short chain fatty acids (SCFAs), tryptophan metabolites, essential vitamins, phenolic acids, polyamines and bile acids, which act to modulate host metabolism and immunity (Figure 1).

SCFAs [for example, acetate (C2), proprionate (C3), and butyrate (C4)] are volatile fatty acids composed of a backbone of between 1 and 6 carbon atoms. Derived from bacterial anaerobic fermentation of dietary fibers in the colon, they promote intestinal epithelial barrier function and regulate the host mucosal immune system. SCFAs are important for maintenance of IEC turnover and barrier function (46–48). Butyrate is a critical source of energy for IECs (49), and also regulates expression of the transcription factor hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)1α, which acts to co-ordinate barrier function (46) and induces IL10RA, which promotes expression of the tight junction protein Claudin 2 (48). In addition, SCFAs act on multiple gut resident immune cells to facilitate maintenance of intestinal immunity. The earliest observation of the role for SCFAs in maintenance of immune cell populations was made in Tregs. Butyrate and proprionate facilitate extrathymic generation of Tregs (50, 51) by enhancing histone H3 acetylation in the promoter and conserved non-coding sequence regions of the FoxP3 locus (52). More recently it has been established that the effects of SCFA extend far beyond these anti-inflammatory cells to influence the function of both adaptive and innate immune cell populations. These include macrophages (53, 54), B cells (55), CD8+T cells (56), type 3 innate lymphoid cells (ILC3s) (57, 58) and neutrophils (58). For example, butyrate alters the metabolic behavior of intestinal macrophages, promoting a state of alternative activation and thus promoting microbial tolerance (53).

Tryptophan is a dietary essential amino acid metabolized in the gastrointestinal tract via three different pathways: the kynurenine pathway; the serotonin pathway; or via direct metabolism by microbiota (59). Whilst the former two metabolic pathways are regarded as host-dependent, the microbiota has been shown to influence them (59). Tryptophan metabolism by the microbiota includes the transformation of tryptophan to indole and its derivatives, many of which are ligands for the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR). This includes: indole-3-aldehyde (IAId), indole-3-acetate (I3A), indole 3-proprionic acid (IPA), indole-3-acetaldehyde (IAAId), 5-hydroxyindole-3-acetic acid (5-HIAA) and indoleacrylic acid.

Tryptophan metabolites produced by the microbiota are important for regulation of immunity. For example, IAId produced by lactobacilli induces IL22 production to support antifungal resistance and ameliorate colitis in mouse models (66). I3A reduces the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines by macrophages and slows their migration toward a chemotactic signal in an AhR dependent manner (67). Additionally, tryptophan metabolites such as IPA act via pregnane X receptors (PXR) to regulate intestinal barrier function through TLR4 activity (68, 69). Recent work has uncovered a mechanism whereby bacteria derived butyrate enhances production of 5-HIAA which acts via AhR to support regulatory B cell function (70). This highlights the importance of interactions between different microbial species to promote immunity.

Bile acids (BAs) are cholesterol-derived molecules produced in the liver and secreted into the duodenum. Whilst the vast majority (~95%) are re-absorbed through the terminal ileum, several different phyla of gut bacteria can transform the remainder to secondary bile acids, with immune modulatory effects. Recently there has been a flurry of activity in this field ascribing a role for secondary BAs in T cell biology. The lithocholic acid (LCA) derivatives 3-oxoLCA and isoalloLCA regulate Th17 and Treg cell differentiation in the lamina propria (71) and RORγ+ Tregs in the colon (72). Furthermore, isodeoxycholic acid (isoDCA) promotes the generation of peripheral Tregs (73).

The existence of intrinsic circadian clocks has rarely been demonstrated in organisms outside of the eukaryotic kingdom, with the exception of certain photosynthetic cyanobacteria. Synechococcus elongatus utilizes 3 clock proteins (KaiA, KaiB and KaiC) in a post-translational oscillator cycle of phosphorylation and de-phosphorylation to generate 24 h rhythms (74). The S. elongatus clock can synchronize to 24 h temperature cycles and directs clock-regulated gene expression of almost the entire genome (75, 76). It appears that it is not necessary to have all three Kai proteins in order to exhibit rhythmicity. Rhodobacter sphaeroides are purple photosynthetic bacteria which express self-sustaining rhythmicity under aerobic condition but lack KaiA (77), suggesting that either KaiB and KaiC function differently from those in Cyanobacteria, or that there may be novel components regulating the clock mechanisms in place here.

The existence of timekeeping components in non-photosynthetic bacteria has been addressed in part by exploring whether homologs of the Kai genes exist in other bacteria. Whilst KaiB and KaiC are quite highly conserved, KaiA is missing in many other prokaryotes (78). However, like R. Sphaeroides, circadian cycles can still be still displayed as in the case of the marine cyanobacterium Prochlorococcus (77). Enterobacter aerogenes is the first gut commensal bacteria found to express 24 h rhythms outside the host (79). This gram-negative motile bacterium from the phylum Proteobacteria shows circadian rhythmic swarming behavior in the presence of melatonin, which was unreproducible in other gram-negative bacteria such as Escherichia coli or Klebsiella pneumoniae. Furthermore, transformation with a flagellar motor-protein-driven luciferase reporter reveals temperature-compensated circadian rhythm of luciferase activity synchronized by melatonin (80). Given the abundance of extrapineal melatonin secreted within the gut (81), these studies present this diurnal hormone as a potential zeitgeber for the gut microbiome and may present one mechanism of host control of microbiome rhythmicity. Further studies are required to understand the intrinsic circadian mechanisms of E. aerogenes and explore the presence of intrinsic rhythms within other species of the gut microbiota. One possibility is that gut commensals have evolved to respond rhythmically to environmental signals through horizontal gene transfer with human hosts (80, 82). The presence of intrinsic circadian machinery in gut microbiota would have far-ranging implications for understanding host-microbiome interactions.

With the discovery of resident intestinal clocks (83–85) and rhythmicity in multiple immune cells, interest is growing in the circadian influence on host-microbiome interaction and immunity. 16S rRNA gene sequencing of the fecal microbiome has demonstrated diurnal oscillations in the relative abundance of roughly 15% of OTUs, accounting for around 60% of the murine microbiome, with corresponding oscillation in 10% of OTUs in humans (86, 87). In addition rhythmicity in total microbiota has been described, driven predominantly by Bacteroidetes, which peak during the murine active phase (88). Diurnal oscillations in abundance also exist robustly in healthy humans despite marked inter-human variation in gut microbiome composition (20).

In addition to timing of food, dietary composition also impacts the microbiome rhythmicity. The availability of high-fat diet ad libitum drives mice to lose their diurnal eating habits and spread their intake through the day (101). This dampens diurnal oscillations in the microbiome (which are restored when time-restricted feeding is applied) and results in persistent microbial dysbiosis (87). Jet-lagged mice fed a high-fat diet experience greater weight gain compared to non-shifted controls, despite equal food intake; a phenotype attenuated by concurrent antibiotic administration or provision of a high-fat diet to GF mice (86, 92). Fecal microbial transplantation (FMT) from mice with jet lag to GF, non-shifted mice conferred an obesity phenotype not seen in FMT of non-jet-lagged mice (86). This suggests that hosts with a disrupted clock are more susceptible to harboring a dysbiotic microbiome, which is sufficient to drive adverse metabolic consequences for the host (Figure 3).

Whilst feeding times clearly drive rhythms in the microbiome, the host circadian molecular clock also plays a role, with studies evidencing the importance of the biological clock in regulating the composition of the microbial community as well as the rhythmicity. Studies utilizing ClockΔ19 mice (as a genetic approach to model circadian disruption) report increased intestinal hyperpermeability (102) and reduced microbial diversity (103) of the gut microbiome. It is feasible, but as yet undemonstrated, that these changes to the microbiota influence barrier integrity (or vice versa). To address the contribution of the host clock in driving microbiome rhythmicity, studies often use transgenic mice lacking a functional clock. Most studies here have been undertaken using animals with global deletion of core clock genes, which complicates interpretation of results as this likely leads to arrhythmic feeding behavior. Mice with global Bmal1 knockout are arrhythmic and demonstrate attenuated compositional microbiome rhythmicity, whilst retaining circadian oscillations in total fecal microbiome abundance (88). Arrhythmic mice with global Per1/2 deletion lose rhythmicity in abundance of fecal and mucosal microbiomes as well as metagenomic and metabolic outputs (86, 90). In addition, the intestinal microbiome of global Per1/2 knockout mice is dysbiotic with less diversity compared to littermate controls (86). Instigation of a time-restricted feeding schedule to Per1/2 knockout mice to align food consumption with wildtypes recovers oscillations in the microbiome (86). Targeting the molecular clock in specific cells will further delineate the relative contributions of central host rhythms and circadian rhythms in local mucosal immunity to microbiome dysbiosis. Indeed, this approach has revealed a subset of ILCs as critical regulators of the rhythmic microbiome.

ILCs are circadian rhythmic tissue-resident lymphoid cells. There are currently five subsets of ILCs, which align with their T helper cell counterparts comprised of natural killer cells, ILC1s, ILC2s, ILC3s and lymphoid tissue inducer cells (104). ILC3s are innate counterparts to Th17 cells, characterized by expression of RORγt and production of IL17, IL22, and GM-CSF and are the predominant ILC class found at mucosal sites such as the intestine. ILC3s regulate the composition of the microbiota by encouraging preferential commensal growth whilst contributing to removal of pathogens. ILC3-derived IL22 binds directly to IECs and acts through Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription (STAT)3 to support a multitude of functions that bolster the luminal biophysical barrier including production of AMPs, goblet cell differentiation and subsequent mucus production (105, 106). In addition, IL22 improves colonization resistance by fucosylating IEC-associated proteins that commensal bacterial preferentially use as an energy source, thus helping commensals out-compete pathogens (107, 108).

Multiple components of mucosal immunity exhibit rhythmicity, including the microbiome, IECs, dendritic cells and ILC3s, which will likely need to be co-ordinated and entrained for maximal gut homeostasis. It will be pertinent to delineate the local power balance and determine which circadian clocks, local or central, drive rhythmicity in the gut microbiome during homeostasis and the consequences of disease (90, 113–115).

Communication between the host and microbiome is bi-directional. Whilst host clocks and rhythmic feeding drive daily variation in the composition of the microbiome, signals derived from the microbiome can influence circadian host physiology. We are now beginning to establish an understanding of how the microbiota and its metabolic outputs effects rhythmic processes.

In addition to the microbiota driving rhythms within the gut, bacterial-derived signals also act further afield to programme circadian networks in the liver (90, 125). The gut microbiome has been identified as a potential driver of HFD-induced changes in liver circadian metabolism (125). The nutritional challenge afforded by HFD drives transcriptional and metabolic reprogramming within the liver, resulting in a gain of rhythms in previously non-circadian transcription factors such as peroxisome proliferative activated receptor γ (PPARγ) (126, 127). Murakami et al. demonstrated that fecal transfer from HFD-fed mice to recipient normal chow fed mice is sufficient to elicit the emergence of circadian rhythms in PPARγ leading to specific rewiring of circadian transcription. Thaiss et al. demonstrated in mice fed normal chow, depletion of the microbiome re-programmes the liver transcriptome, with both loss and gain of rhythmic pathways (90). They went on to identify polyamines and amino acids as contributing microbiome-regulated rhythmic metabolites that signal from the gut to the liver to regulate transcriptional programmes (90). These studies provide proof-of concept that systemic metabolic rhythms are reliant on the rhythmic microbial outputs. It will be interesting to explore the extent to which these rhythmic signals direct other physiological processes, with immune homeostasis being an obvious candidate.

The intestinal microbiome is very well established as an influential component of immune-metabolic homeostasis. A healthy microbiome exhibits rhythmicity in microbial composition, as well as rhythmicity in its biophysical location and metabolic outputs, each of which will influence immune homeostasis. Whilst evidence is emerging of gut commensals with potential intrinsic rhythmic capacity, it is likely that these microbiome rhythms will be heavily reliant on entrainment derived largely from the host. This may take the form of food timing, food composition, secreted host signals or non-dietary intake including antibiotics and immunomodulatory medication, as well as host disease state. Initial observations of microbiome rhythmicity in immune homeostasis and associated dysrhythmia in inflammatory disease states should drive scientific investigation into the mechanisms of host circadian regulation of the microbiome and vice versa, as it is not yet clear which immune components are directly sensitive to changes in microbiome rhythmicity and which host-microbiome pathways predominate in health and disease. Whilst current studies have predominantly focused on the metabolic implications of an arrhythmic microbiome, future work should expand on early work exploring the impact of microbiome rhythmicity on composition and function of immune subsets. Piecing together the relative contribution of each moving part in the microbiome, intestinal epithelium and circulating immune cells will help to understand the role of circadian rhythmicity in crosstalk between the microbiome and immune system.

Evidence of microbiome dysbiosis associated with chronic human inflammatory conditions is growing, however, addition of a circadian component to human immuno-microbiome trials is in its infancy. In humans, manipulation of the microbiome via fecal microbial transplantation is already established to modulate immune response in infective conditions such as Clostridium difficile infection and is under investigation in inflammatory conditions such as inflammatory bowel disease (128, 129). It is exciting to consider circadian influence on microbiome health as a pathway to further understanding of mucosal immunology and ultimately improve efficacy of microbiome modulation as a chronotherapy for human inflammatory and auto-immune disease.

Figures were created with moc.redneroiB.

TB and JG wrote the manuscript and designed the figures. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The handling Editor declared a past co-authorship with one of the authors JG.

Funding. Work in JG's laboratory is funded by the MRC (MR/S002715/1 and MR/P023576/1). TB is an MRC Clinical Research Training Fellow (MR/S02199X/1).

