Fasting alters the gut microbiome reducing blood pressure and body weight in metabolic syndrome patients

Periods of fasting and refeeding may reduce cardiometabolic risk elevated by Western diet. Here we show in the substudy of NCT02099968, investigating the clinical parameters, the immunome and gut microbiome exploratory endpoints, that in hypertensive metabolic syndrome patients, a 5-day fast followed by a modified Dietary Approach to Stop Hypertension diet reduces systolic blood pressure, need for antihypertensive medications, body-mass index at three months post intervention compared to a modified Dietary Approach to Stop Hypertension diet alone. Fasting alters the gut microbiome, impacting bacterial taxa and gene modules associated with short-chain fatty acid production. Cross-system analyses reveal a positive correlation of circulating mucosa-associated invariant T cells, non-classical monocytes and CD4+ effector T cells with systolic blood pressure. Furthermore, regulatory T cells positively correlate with body-mass index and weight. Machine learning analysis of baseline immunome or microbiome data predicts sustained systolic blood pressure response within the fasting group, identifying CD8+ effector T cells, Th17 cells and regulatory T cells or Desulfovibrionaceae, Hydrogenoanaerobacterium, Akkermansia, and Ruminococcaceae as important contributors to the model. Here we report that the high-resolution multi-omics data highlight fasting as a promising non-pharmacological intervention for the treatment of high blood pressure in metabolic syndrome patients.

Fasting can prolong survival and reduce disease burden in rodent models, and possibly in humans1. In contrast, today’s Western diet promotes cardiometabolic disease (CMD)2. How diet affects the gut microbiota, immune system and subsequently host (patho)physiology is not fully understood, and information is lacking on how periodic fasting affects the gut microbiome in patients with metabolic syndrome (MetS). To reduce CMD risk, exercise and a healthy diet are often prescribed. Shifting from a “Western diet” to a healthier “Mediterranean-like” DASH diet3 to achieve optimal nutrition and negative energy balance is recommended, although compliance is a major hurdle. Our study is the first of its kind to investigate the effects of a lifestyle modification in combination with fasting therapy in patients with MetS using a multi-omics approach by combining gut microbiome analysis and deep immunophenotyping. The “Western diet” is known to induce metabolic inflammation, accelerating CMD4. The gut microbiota is a delicate ecosystem that plays a pivotal role in health and disease. Dysbiosis has been observed as a characteristic of several inflammatory, cardiovascular, and metabolic disorders (e.g. obesity)5, including hypertension6,7. The “healthy” gut microbiome is relatively stable, although various factors such as antibiotics, intestinal infections, and profound dietary or lifestyle changes, such as moving on or off a “Western diet”, can induce transient or persistent changes to this ecosystem. Traditionally, fasting plays an important role in different cultural and religious practices. Dramatic caloric restriction not only affects host health and physiology, but also has an impact on the microbiome8–10. Here, we studied the role of fasting in cardiovascular risk patients with MetS (Table 1). Five days of fasting followed by 3 months of a modified DASH diet induced distinct microbiome and immunome changes not seen under DASH alone, as well as a sustained SBP benefit even 3 months post-intervention. Applying machine-learning algorithms, we were able to make effective predictions regarding which patients would respond positively to treatment via BP reduction from either baseline immunome or 16S microbiome data. The microbial signature for BP responsiveness generalizes to a recently published cohort investigating the impact of fasting in 15 healthy male volunteers, as do many of the microbiome changes upon fasting. These data highlight fasting followed by a shift to a health-promoting diet as a promising non-pharmacological intervention for patients with hypertensive MetS, with possible implications for a wider spectrum of health states.

As we have previously reported a major influence of common MetS drugs on the microbiota11, we accounted for any changes in medication regime or dosage in our statistical tests, alongside controlling for important demographic features such as age and sex. There were substantial and significant (PERMANOVA P = 0.001) differences in microbial composition within individuals during fasting, reflecting a characteristic intervention-induced shift, which later partially reverted following a 3-month refeeding period on a DASH diet (Fig. 1d, Supplementary Data 1 and Fig. 1a). This was echoed by analogous significant (PERMANOVA P = 0.001) changes in host immune cell composition during the intervention, revealing a fasting-specific signature, which likewise largely reversed during refeeding (Fig. 1e, Supplementary Data 1). We did not observe significant changes to the microbiome species richness/alpha diversity (between-group Mann–Whitney U (MWU) P > 0.05, within-individual likelihood ratio test FDR > 0.1 for all comparisons; Supplementary Data 2; Shannon: Fig. 1b, Supplementary Fig. 2) after either fasting or refeeding in the present dataset, though a trend of reduced, then restored diversity was seen in the longitudinal tests. Similarly, there were no significant changes between time points in the intersample gut taxonomic variability/beta diversity (Bray–Curtis distance, Fig. 1c. DASH without fasting neither affected the microbial composition nor the host immune cell composition (P = 0.374 and P = 0.378, respectively, Supplementary Fig. 1B, C).

Reanalyzing previously published data, we compared the microbiome signatures of metformin use and MetS to those seen in our dataset11,14. For ease of comparability, we proceeded with only human gut-specific functional modules (GMM) assessed from shotgun sequencing data available for the fasting arm. Certain fasting- or refeeding-associated functional gene modules from our data were found to overlap with signatures of metformin usage or MetS, though there was little concordance on a taxonomic composition level, in line with previously described higher functional than taxonomic concordance between microbiomes. Of note, when comparing the metformin signal to the MetS signal, it is clear that these two effects are functionally distinct and often oppose one another. In contrast, the inferred gut functional signature of metformin treatment shared some features with that of our fasting intervention (Supplementary Fig. 5).

Assessing the clinical relevance of our intervention, we inspected clinical outcomes in the two study arms. While DASH reduced office SBP after 3 months (Fig. 2h), it did not significantly (MWU P = 0.27) affect 24 h ambulatory SBP, the gold standard of clinical BP measurements (Fig. 2a)3. In contrast, fasting followed by a modified DASH diet led to a sustained reduction both in 24 h ambulatory SBP and mean arterial pressure (MAP) (MWU P < 0.05, Fig. 2a). Further, subjects undergoing fasting could significantly (χ2 P = 0.035) reduce their intake of antihypertensive medication in 43% of cases, compared to only 17% of the cases on DASH alone, while their BP remained under control (Fig. 2b, Supplementary Data 3). Because the BP response to fasting was heterogeneous in our cohort (Fig. 2a, b), we applied a decision tree model to stratify patients based on their ambulatory BP response, adjusted for antihypertensive medication (Supplementary Fig. 6, Data 4). The responder group (n = 22) had a median SBP decrease of 8.0 mmHg, irrespective of the high reduction in medications amongst these patients, while the decrease in the non-responder group (n = 10) was significantly lower (0.3 mmHg; Fig. 2c). In the DASH-only arm, 17 patients were classified as responders with a median SBP decrease of 8.0 mmHg, while the non-responders (n = 14) showed no decrease in median SBP (0.5 mmHg, Fig. 2c). Fasting followed by a modified DASH diet, unlike a modified DASH diet alone, significantly (drug-adjusted post-hoc P < 0.05) reduced BMI and body weight even 3 months post-fasting (Fig. 2d, e). Although all fasting+DASH participants showed a reduction in body weight, this reduction alone could not explain the long-term ambulatory SBP and MAP changes exclusive to the fasting arm (Fig. 2f, g), nor the microbiome or immunome changes accompanying it. 95% of significant findings retain significance when BMI is added as a predictor to the nested models for longitudinal data (see Supplementary Data 5). Very few of the significant effects observed in the fasting+DASH arm could be replicated in the equally powered DASH-only arm (Fig. 3a–c).

Because the BP responsiveness was heterogeneous in the fasting+DASH arm (Fig. 2a–c), despite the similar disease severity indicated by the baseline clinical characteristics of these patients (Supplementary Data 6), we hypothesized that unique characteristics involving the immunome or microbiome of these patients may contribute to their BP response. We compared the impact of fasting and refeeding in the complete fasting arm, in the BP responders of the fasting arm, and in the DASH-only arm (Fig. 4a, b, Supplementary Data 2, 7, 8). Even at reduced statistical power, we were able to capture changes in the abundance of many gut microbial taxa that were uniquely characteristic of successful fasting treatment even 3 months post-fasting (Fig. 4a, Supplementary Data 7, 8). Fasting combined with DASH resulted in the sustained depletion of Actinobacteria family members Corynebacteriaceae and Actinomycetaceae (Fig. 4a). BP responders were uniquely characterized by immediate and sustained enrichment of an unclassified Clostridium species, with concomitant depletion of Sphingomonas (genus-16S) and Prevotellaceae NK3B31 group (Fig. 4a). In addition, responders experienced a significant and sustained enrichment of the butyrate-producer F. prausnitzii upon refeeding (Fig. 4a). We further classified microbiomes in the fasting+DASH arm into enterotypes as previously described15, finding a trend towards more samples shifting enterotype during intervention in subjects, who achieved BP decrease (Supplementary Fig. 7). Virtually no overlap with effects seen in the equally powered DASH arm were found, indicating that fasting may be needed on top of a BP-reducing diet for these changes to occur (Fig. 4a, b).

Changes to the immunome of responders are similar to those seen in the unstratified fasting group and differ from those in the DASH arm (Fig. 4d, Supplementary Data 2, 7, 8). In the fasting arm, several immune features related to pathogen-sensing and mucosal immunity (e.g. MAIT cells, IL-17+-producing Th and γδT cells) changed in abundance significantly only when tested in the responder group, indicating relevant differences between responders and non-responders. Upon fasting, the frequency of both pro- and anti-inflammatory adaptive immune cells showed a stronger decrease in responders, indicating a stronger anti-inflammatory effect of fasting in responders.

We next aimed to explain the beneficial role of fasting on BP by studying interacting microbiome-immune features through network analysis. We assessed all triplets of pairwise interactions between host clinical phenotypes, immune cell populations, and microbiome taxa or functional profiles, respectively, using modified Spearman correlations (requiring FDR < 0.1 in each comparison of two data spaces, and P < 0.05 in a post-hoc test accounting for the presence of the same subjects at all three time points (see Methods, Supplementary Data 9). Figure 5a shows a chord diagram constructed from these data, where the colored outer rings are lined with components from one of our three tested system spaces during fasting, refeeding, and over the full duration of the study, and the color of the connectors between factors indicate a positive or negative association (Spearman’s rho). We identified a cluster of circulating cytokine-producing MAIT cells (absolute number and fraction of CD3+ T cells), which positively correlated with 24 h ambulatory SBP (Figs. 5a,  6c, Supplementary Fig. 8) and MAP, but not with 24 h diastolic BP (Fig. 5a, Supplementary Data 9).

A recent publication showed non-classical monocyte enrichment in hypertensive patients21. Interestingly in our study, circulating non-classical monocytes were enriched upon fasting and then depleted again upon refeeding to remain below baseline levels 3 months after fasting (Figs. 1h, 5a, Supplementary Data 2). Network analysis revealed an association between non-classical monocytes, MAP and gut abundance of Sutterella showed an inverse correlation with non-classical monocytes (Figs. 5a, b,
6d, Supplementary Data 9).

As previously stated, a large proportion of fasting patients responded with a substantial drop in BP, allowing them to reduce their use of antihypertensive medication while BP remained controlled. As not all patients experienced this beneficial effect, we sought to understand whether the factors underlying successful fasting intervention in the BP responders could be predicted at baseline. Responder and non-responder subgroups differ considerably in immunome and microbiome features, not only post-fasting and at three-month follow-up, but also at baseline, suggesting a favorable clinical response may be predictable in single patients (Supplementary Fig. 9A–C).

Due to the similarity of the study designs, we next assessed whether a decrease in BP in the Mesnage cohort could be predicted by a model trained on our 16S dataset. We classified the Mesnage patients according to their BP decrease 3 months post-fasting (Supplementary Data 12). A stepwise selection model was built on our 16S baseline data, filtered for significant responder-specific taxa. The model was then evaluated, using the corresponding features from the Mesnage dataset as input. The model classified correctly 10 out of 15 subjects in the Mesnage cohort as either BP responders or non-responders. Top five contributors to the predictor highlighted gut microbiomes of non-responders to be enriched and responders to be depleted of the taxa Desulfovibrionaceae, Hydrogenoanaerobacterium, Akkermansia, Ruminococcaceae GCA-900066225 and Hydrogenoanaerobacterium sp. (Fig. 8c).

Here we demonstrate that fasting induces changes to the gut microbiome and immune homeostasis with a sustained beneficial effect on body weight and BP in hypertensive MetS patients. There is a growing interest in understanding how dietary interventions shape the gut microbiome and interact with metabolic diseases, including obesity, MetS, type 2 diabetes, and (cardiovascular) health8–10,23–27. Several lifestyle interventions aimed at weight loss have shown that the gut microbiome changes in obese, type 2 diabetic or MetS patients10,23,24,26,27. Although these interventions led to beneficial clinical outcomes, their effect on the gut microbiome was highly variable10,23,24,26,27 (more information in Supplementary Data 13). In mice, intermittent fasting decreased obesity-induced cognitive impairment and insulin resistance associated with increased abundance of the Lactobacillus and the butyrate-producer Odoribacter25. In a small human pilot study, Ramadan fasting9 affected the microbiome of healthy subjects enriching several SCFA producers. Each of the aforementioned studies are described in greater detail in Supplementary Data 13.

It is important to recognize that our study represents patients with hypertension and MetS solely from a Caucasian-European background. This selection criterion introduces a selection bias in our study design. Additional research is necessary to elucidate whether the results presented here could be applicable in a more heterogeneous patient population. Further, our recruitment procedure could already have introduced a selection bias toward patients who were interested in fasting/dietary studies and therefore are sensitive about their cardiometabolic health. Since the participants were especially interested in the fasting procedure, the allocated DASH participants were offered a cost-free fasting cycle after successful completion of the study. However, we cannot exclude that this led to an increased long-term motivation compared to the participants who started with the fasting protocol. Furthermore, the study design did not allow us to investigate the long-term effects of a fasting intervention without a subsequent DASH diet on the BP, microbiome, or immunome. In our cohort, fasting was required on top of DASH to achieve the observed outcomes, but we cannot conclude (and do not expect) fasting without a subsequent dietary change to do so either. We can only claim fasting was required prior to the DASH diet to achieve the effects observed in our cohort. DASH, which is rich in fibers, might furthermore “fuel” the beneficial microbiome, thus further contributing to cardiovascular health, and may play a part in maintaining this microbiotal state longer. However, some effects are replicated in the similar dataset from healthy males (without MetS and without DASH intervention) in the Mesnage dataset22, thus indicating the precise DASH setup may not be strictly needed. Most likely, the two components of the intervention synergize—fasting may potentiate the microbiome in these patients to be shifted to a more DASH-compatible microbiota upon diet change. While we identify changes in microbial taxonomic and functional features, bacterial metabolites and immune processes, which could explain the efficacy of the intervention, robust conclusions of causality will require follow-up experimental work, particularly in animal models (e.g. gnotobiotic mice colonized with bacteria strongly associated with BP). In addition, the relatively low patient number could be regarded as a limitation. Although our present study is large enough to allow inference of significance for the strongest contributors to the observed effect, our results are likely not complete, and follow-up in additional and larger studies will be needed for a comprehensive view of subtle fasting-associated host and microbiome features. Our study design did not allow for the blinding of participants regarding their intervention. To maximally reduce the bias, the scientific staff were blinded during the course of processing, measurement, and analysis of collected samples. Further, the present study cannot infer how frequently fasting cycles should be repeated to control BP in at-risk patients, nor whether it is as effective without a concomitant DASH intervention. Despite the low number of participants of the study, machine-learning algorithms were able to predict BP responsiveness based on the immunome and 16S data. Only the latter could be confirmed in an independent dataset, as no equivalent immunome profiling in a fasting dataset has been published to date. Confirmation of the predictive capability of the immunome data and testing further hypothesis raised above (e.g. the interaction between SCFA availability and BP responsiveness) require future prospective clinical studies. The favorable impact of fasting followed by a DASH diet during refeeding phase shown here highlights this intervention as a promising non-pharmacological intervention for the treatment of high BP in MetS patients.

The study was planned as part of a randomized-controlled bi-centric trial conducted by the outpatient center of the department of Internal and Integrative Medicine at Charité-Universitätsmedizin. The study was approved by the ethics committees of the Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin (approval number: EA4/141/13) and registered at ClinicalTrials.gov (registration number: NCT02099968).

Participants were recruited from the existing patients at study centers and through local newspaper announcements. Patients were first screened over the phone by a research assistant to assess eligibility. Eligible patients were invited for an assessment by a physician, where they were examined and provided detailed written information describing the study. If patients met all inclusion criteria and did not meet any exclusion criteria, informed consent was obtained and they were included in the study.

Exclusion criteria included (i) diabetes mellitus type 1 or insulin bolus therapy (c-peptide < 1.2 ng/ml), (ii) manifest treated coronary artery disease, myocardial infarction, pulmonary embolism, or stroke within the past 3 months, (iii) heart failure ≥ stage I NYHA, (iv) peripheral artery disease ≥ stage 2, (v) chronic kidney disease > stage 2 (GFR < 60 ml/min), (vi) manifest eating disorder, vii) dementia or manifest psychosis, or viii) other severe internal diseases.

The interventions in both groups were delivered as an intensive group-based behavioral intervention. The educational concept incorporated aspects of the mind–body program designed by the Benson–Henry Mind/Body Medical Institute of Harvard Medical School40. The dietary education included counseling, comprehensive lectures and cooking classes.

Intervention within the fasting arm (Fig. 1a) started with two calorie-restricted vegan days (max 1200 kcal/day), followed by 5-days with a daily nutritional energy intake of 300–350 kcal/day, derived from vegetable juices and vegetable broth. After completion of fasting, weekly 6 h multimodal sessions were provided for a total of 10 weeks; both groups received intensified nutritional counseling/nutritional classes and additional general lifestyle recommendations for exercise and stress reduction41. The program entailed 10 h of group sessions for the initial periodic fasting and 50 h of nutritional education, which included lectures and cooking lessons. Similar to protocols from previous trials on periodic fasting in rheumatoid arthritis and diabetes mellitus type 242,43 patients were instructed to follow a modified DASH diet after the fasting period, with additional emphasis on plant-based and Mediterranean diet to optimize refeeding44–46.

The DASH group (Fig. 1a) was trained in the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) diet, a sodium-, fat- and sugar-reduced mainly plant-based diet, which has been shown to reduce high blood pressure47,48. The intervention was similarly delivered as an the fasting group-based behavioral intervention with aspects of the mind–body program of the Benson–Henry Mind/Body Medical Institute, Harvard Medical School40. Overall, the program consisted of 50 h of group sessions over a period of 10 weeks and also included comprehensive lectures and cooking lessons.

Patients were randomly allocated to Fasting or DASH by block-randomization with randomly varying block lengths, stratified by a) study center, and b) the intake/non-intake of antihypertensive medication. The randomization list was created by a biometrician not involved in patient recruitment or assessment using the Random Allocation Software49. The list was password-secured and only the biometrician was able to access it. On this basis, sealed, sequentially numbered opaque envelopes containing the treatment assignments were prepared.

Outcomes were assessed at baseline and at 1 and 12 weeks after randomization by a blinded outcome assessor who was not involved in patient recruitment, allocation, or treatment. Two primary outcome measures were defined: 24 h ambulatory systolic blood pressure at week 12 and the Homeostasis Model Assessment (HOMA)-index at week 12.

Twenty-four-hour ambulatory blood pressure monitoring (ABPM) and pulse pressure recording were performed using a digital blood pressure monitor (Mobil-O-Graph® PWA, I.E.M., Stolberg, Germany)50. Baseline ABPM measurements were performed within one week before the starting of the intervention, those at week 12 within a week after the end of the intervention. ABPM was initiated at the same time of day for each successive visit. The monitoring software automatically removed incorrect measurements using built-in algorithms. Blood pressure and heart rate values were further categorized as day or night values using each patient’s reported awake and sleep times. Office blood pressure was measured in the hospital by a sphygmomanometer, using the average of three consecutive measurements after 5 min rest while sitting in a quiet room. Office blood pressure was measured at each time point, ambulatory blood pressure only at baseline and week 12.

Body weight, body fat percentage, and lean mass percentage were measured using the Omron BF 511 bioelectrical impedance device51. BMI was calculated as the weight in kilograms divided by the square of height in meters. Waist circumference was measured by two research assistants using a measuring tape in the horizontal plane exactly midway between the iliac crest and the costal arch. Measures were repeated twice and the mean of both measures was used. If the two measures differed by more than 1 cm, both measures were repeated. Hip circumference was measured in the horizontal plain at the maximal circumference of the hips or buttock region above the gluteal fold, whichever is larger, using the same approach as for waist circumference. Waist-hip-ratio was measured as the quotient of waist circumference and hip circumference52.

Blood samples were collected from the antecubital vein into vacutainer tubes and analyzed using the Modular P analyzer (Roche, Mannheim, Germany). Metabolic parameters included plasma and blood glucose levels, blood insulin levels, HbA1C, and HbA1C IFCC and were analyzed using standard procedures. HOMA index was calculated as blood insulin level (µU/ml) × blood glucose level (mmol/l)/22.553. Further laboratory parameters included blood lipid levels (total cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, LDL/HDL ratio, triglyceride), uric acid, blood creatinine level, estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR), C-reactive protein (CRP), insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1), and interleukin-6 (IL-6), triglyceride, fasting glucose level54. Samples were destroyed after the analysis and were not further stored.

All adverse events occurring during the study period were recorded. Patients experiencing adverse events were asked to see the study physician to assess their status and initiate any necessary response. The most common symptoms during the fasting period were mild weakness, headaches, and mild perception of hunger. No serious adverse effects were reported. During the normocaloric diet periods no adverse effects were reported.

All analyses were conducted on an intention-to-treat basis, including all participants being randomized, regardless of whether or not they gave a full set of data or adhered to the study protocol. Missing data were multiply imputed by Markov chain Monte Carlo methods55,56.

Whole blood staining was performed using antibodies against major leukocyte lineages. Quantitative measurement was performed using a high throughput sampler (BD) and a BD FACS CantoII (BD). Peripheral venous blood was obtained and mononuclear cells were isolated within 24 h of collection by density gradient centrifugation using Biocoll and cryopreserved until further processing. Thawed cell aliquots were either labeled for extracellular antigens using fluorophore-conjugated monoclonal antibodies or CD4+ cells were selected (Miltenyi CD4+ Selection Kit). Cells (106) from CD4+ and CD4− fractions were placed onto U-bottom plates and re-stimulated for 4 h at 37°C and 5% CO2 in a humidified incubator in a final volume of 200 µl RPMI 1640 (Sigma) supplemented with 10% FBS (Merck), 100U/ml penicillin (Sigma), 100 mg/ml streptomycin (Sigma), 50 ng/ml phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA, Sigma), 250 ng/ml ionomycin (Sigma) and 1.3 µl/ml Golgistop (BD). After re-stimulation, cells were labeled with Life/Dead Fixable Aqua Dead Cell Stain Kit, for 405 nm excitation (Invitrogen), followed by labeling with surface antigen-specific fluorophore-conjugated monoclonal antibodies. Cells were then fixated and permeabilized by FoxP3/Transcription Factor Staining Kit (eBioscience), and subsequently labeled with intracellular-antigen-specific fluorophore-conjugated monoclonal antibodies. Antibodies are listed in Table 2. Samples were analyzed using the FACSCanto II multicolor flow cytometer (BD). The acquisition was performed with Diva 6.1.3 (BD). Data analysis was performed using FlowJo 10.3 (FlowJo LLC) and FCSExpress V6.02 (De Novo Software) software. Absolute cell numbers were calculated using the relative percentage of cell population compared to a marker used in the whole blood staining.

Data were manually gated on single live cells and exported as FCS files in FCS Express V6.02 (De Novo Software). The automated analysis of FCS files was done by the FlowSOM57 algorithm, an R58 bio-conductor package that uses self-organizing maps for dimensional reduction and visualization of flow cytometry data. All data were scaled and log-transformed on import. Cells were assigned to a Self-Organizing Map (SOM) with a 10 × 10 grid, grouping similar cells into 100 nodes. Each node in the FlowSOM tree gets a score indicating its correspondence with this requested cell profile. To visualize similar nodes in branches, a minimal spanning tree (MST) was constructed and cell counts were log scaled. To visualize the differences between the two-time points, the mean percentage per sample group was computed in each cluster and then the statistical difference was performed by applying MWU test on every node within metaclusters. P values were two-sided and analysis was performed using RStudio (version 3.4.4). The FlowSOM algorithm was run 3 times to ensure reproducibility of the results and P < 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant.

Antihypertensive drugs were normalized in order to track changes during intervention. In a first step, antihypertensives (according to the WHO ATC classification system), diuretics, beta-blocking agents, calcium channel blockers, and agents acting on the renin-angiotensin system as well as the given dosage were identified at V1 and at follow-up visit after 3 months (V3).

Secondly, drug dosage was normalized to the lowest drug dosage per patient and drug. The lowest drug dosage at baseline was set to one, while corresponding drug dosages at other time points where either zero if the medication was discontinued, one if there was no change in drug dosage between time points, smaller than one if the drug dosage was decreased or greater than one if the drug dosage was increased at a certain time point. The sum of the agents taken was calculated at each time point.

For DNA-based 16S rRNA gene and metagenomics sequencing, fecal samples were collected into RNALater containing tubes, shipped at room temperature and stored at −80 °C until processing. The DNA isolation protocol has been previously described59. Briefly, samples were treated with 500 µl of extraction buffer (200 mM Tris, 20 mM EDTA, 200 mM NaCl, pH 8.0), 200 µl of 20% SDS, 500 µl of phenol:chloroform:isoamyl alcohol (24:24:1) and 100 µl of zirconia/silica beads (0.1 mm diameter). Samples were homogenized twice with a bead beater (BioSpec) for 2 min. After precipitation of DNA, crude DNA extracts were resuspended in TE Buffer with 100 µg/ml RNase I and column purified to remove PCR inhibitors.

Amplification of the V4 region (F515/R806) of the 16S rRNA gene was performed according to previously described protocols60,61. Briefly, for DNA-based amplicon sequencing 25 ng of DNA was used per PCR reaction in a final volume 30 µl. The PCR conditions consisted of initial denaturation for 30 s at 98 °C, followed by 25 cycles (10 s at 98 °C, 20 s at 55 °C, and 20 s at 72 °C). Each sample was amplified in triplicates and subsequently pooled. After normalization, PCR amplicons were sequenced on MiSeq PE300 platform (Illumina) at the Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, Braunschweig, Germany.

Sixty microliters of total DNA was used for shearing by sonication (Covaris). Fragmentation was performed as follows; processing time: 150 s, fragment size: 200 bp, intensity: 5, duty cycle: 10. Library preparation for Illumina sequencing was performed using the NEBNext Ultra DNA library prep Kit (New England Biolabs). The library preparation was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. An input of 500 ng of sheared DNA was used and the size selection was performed using AMPure XP beads with the following parameters. First bead selection: 55 µl, and second: 25 µl. Adaptor enrichment was performed using seven cycles of PCR using NEBNext Multiplex oligonucleotides for Illumina (Set1 and Set2, New England Biolabs). Sequencing was performed on NovaSeq PE1000 platform (Illumina) at the Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, Braunschweig, Germany.

Reads retrieved from 16S amplicon sequencing were analyzed using the LotuS (1.62) pipeline62. The pipeline includes sequence quality filtering63, read merging64, adapter and primer removal, chimera removal65, clustering66, and taxonomic classification67 based on the SILVA (v138)68 database. The validation dataset22 was reprocessed using the exact same settings.

Metagenomic shotgun sequences were processed within the NGLess framework (0.10)69. Reads were quality filtered by a minimum read length of 45 bp and a minimum Phred quality score of 25. Sequences passing that filter were mapped to the human genome (adapted from hg19; minimum 45 bp match, 90% minimum identity) and filtered. Sequences identified as non-human were mapped with bwa70 to a) the IGC gene catalog (0.5)70 with a minimum match size of 45 bp and a minimum identity of 95%, b) 40 reference marker genes described in Ciccarelli et al.71 and Sorek et al.72 with a minimum match size of 45 bp and a minimum identity of 97%. Reads mapping to the marker genes were extracted and further mapped to marker gene-based OTUs73. Mapping statistics can be found in Supplementary Data 14.

Reads mapped to the IGC microbial gene catalog (0.5)71 were rarefied using the RTK (0.93.1)74 with default settings (95% of smallest total reads—here 15,247,497 reads/sample). Reads were mapped to the mOTUv2 (2.1) taxonomic marker genes73 were likewise rarefied (5838 reads/sample). Reads mapped to 16S OTUs (27813 reads), to ensure sample compatibility regardless of sampling depth. For functional microbiome analysis, IGC genes were binned to KEGG KOs75 based on the annotations in MOCAT2 (2.0.1)75, then binned by averaging over KOs to KEGG modules and to Gut Microbial Modules (GMMs)76. 16S and mOTUv2 (2.1) OTUs were binned at more rootwards taxonomic levels using the taxonomies provided with LotuS (1.62)62 and the mOTUv2 (2.1) tool73 respectively.

We assessed several metrics for gut alpha diversity using the 16S species data (thus, available in equal form for both arms), namely species richness, Shannon diversity, community evenness, Simpson’s and the Inverse Simpson’s metric, and the Chao1 index, calculated using the RTK (0.93.1)tool74. Unpaired MWU tests failed to reach significance (P > 0.05) for all comparisons of subsets of samples: each time point versus each other time point, in each arm separately and pooled, and between the arms within each time separately and pooled. Subsequently, we assessed within-individual changes in alpha diversity for both the DASH and the fasting+DASH arm, analogously to analysis of microbial taxa, functional modules, clinical phenotypes, and immune cell population counts, controlling for medication changes in the same manner. Supplementary Data 1 shows these results. In short, there is a nonsignificant trend for fasting to reduce diversity, which refeeding then restores, in the fasting+DASH arm, whereas no such trend is visible in the DASH-only arm. Beta diversity was assessed as community distances between samples computed using the vegan (2.5-5) R package. For microbiome data, Bray-Curtis distances on rarefied samples were used, and for immunome data, Euclidean distances. Comparisons of distance profiles was performed using Mann–Whitney U tests.

Mutlivariate analysis was carried out using Principal Coordinates Analysis (PcoA) as per the vegan (2.5-5) R package, with the same distance metrics as noted above. Where described, delta metrics for the first two dimensions of unconstrained ordination were computed. PERMANOVA tests for multivariate effect were done using the adonis function in the vegan (2.5-5)77 R package, stratified for patient ID.

For all univariate analysis of clinical, immunome, or microbiome features, medication changes during the course of the study were accounted for as possible confounders using the following two-step procedure. The first step was a nested model comparison of a linear model for each feature, involving as predictors age, patient ID, sex, and normalized dosage of each salient medication tracked at each time point, with the same model but additionally containing time point V1-V3 as a predictor. Models were compared using a likelihood ratio test as implemented in the lmtest (0.9-37)78 R package, and adjusted for false discovery rate (FDR) using the Benjamini–Hochberg (BH) procedure within each measurement space. In the second step, features with FDR < 0.1 were retained for a second phase of post-hoc tests using Mann–Whitney U comparisons between values at each pair of time points, BH FDR-adjusted between time point comparisons (n = 3) and requiring FDR < 0.05 to retain the result as significant. Standardized non-parametric effect sizes were taken using the (signed) Cliff’s delta metric as implemented in the orddom (3.1)79 R package. The same methods were used to analyze the validation dataset, with the exception no drugs were adjusted for as subjects were unmedicated22.

Body weight and blood pressure change differences between Responders and Non-Responders were compared with two-sided Mann–Whitney U test using GraphPad Prism (6.01).

Enterotypes of the samples in the fasting arm were performed by implementing the R package DirichletMultinomial (1.32.0.)15 on the genus-level abundance table.

To assess possible interactions between immune cells, taxa, and quantitative phenotypes, another two-step test was used: first a Spearman correlation test using samples pooled across time points, and with Spearman’s rho used as standardized signed effect estimate. P-values from this were FDR-adjusted with the BH method for each comparison of two data spaces, requiring FDR < 0.05 for significance. Second, a post-hoc test was done to account for dependency between same-donor samples: for each of two correlated features, a mixed-effects model was fitted of the rank-transformed variable using the rank of the other as predictor, with patient ID as a random effect. This model was compared to a simpler model containing only the random effect under a likelihood ratio test as implemented in the lmtest (0.9–37)78 R package. The highest P-value for the two possible such models was taken, and P < 0.05 was additionally required to retain the correlation as robust. Correlation was visualized by the R packages circilize80 and pheatmap81.

Samples from Kushugulova et al.14 and Forslund et al.11 were previously mapped to the IGC gene catalog (0.5) and the mOTU marker genes; these abundances (binned at the level of KEGG and GMM modules as per the above in case of functional profiles). The Kushugulova samples were tested for significantly differential abundances between MetS cases and controls using the Mann–Whitney U test, then controlling that a MetS status predictor still significantly improves fit (using the R lmtest ((0.9–37)78 package) of the rank-transformed abundances when added to a linear model already incorporating metformin status as a predictor, thereby controlling for confounding influence of metformin treatment status. Analogously, the Forslund samples were tested for significantly differential abundances between metformin-treated and untreated patients using the Mann–Whitney U test, then controlling that a metformin status predictor still significantly improves fit (using the R lmtest (0.9–37)78 package) of the rank-transformed abundances when added to a linear model already incorporating MetS status as a predictor, thereby controlling for confounding influence of MetS status. The validation dataset22 was analyzed exactly as the main study dataset, as described above.

To estimate how well the omics data enables forecasting of the blood-pressure response in future patients, we performed a leave-one-patient-out cross-validation procedure. This approach represents the gold standard in the machine-learning community to carry out an acid-test that empirically evaluates the practical value of a predictive model82. To this end, the set of n participants was iteratively split into n − 1 participants as training set, and the untouched data from the hold-out participant as the test set. All input variables were z-scored by centering to zero mean and unit-scaling to a variance of one83. In each of n cross-validation folds, the logistic-regression algorithm was a natural choice of method for binary classification (no intercept term, L2 shrinkage penalty, hyper-parameter C defaulted to 1.0). Given that the number of variables was >10× times larger than the number of participants, dimensionality reduction was necessary for a preliminary selection of a set of ten most promising input variables that could be relevant for outcome prediction. Forward-stepwise selection is an established means84 to screen the relevance of several hundred quantitative measures. The first step identifies the single input variable among the p candidates, with the best p-value having a statistically significant association with the blood-pressure outcome. After adding this first variable to the empty null model, the second most significant (i.e., smallest p-value) was searched based on the remaining p − 1 input variables. Based on a two-variable model, the third most significant variable was searched based on p − 2 remaining variables, and so forth. This successive identification of the ten most promising among the p overall input dimensions did not bias the subsequently performed prediction performance estimate, because the entire variable reduction scheme was exclusively carried out on the n − 1 participants of the current cross-validation fold. Based on the top 10 variables, the logistic-regression algorithm could be more robustly fit to these subselected ten input dimensions only. The ensuing predictive model was then explicitly validated by computing whether or not the obtained model parameters allowed for accurate derivation of the relevant blood-pressure response for the independent, unseen participant. In this way, the omics data of each patient in our dataset served as test observation once. Averaging these yes-no results over all n predicted, versus observed clinical responses, yielded an estimate of the expected forecasting accuracy of the predictive model in participants that we would observe in other or later acquired datasets.

Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.

Peer review information Nature Communications thanks the anonymous reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Peer reviewer reports are available.

Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

These authors contributed equally: Andreas Michalsen, Dominik N. Müller, Sofia K. Forslund.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41467-021-22097-0.

