The Gut Microbiome in Multiple Sclerosis: A Potential Therapeutic Avenue

Recently, there has been a substantial increase in the number of studies focused upon connecting the gut microbiome with cases of central nervous system (CNS) autoimmunity. Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a neurodegenerative autoimmune disorder of the CNS. Recent experimental and clinical evidence suggests the presence of microbial imbalances in the gut of MS sufferers. The gut microbiome is defined as the summation of all the microbial entities as well as their genes, proteins, and metabolic products in a given space and time. Studies show the MS gut microbiome as having general alterations in specific taxa, some associated with the promotion of inflammatory cytokines and overall inflammation. In conjunction with these findings, experimental models of the disease have reported that T regulatory (Treg) cells have deficits in their function as a result of the aberrant gut microbiota composition. The findings suggest that the interactions between the host and the microbiota are reciprocal, although more extensive work is required to confirm this. Moreover, evidence indicates that changes in microbiota composition may result in imbalances that could result in disease, with the gut as a potential novel therapeutic avenue. By understanding the biological effects of aberrant gut microbiome composition, it is possible to contemplate current therapeutic options and their efficacy. Ultimately, more research is necessary in this field, but targeting the gut microbiota may lead to the development of novel therapeutic strategies.

Microbes are everywhere. Among them, bacteria are prokaryotic microorganisms with a vast array of functions and characteristics. Diverse bacterial metabolism allows them to occupy almost every possible niche on Earth. They can be found in conditions ranging from the extreme, such as in deep-sea hydrothermal vents, to milder conditions such as on plants growing in temperate climates. As a consequence, every facet of human biology is exposed to bacteria. Whether it is from the dust in the air or the food consumed, humans are constantly exposed to bacteria.

Gut microbes have significant impacts on metabolism and immune and neuronal responses. As a result, the microbiota can potentially affect the onset and progression of diseases defined by several effector cells and soluble metabolic, immune, and neuroendocrine factors modulated by gut microbes. For instance, experimental evidence indicates that gut microbes affect the balance of pro- and anti-inflammatory immune cell populations and cytokines linked pathologically with different autoimmune diseases. Furthermore, an increasing number of studies now report on differences in the percentages of specific microbial taxa found in the gut content of patients that suffer from autoimmune diseases such as multiple sclerosis (MS), and healthy individuals. In this review article we discuss the proposed association established between the gut microbiota and MS.

The best studied microbiomes are the mouse and human gut microbiomes that span the entire digestive tracts, including the stomach, small intestine, caecum, large intestine, and rectum. Across geographic locations, the gut environment varies dramatically in both its physical and chemical nature. The physical and chemical variation dictate the structure of the microbiota present. For example, the approximate pH of the duodenum is 6, whereas the pH of the terminal ileum ranges from 6 to 7.4 [1]. Mucus levels tend to differ between the large and small intestines as well, directly regulating the bacterial communities present [2]. Although the physical properties of the gastrointestinal tract shape bacterial populations, microbes persist and thrive. Therefore, the gastrointestinal tract physiology has evolved to interact with and respond to the microbiota present.

Secreted immunoglobulin A (sIgA) and other immune system-mediated responses dictate what bacteria persist where. The intestinal mucosa contains large quantities of sIgA to monitor the gut microbiota [3]. The non-pathogenic bacteria become coated in sIgA to maintain tolerance from the host. sIgA coatings on bacteria reduce inflammatory signaling and reduce changes to bacterial gene expression [11]. This process allows homeostasis between the host and the microbiota to be maintained. However, this process can sometimes be utilized by pathogenic bacteria as well. In the case of some species of Helicobacter, these pathogens are coated in sIgA as well, resulting in an inappropriate tolerance response by the host [12]. Therefore, the homeostasis between non-pathogenic bacteria and the host is more complex than solely sIgA coating. The promotion of tolerance as a mechanism of self-survival has been proposed. This is shown the case of Bacteroides fragilis. The polysaccharide A component of the bacterial capsule on B. fragilis has been shown to exert anti-inflammatory properties by stimulating the secretion of interleukin (IL)-10 by regulatory T (Tregs) cells [13]. This process is seen in other bacteria as well, suggesting that the need for self-promoting tolerance is necessary.

The gastrointestinal tract is the site of interaction between the body’s largest concentration of immune cells and the gut microbiota [14]. The gut epithelium acts as a major barrier between the external environment and the host’s internal environment. The human digestive tract essentially is a long tube starting from the mouth and extending down the esophagus, past the stomach, and through the small intestines and large intestine, finally ending past the colon at the anus; everything humans eat needs to be separated from the inside of the body.

Because of the high intake of microbes via digestion and the critical role intestinal epithelia plays, the immune system and intestinal physiology evolved to monitor the traffic. The lymphatic system is a network of vasculature that allows leukocytes to travel through the body and monitor antigens. For the gut, there is a specialized set of lymphatic tissue known as the gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT). The GALT comprises the Peyer’s patches, mesenteric lymph nodes, lymphatic vasculature, as well as other lymphoid aggregates. These structures work in tandem to protect the gut from pathogenic microbes while monitoring the commensal or mutualistic bacteria.

As bacteria and their metabolites persist in the gut, the GALT-associated immune cells must monitor every aspect of the intestinal lumen to catch and eliminate pathogens. The Microfold (M) cell, a specialized epithelial cell of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue, transports antigens from the intestinal lumen to immune cell populations. M cells allow dendritic cells to sample antigens from the lumen and endogenously prepare the antigen for presentation to T effector cells via the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II molecule. This process then, in turn, can activate the T cells and differentiate them into specialized effectors to perform functions necessary for dealing with the microbe expressing the activating antigen. Whether it is to mount an immunological response or to disregard the antigen, an interaction between the host immune system and the microbe will occur. This process is mediated by the subsets of T cells as well as anergy.

The processes that maintain the balance between pro- and anti-inflammatory processes are complicated and, in some cases, depend on the bacteria or viruses present [21]. Additionally, the gut microbiome is shaped by various factors including host genetics, geographical location, diet, lifestyle choices, prescribed pharmaceuticals, mode of delivery during birth, antibiotic exposure, and possibly even disease states themselves. When these factors tip the gut microbiome out of balance, there can be an induced imbalance between these pro- and anti-inflammatory responses that can result in disease. This proposed disease model is known as dysbiosis: gut microbial imbalances that result in, or are a result of, disease states. In general, laboratories are investigating whether these alterations in gut microbiota result in disease. However, it is possible that alterations in the balance between pro- and anti-inflammation can alter the structure and function of the gut microbiota as a function of diseased states.

Autoimmunity is best described as being a process in which the host’s immune system fails to distinguish the self from non-self and begins to elicit immunological responses against host tissue. Mechanisms that drive autoimmunity remain to be elucidated; however, it generally is understood that exacerbated pro-inflammatory responses can exacerbate the tissue damage that characterizes the process of autoimmunity. Therefore, understanding the extent of inflammation induced by dysbiosis becomes critical. The importance of gut microbiota in context to immune function can be seen when comparing traditional mice to gnotobiotic mice, also referred to as germ-free (GF) mice. GF mice exhibit reduced immune function with physiological abnormalities such as increased intestinal permeability. Dysbiosis can be induced by the same environmental factors that have been described to potentially illicit autoimmunity. Moreover, dysbiosis has been noted in several experimental models of autoimmunity as well as in patients suffering from autoimmunity [22,23,24,25]. These phenomena can provide evidence that intestinal dysbiosis is critical in the development of autoimmune disorders.

Gut microbial imbalances tend to shift towards a pro-inflammatory state that have profound effects on the intestinal physiology of the individual. Additionally, dysbiosis has been associated with intestinal barrier disruptions. When the integrity of these tight junction protein complexes diminishes there is an increase in intestinal permeability; the bacterial antigens can pass out of the intestinal lumen and travel to other locations in the body. As a result, levels of antigens, like the endotoxin lipopolysaccharide, can increase in the blood circulation which could have systemic inflammatory effects [36]. Systemic translocation of bacterial antigens can have a profound effect on CNS immunity and impact the integrity of the blood–brain barrier [37]. This process can result in the ultimate passage of autoreactive lymphocytes into the CNS and have direct access to the myelin sheath.

As previously discussed, autoimmunity has been shown to be impacted by the gut microbiome. However, it has also been theorized that disease itself can shape the structure and function of the gut microbiome. What this implies is that there is a bi-directional relationship between diseased states and the structure and function of the gut microbiome. This then raises more questions: What comes first, the disease or the aberrant gut microbiome? The proposed multifactorial and multidirectional association between the gut microbiome and the CNS of MS is described in Figure 1.

It is hypothesized that there is a bi-directional relationship between the gut microbiota and MS [68]. The composition of the gut microbiome might shape MS pathology at the same time MS disease progression also could alter the gut microbiome. However, two recent works clearly suggest that the changes in microbiota composition drive neuroinflammatory effects rather than the opposite. These recent studies support the premise that changes observed in the gut microbiome of MS patients are correlated with functional mechanisms that might regulate disease. Fecal transplantation of the gut microbiome can influence the progression of EAE. When fecal material from discordant monozygotic twins was transplanted into mice, there was a profound impact on spontaneous EAE disease incidence [69]. The MS gut microbiome had the ability to increase the likelihood of spontaneous EAE induction in mice as opposed to the healthy twin. Moreover, the stool from MS patients also increased the severity of EAE in mice [70]. These recent works clearly support the proposed concept that although interactions may be bidirectional the composition of the gut microbiota affect the progression of CNS inflammatory demyelination. Therefore, it is clear that targeting the gut microbiome might have profound impacts on MS pathology. Table 1 summarizes the colonization studies transferring MS microbiota into GF mice, as well as approaches based on monocolonization, multi-species colonization, and the treatment with immunomodulatory compounds purified from gut symbionts, discussed next.

GF: germ-free; Tg: transgenic. MOG-specific TCR Tg: transgenic myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG)-specific T cell receptor. IL: interleukin; HLA: human leukocyte antigen. PSA: polysaccharide A.

As summarized earlier, recent experimental evidence and clinical data suggests that the gut microbiome might be a major factor regulating autoimmunity. Targeting the gut microbiome with therapeutics could have profound effects in disease progression as well as managing symptoms of disease. The extent and approach towards modulating the gut microbiome can follow many directions; it is crucial to balance the positive and negative impacts of each therapeutic option. Gut microbiome-based therapeutic approaches could have beneficial effects in terms of disease management but also have unintended adverse side effects. Furthermore, some therapeutic options can work for some autoimmune diseases but not others. Therefore, again, assessing proposed therapeutics are crucial and developing therapeutics with less negative consequences is essential.

As discussed earlier, EAE, a model disease for MS, has been explored in the context of antibiotic intervention [40,41]. Other CNS diseases also have studied in terms of how antibiotics impact disease pathology. Parkinson’s disease (PD) patients report gastrointestinal distress as well as exhibit intestinal inflammation well before symptoms of motor deficits [71,72,73]. A study hypothesized that alterations in the gut microbiota by antibiotic interventions could alleviate PD pathology due to the association of intestinal complications and the tight interactions between the gut and the CNS [74]. The treatment of broad-spectrum antibiotics did, in fact, confer protection against motor dysfunction in a murine model. These findings support the notion that therapeutic targeting of the gut microbiome with antibiotics may be efficacious.

The usage of broad spectrum antibiotics can also have adverse effects by the same mechanism. Clostridium difficile, an opportunistic pathogen, can infect the host after antibiotic treatments with symptoms ranging from diarrhea to pseudomembranous colitis and can be in some cases life threatening [75]. The exposure to antibiotics causes structural changes in the gut microbiome, leaving the host susceptible to opportunistic infection from C. difficile as well as other enteric pathogens [76]. Children exposed to antibiotics within the first three years of life exhibit lower diversity in their gut microbiome. Moreover, these microbiome structures are less stable in exposed children than in non-exposed children [77].

In response to the negative impacts of broad spectrum antibiotic usage the notion of using bacteriophage (phage) as a therapeutic approach has been discussed. Phage are bacteria-specific viruses that can be altered to target bacterial populations of interest while leaving others untouched. The oral delivery of phage has been considered to be safe and have the capability to bypass intestinal epithelia and penetrate the GALT as well as the blood stream [78,79]. This ability to penetrate the GALT as well as the blood stream makes phage therapy extremely attractive to deal with bacterial translocation that can lead to diseased states.

Phages play a critical role in shaping the gut microbiome naturally and constitute the bulk of the intestinal viriome [80,81]. However, phages can also be pathogenic by contributing to intestinal dysbiosis; their uncontrolled destruction of beneficial bacteria can have an impact on the overall structure and function of the gut microbiome [82]. Additionally, phages also can have the unintended impact of horizontally transferring antibiotic resistance to their bacterial hosts [83]. Lysogenic phage have had antibiotic resistance genes associated within their genomes [84]. To some, this has rendered the notion of phage therapy obsolete. However, researchers have been designing “smart” phage cocktails that bypass horizontal gene transfer and appear promising [85]. Ultimately, there is still a lot of unanswered questions and concerns with regard to the safety and efficacy of phage therapies in terms of unintentional microbiome impacts.

The approach of antibiotic interventions and phage therapeutics is to target bacterial populations and remove or reduce them from the gut microbiome. Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) acts as whole gut microbiome replacements in hope of correcting aberrant gut microbiome structures and functions. The efficacy of FMTs is also quite high; thus, fecal transplantations is a common therapeutic to treat patients with C. difficile [86,87]. Conceptually, by eliminating the host’s aberrant gut microbiome and replacing it with a healthy gut microbiome, the diseased state will be rectified. The efficacy of FMT has promise in other diseases, including autoimmunity, such as inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) [88], a disease proposed to be associated with gut dysbiosis [89], and neurological disorders, as well. In IBD, a meta-analysis showed that FMT therapy put 45% of patients into clinical remission and reduced the need for other forms of anti-inflammatory therapeutics [90]. Symptom rescue was attributed to microbiota manipulation; the gut microbiome changes in the patients in response to microbiota transplant therapy [91].

There are still concerns regarding safety that remain to be addressed. Some of these concerns regard the route of administration, frequency of applications, screening the microbiota from the donor, the preparation protocol of the stool sample from the donor, what antibiotics should be administered and their frequency prior to fecal transplantation, among others [89]. Some of these concerns have been partially explored. For example, instances of aspiration occurred in two patients when the FMT was administered via gastroscopy [87]. It was proposed that that colonoscopy would be a safer route for the therapy. This claim was then assessed later in the study by Bamba et al. [86]. Still, several concerns remain. A systematic review of 50 reports on FMT indicated 28.5% reported cases of adverse effects, ranging from fever to nausea, abdominal cramps, dizziness, although there was a reduced frequency (2%) of other severe adverse effects [94]. Furthermore, the donor stool could significantly affect the intestinal homeostasis of the receiver. Studies of the composition of the gut microbiome and its impact on human health are still on their infancy and the potential implication of the transfer of significant numbers of microbes to a new host in metabolic, immune and neuroendocrine systems require attention. Ultimately, the risks and rewards of fecal transplantation therapy still need extensive exploration.

Diet is the main factor shaping the structure of the gut microbiome. By manipulating compounds and nutrients the gut is exposed to, it is possible to alter the structure and function of the gut microbiome. Western diets generally consist of high amounts of saturated fats and carbohydrates which can lead to chronic inflammatory states [95]. Recognizing the impacts of the Western diet and identifying routes to supplement the diet to reduce the negative impacts and chronic inflammatory states could be a therapeutic avenue to assess. As was discussed earlier, studies in animal models and studies of the composition of the human gut microbiome in response to diet have demonstrated the drastic impact of changes of diet, which also occur within few days of dietary intervention [5,6,7,8]. The analysis of the human microbiome before and after plant vs. animal-based diets evidence the fast and significant effects that diet has on the microbiome composition [8]. The effects were also observed in the abundance of short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs). Acetate, propionate, and butyrate are SCFAs derived from the catabolism of carbohydrates. These SCFAs have shown to regulate a number of relevant molecular and cellular pathways associated with immunomodulation, such as the induction of Tregs [96], as well as the regulation of the permeability of the blood–brain barrier [97]. Thus, dietary factors have been shown to regulate the balance between pro- and anti-inflammatory responses that in turn might regulate autoimmune diseases, such as MS [98].

Utilizing dietary supplements as a therapeutic avenue for MS is still largely unexplored. The usage of probiotics however, has been gaining attention. A probiotic is generally described as bacteria that is administered orally to have some beneficial impact on the health of the individual. Moreover, probiotics are non-toxic immunomodulatory agents that could also be used orally in conjunction with current therapeutics for MS [103]. Studies have shown that oral administration of probiotics have positive immunomodulatory effects that could work in tandem with current pharmaceutical therapeutics.

GF models of EAE have been explored to determine the effects of individual microbial species of the microbiome on disease severity and progression. The reduced susceptibility of GF mice to spontaneous and induced EAE [50,51] was used as a baseline to compare the effects of the mono-colonization with segmented filamentous bacteria (SFB). SFB is a gram-positive bacterium that promotes the expansion of Th17 cells [104]. When GF EAE mice were reconstituted orally with SFB, the severity of EAE was also restored [51] (Table 1).

The immunomodulatory effects of PSA have been demonstrated in cells derived from human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). In a first study, blood from healthy individuals was used to isolate naïve CD4+ T cells and dendritic cells for in vitro Treg induction assays. Exposure of PSA to human dendritic cells induced CD39+FoxP3+ Tregs [121]. Furthermore, circulating Foxp3+CD4+ T cells isolated from healthy individuals and cultured with PSA-exposed dendritic cells showed an enhanced expression level of CD39 and IL-10 production, and reduced tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-production by monocytes stimulated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) [121]. In a more recent follow up study, PSA was shown to increase dramatically the production of IL-10 by CD4+ T cells isolated from patients suffering from MS [122]. In this later study, PSA was able to stimulate the expression of Foxp3 in CD4+ T cells sorted from PBMCs of healthy untreated MS patients, and MS under treatment with glatiramer acetate (GA) when compared to untreated cells. Similar increases were observed in the context of IL-10 produced by cells exposed to PSA when compared to untreated cells. Remarkably, the fold-increase in Foxp3 expression was higher in cells isolated from MS patients than in cells isolated from healthy individuals [122]. Thus, in vivo and in vitro studies have demonstrated that PSA, a polysaccharide produced and isolated from a gut microbiome member promotes immunomodulatory responses in EAE mice and in samples isolated from MS patients.

All the potential new therapeutic options discussed in this review have not been explored fully for MS. Although there is still no cure for MS, over the last two decades the number of therapeutics available for MS has increased significantly. Some therapeutics available only treat symptoms of the disease and act as immunosuppressive or immunomodulatory agents; however, many of them have limited efficacy and have in some cases severe side effects [123]. Moreover, as of yet there is no efficacious therapeutic for secondary progressive MS. Because of the lack of a therapeutic that promotes efficacy to all patients with no associated side effects, there is a need to explore novel therapeutic avenues.

The effect of the gut microbiome on MS pathology is a promising avenue of investigation. Therefore, characterizing the microbial profile of the MS gut as compared to healthy gut microbiomes, as well as other autoimmune diseases could be insightful. By investigating the structure of these microbiomes, it is possible to understand what microbes are contributing to the pro-inflammatory state and lack of anti-inflammation. From this data, it would be possible to then develop probiotic mixtures containing critical bacterial populations which can increase the number of Tregs as they are diminished in the MS gut microbiome.

