Characterization of the gut microbiome in wild rocky mountainsnails (Oreohelix strigosa)

The Rocky Mountainsnail (Oreohelix strigosa) is a terrestrial gastropod of ecological importance in the Rocky Mountains of western United States and Canada. Across the animal kingdom, including in gastropods, gut microbiomes have profound effects on the health of the host. Current knowledge regarding snail gut microbiomes, particularly throughout various life history stages, is limited. Understanding snail gut microbiome composition and dynamics can provide an initial step toward better conservation and management of this species.

In this study, we employed 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing to examine gut bacteria communities in wild-caught O. strigosa populations from the Front Range of Colorado. These included three treatment groups: (1) adult and (2) fetal snails, as well as (3) sub-populations of adult snails that were starved prior to ethanol fixation. Overall, O. strigosa harbors a high diversity of bacteria. We sequenced the V4 region of the 16S rRNA gene on an Illumina MiSeq and obtained 2,714,330 total reads. We identified a total of 7056 unique operational taxonomic units (OTUs) belonging to 36 phyla. The core gut microbiome of four unique OTUs accounts for roughly half of all sequencing reads returned and may aid the snails’ digestive processes. Significant differences in microbial composition, as well as richness, evenness, and Shannon Indices were found across the three treatment groups.

Comparisons of gut microbiomes in O. strigosa adult, fetal, and starved samples provide evidence that the host internal environments influence bacterial community compositions, and that bacteria may be transmitted vertically from parent to offspring. This work provides the first comprehensive report on the structure and membership of bacterial populations in the gastropod family Oreohelicidae and reveals similarities and differences across varying life history metrics. Strong differentiation between these life history metrics demonstrates the need for wider sampling for studies of dynamics of the snail gut microbiome.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s42523-021-00111-6.

Complex microbial communities living in animal gastrointestinal tracts are known to play critical roles in a variety of biological processes [1]. These communities can be comprised of a mix of horizontally acquired exogenous microbial taxa, and “core” taxa that confer selective advantages to the host and may be acquired vertically through the parent or horizontally [2]. Symbiotic gut bacteria can provide many beneficial services that affect host fitness, including nutrient absorption, digestive capabilities, immune response, and adaptation to abiotic challenges [3–7]. Maintaining a balanced microbial community and preventing dysbiosis (negative health effects due to an imbalanced microbiome) is therefore crucial to the host’s health. Varying factors can influence animal gut microbiome compositions, including host diet, pathogens, seasonality, and disease [8–12]. Gut microbiomes may also shift based on host developmental stages [12–17].

To our knowledge, the gut microbiome of Oreohelix strigosa has never been systematically characterized, despite its ecological importance. Valuable baseline data can be derived from characterizing host-associated microbial communities [40]. These data will lead to better detection of snail dysbiosis, which may be caused by any number of environmental stresses [40]. In this study, we used 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing to investigate the gut microbial communities of three populations of Oreohelix strigosa. We characterized core and unique gut microbes by comparing developmental stages of the snails, and by starving a sub-group of the snails. This study contributes to our understanding of the basic characteristics of the gut microbiome in Rocky Mountainsnails, and thereby promotes ex situ conservation should these snails become threatened.

Between July and September of 2018 when terrestrial snails from the Rocky Mountains are most active, we collected living samples of Oreohelix strigosa from three geographically close locations within the Colorado Front Range: (1) the University of Colorado Mountain Research Station in Ward, Colorado, USA, hereafter: MRS; (2) Frisco, Colorado; and (3) Vail, Colorado (Table 1). These freshly collected samples (N = 72, including fetal snails found within adults) included 29 from the MRS, 8 from Frisco, and 35 from Vail. We used a qualitative collection method (i.e., collections made by direct visual searching) to collect specimens for this study, as snails present on tree trunks and limbs or vertical rock ledges are usually not effectively collected with quadrat samples. O. strigosa are most likely to be found under the bark of trees (specifically preferential to aspens), near bases of rocks, under logs, and in other microhabitats that might be missed in a completely random selection of samples. Therefore, the qualitative collection approach can maximize collection success [41]. All collections were taken with the appropriate permitting for invertebrates.

In total, we used 50 non-starved adult snails, 6 starved adult snails, and 12 fetal snails.

All dissections were performed aseptically, using sterile instruments. The soft body of the adult snail (Fig.
1) was removed by using fine forceps to gently pull the body out in its entirety by the foot. The digestive tract was carefully isolated from the body, as identified by its unique color and tissue texture, then, a portion of gut was collected from the stomach to the anus (excluding the anus). We then re-preserved all shell and body parts individually in 80% ethanol after the necessary tissue was removed. Information regarding museum catalog numbers and supplementary metadata can be found in Additional file 1.

Species identification was confirmed using the COI mitochondrial gene amplified using primer sets LCOI490 5′-GGTCAACAAATCATAAAGATATTGG-3′ and HCO2198 5′-TAAACTTCAGGGTGACCAAAAAATC-3′ to compare against the most up to date Oreohelix family tree COI sequences from Linscott et al. [36].

Statistical analyses were conducted in R version 4.0.2 [50] using the {MCToolsR} package [51]. We sought to analyze the richness, evenness, and alpha- and beta- diversity across all samples to understand the gut microbiome broadly at the snail species level, and between treatment groups of adult non-starved snails (n = 50), adult starved snails (n = 6), and fetal snails (n = 12). To include our samples while dropping out extraction blanks, we chose a sequencing depth of 2000 reads for rarefaction. Rarefied samples were used for downstream analysis. For all statistical analyses in the present study, a p-value < 0.05 was considered significant.

Venn analysis was done using the {VennDiagram} package [55]. Graphs were created using {ggplot2} [56] and {paRkpal} [57] packages.

To our knowledge, this is the first study to characterize the gut microbiome, or any microbiome, of a member of the land snail family Oreohelicidae. In these results, we will present the overall taxonomic composition of O. strigosa gut microbiomes and members of the core microbiome. Then, we present differences between the three treatment groups of adult, fetal, and starved snails both taxonomically, and in terms of diversity metrics.

Next-generation sequencing of 16S rRNA sequences was employed to assess the gut microbiomes of 50 non-starved adult snails, 6 starved adult snails, and 12 fetal snails. We obtained 2,714,330 reads in total from the 68 samples. Of those reads, 7056 unique OTUs were identified. The number of OTUs per sample ranged from 23 to 1559. The number of reads per OTU ranged from 0 to 39,012 reads (this was an OTU from genus Mycoplasma), and the average number of reads per OTU was 384.68. The alpha- diversity indices indicate a high diversity of the O. strigosa bacterial community, as compared with other snail species. For example, there were 7065 total OTUs in O. strigosa, versus 1196 OTUs in freshwater snail Radix auricularia [58]. The invasive land snail Lissachatina fulica only had 228 OTUs [8].

These discrepancies may be driven by the snails’ differential dietary and habitat needs. O. strigosa primarily feeds on decaying lignocellulosic matter, rather than fresh vegetation [28]. Lignocellulosic matter may be more difficult to digest, thus calling for additional commensal bacteria to assist digestion. Alternatively, in termites, a subset of microbes appears to be responsible for digesting lignocellulosic matter [59]. However, microbial richness decreased only when termites were fed a singular, specific diet of straw, supporting the idea that microbial diversity declines when the diet solely consists of lignocellulosic matter [59]. Oreohelix strigosa may therefore have a much more diverse diet than expected and need additional gut microbe symbionts. Radix auricularia is a freshwater species that likely has different dietary needs than a terrestrial snail, consuming more aquatic plants and algae than woody matter and dry leaf litter. Dietary diversity may also be directly correlated with habitat diversity and may in turn impact bacterial diversity in guts. The land snail Lissachatina fulica does have a wide-ranging diet, as it is an invasive species that adapts to a broader range of environments. In Cardoso et al. [8], Lissachatina fulica was collected from one locality in its invasive range. This narrow sampling range might be driving the lower number of OTUs recovered; it is also worthy to note that methods of OTU classification, including similarity thresholds and sequencing technologies, vary between these studies. Further broader sampling may reveal different microbiome diversity patterns.

The taxonomic composition of Oreohelix strigosa gut microbiomes proved to be highly diverse (Fig. 2A). A total of five phyla accounted for 96.48% of the total sequences across all samples. Proteobacteria (61.29%) and Bacteroidetes (25.44%) were the most dominant bacterial phyla followed by Verrucomicrobia (5.36%), Firmicutes (3.22%), and Actinobacteria (1.17%). A total of 31 other classified phyla each comprised less than 1% of the relative abundance; and one phylum was not classified. Proteobacteria contained the largest number of OTUs (2835) which belonged to the following classes, in order from greatest contribution to least: alpha-, gamma-, beta-, delta-, epsilon-, and zeta- proteobacteria, with alphaproteobacterial contributing the majority of OTUs (1613), followed by Bacteroidetes with 1146 OTUs and Actinobacteria with 956 OTUs.

Overall, the known symbionts associated with the O. strigosa gut are expected to aid digestive functioning consistent with the inferred diet of this snail. As with some other land snails, O. strigosa feeds preferentially on decaying wood and leaf litter rather than fresh leafy greens [28]. As such, bacterial symbionts with functional ability to help the host digest complex molecules, like lignocellulosic matter, are consistent with the needs of this snail host. Cellulose degrading bacteria isolated from the gut of different snails are also found in O. strigosa, these include many members of Enterobacter, Bacillus, and members of genus Sphingobacterium, including S. multivorum. Lactic acid bacteria, responsible for fermentation in other snail guts, were similarly also found in our samples, including members of Enterobacter, Lactococcus, Butiauxella, and Enterococcus (like E. casseliflavus) [23]. Although we cannot test bacterial functions directly with our microbiome profiling data, it is likely that O. strigosa gut microbiome aids its digestive and fermentative processes.

Venn analyses found that 11.34% (800 OTUs) were common to all three treatment groups of the total 7056 OTUs identified (Fig.
2B). The non-starved adult snails share 22.15 and 49.42% OTUs with the fetal snails and starved snails respectively.

The fact that the four core gut microbes contribute to half of the relative abundance across all samples might reflect their ecological importance as beneficial symbionts to the snail host. It is worthy to note that these bacterial strains were found in the unborn fetal snails, suggesting that they may be passed down through vertical transmission (see discussion in fetal and adult comparison section) from parent to offspring. Therefore, these strains may confer some evolutionary advantage at birth for these snails. However, it is important to note that functional capacity of such microbes was not examined in this study. Members of Enterobacteriaceae and Sphingobacteriaceae are known cellulose-degrading bacteria in other snail species [23]. While less functional information is known regarding Sphingomonas species, members of the genus have been found in the freshwater snail Biomphalaria glabrata and are thought to play a role in immune functioning, specifically in parasite defense [64]. In the land snail Cornu aspersum, cellulose-degrading bacteria and lactic acid bacteria persisted in every life stage of the snail examined, which is consistent with the four core bacteria found here [65]. This demonstrates that O. strigosa likely maintains an obligate group of bacterial symbionts that are important to the snails’ survival.

Fetal gut microbiome samples consisted of fewer OTUs than their adult counterparts. In fetal samples, a total of three phyla accounted for 97.32% of the total sequences. Proteobacteria (86.92%) was the most dominant phylum followed by Bacteroidetes (8.03%) and Firmicutes (2.37%). The lack of Verrucomicrobia at abundances > 1% in fetal samples, as opposed to the phylum’s larger presence in every other group, indicates taxa from this phylum might be horizontally acquired in adults. Some snails are known to eat soil to augment their gut microbiome [23]. Verrucomicrobia is generally abundant in soil and freshwater samples, and so could likely be found in the soil substrate that O. strigosa live and burrow in. Other phyla that were common in similar abundances across snail groups, like Proteobacteria, Bacteroidetes, and Firmicutes, may be vertically transmitted from parent to offspring. A small number of OTUs were present only in fetal samples and not the other treatment groups, this indicates that vertical transmission of highly transient bacteria may exist, explaining why these OTUs were not found in adults.

Means of reproduction may also influence microbiome composition. Asexually reproducing New Zealand mud snails (Potamopyrgus antipodarum) are dominated by a strain from the genus Rhodobacter, while sexually reproducing individuals are dominated by a strain from the order Rickettsiales. This association suggests the snail’s reproductive strategy has certain levels of influence on the assembly of its microbiota [67]. Oreohelix strigosa can self-fertilize or mate, but seem to prefer mating as little research has investigated self-fertilization ([68], personal observation). Means of reproduction may be an important factor that alters the microbiome of fetal snails in Oreohelix, but this needs further investigation.

Starved snails had ten phyla showing relative abundances greater than 1%, compared with five in the adult group and three in the fetal group. Starved snails showed increased relative abundances of the phyla Acidobacteria, Planctomycetes, Cyanobacteria, Spirochaetes, and Tenericutes, which are present in the other two treatment groups but at low abundances. As this is proportional data, this trend can be also caused by originally abundant taxa diminishing, resulting in the appearance of increasing abundances of other phyla.

Lastly, we conducted the same PERMANOVA test using only samples found in one location that included both starved and fetal groups (MRS), to validate the results without any possible impact of locality. In this test, the significant results of age and starvation hold up, with age explaining roughly 9.3% of the variation between samples (p-value < 0.001) and starvation explaining 5.5% (p-value < 0.05).

We used the non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis test to test for significant differences among the means of the richness, evenness, and Shannon index of the three groups (non-starved, starved, and fetal). The tests returned significant p-values for each metric (Evenness: Kruskal-Wallis chi-squared = 10.464, df = 2, p-value = 0.005342; Richness: Kruskal-Wallis chi-squared = 13.233, df = 2, p-value = 0.001338; Shannon Index: Kruskal-Wallis chi-squared = 13.156, df = 2, p-value = 0.001391, Fig.
2D). The starved group showed significant higher evenness compared to others, and the fetal group showed significant lower mean richness and Shannon diversity. In the bootstrap analyses where we compared fetal and starved samples with random samples of 6 and 12 non-starved adults, the significantly higher microbiome evenness in starved snails was found in 48% of the bootstrapped replicates; the lower Shannon Index scores in fetal samples was true for 52% of the replicates; and the lower fetal microbiome richness was supported by 93% of the replicates.

Microbial ecology theory predicts that microbial species passed vertically from parent to offspring are more likely to be beneficial to the host, while species gained horizontally from the environment are opportunistic and more variable [72]. Fetal snails unexposed to their surrounding environment, are also unlikely to gain symbionts horizontally. This is consistent with our finding of a significant lower richness in fetal snails compared with adult snails.

Across both vertebrates and invertebrates, there are many examples of vertical transmission of microbiomes. Demonstrated examples include insects [73, 74], sponges [75], bivalves [76–78], and cephalopods [79–82]. In sponges, members of up to ten bacterial phyla and one archael phylum have been vertically transmitted from adult sponge to other life stages, including oocytes of oviparous sponges and embryos of viviparous sponges [83]. In chemosynthetic vesicomyid clams, vertical transmission also appears to be the main mechanism for maintaining thioautotrophic bacterial symbionts [76, 83]. In many of these animals, the deposited microbiome is not as rich as the adult microbiome, and compositional changes happen throughout maturation likely due to further horizontol transmission. For example, amylolytic bacteria are vertically transmitted in the land snail Cornu aspersum, whereas transient proteolytic and cellulolytic bacteria are gained through environmental augmentation when the adult snail is active [23, 65]. Importantly, the fetal snails examined here were unborn and therefore completely unexposed to their surrounding environment, so examining more life stages of these snails, like juveniles, could shed more light on which bacteria are adopted from parents versus environments.

Starved samples showed significantly greater evenness than non-starved adults, but not always in the bootstrap analyses. Starved samples also showed nonsignificant differences to richness and Shannon Index scores compared with adults.

Lastly, we must acknowledge that the small sample sizes of our fetal and starved groups limit the statistical power of our experiment. We have used a sensitivity analysis to best assess whether our results stand with more balanced groups. However, to further elucidate the effects of life stage and starvation on gut microbiome composition and diversity, we recommend that follow-up studies integrate a higher amount of replication in their investigations.

Recent studies have reported the importance of gut microbiome to the health of hosts across the animal kingdom [100, 101]. Hence, the main purposes of this study were to characterize the bacterial diversity in both adult and fetal Oreohelix strigosa, and to determine the diversity and composition of bacterial communities in starved and non-starved snails.

This study has led to several major findings, including that O. strigosa showed a rich and diverse microbiome consisting largely of members of Proteobacteria, more specifically, Gammaproteobacteria. This gut microbiome is more diverse than that of many other gastropod species. We hypothesize that the function of this gut microbiome is to aid in digestion, specifically helping to digest tough, cellulolytic matter typical of this snail’s diet. A core gut microbiome was found in members of O. strigosa. Specifically, we were able to determine that four OTUs were found across the two life stages of snails studied and all localities. The presence of select bacterial species regardless of environmental variables, such as geographic location, indicates that these bacteria are likely invaluable to O. strigosa’s survival. The presence of a gut microbiome particularly in fetal snails lends credence to the hypothesis that some bacterial members are vertically transmitted from parent to offspring before birth. More extensive studies looking at a wider range of variables are needed to confirm such patterns. Overall, the gut microbiome of O. strigosa is a diverse community, with great potential for increased research in both its natural habitat and manipulated lab studies.



Publisher’s Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Change history

8/8/2021

This article has been updated to correct the placeholder in the availability of data and materials.

