The high prevalence of Clostridioides difficile among nursing home elders associates with a dysbiotic microbiome



Clostridioides difficile disproportionally affects the elderly living in nursing homes (NHs). Our objective was to explore the prevalence of C. difficile in NH elders, over time and to determine whether the microbiome or other clinical factors are associated with C. difficile colonization.

C. difficile is prevalent among NH elders and a dysbiotic gut microbiome associates with C. difficile colonization status. Manipulating the gut microbiome may prove to be a key strategy in the reduction of C. difficile in the NH.

Clostridioides difficile infection (CDI), the leading cause of gastroenterologic hospitalizations and associated deaths,1 remains at a historically high level with hospital stays from the disease tripling over the past decade.2 The elderly are disproportionally affected3,4 with the rate of CDI being several fold higher in individuals 65 years of age and older5 and an increased risk of 2% for each additional year after 65 years.6 Not only are elders at increased risk of acquiring CDI but they also have higher rates of recurrence, complications, and death.7 Elders living in nursing homes (NHs) are now the predominant group suffering from CDI.3,8 On average, 40% to 50% of new CDI cases come from elders living in nursing homes.9,10 Most NHs in the US have structured infection control and prevention programs,11 however environmental measures to control CDI, such as enforcing hand hygiene, contact precautions, and decontamination procedures are employed only after CDI is identified. These measures have not been able to stem CDI concerns in NHs.12

Currently, there is a lack of knowledge concerning the risk factors contributing to C. difficile colonization in NH elders. A better understanding of how clinical factors and microbiome composition contribute to C. difficile colonization in NH elder would provide a novel tool for preventing CDI. Accordingly, we set out to follow longitudinally a cohort of elders from multiple NH facilities to investigate: 1) the patterns of C. difficile colonization; 2) the associations of C. difficile colonization with medication exposures and other clinical variables; and 3) the associations of C. difficile colonization with characteristics of the elder gut microbiome. Our findings contribute to the understanding of microbiome composition as a potential target to reduce CDI burden in the elderly.

Over a 3-year period, we enrolled and followed 167 NH elders from 5 different facilities collecting monthly samples, totaling 506 clinical samples. Forty-four (26.35%) of the residents enrolled provided only a single stool sample for the following reasons: 23 (52.3%) elders were on a floor where multiple sample collection did not occur, 12 (27.3%) residents chose to withdraw from the study, 5 (11.4%) died after the first sample collection, 3 (6.8%) had their nurse stop collection due to social issues and, 1 (2.3%) moved out of the facility. Of the remaining, we had an average of 3.7 samples collected per elder. No residents included in this analysis were exposed to antimicrobials nor were hospitalized during the study period. The average participant age was 85.2 years (SD 9.1) of which 18.1% were male, 40 (23.9%) were hospitalized in the past year, and 31 (18.7%) had an antimicrobial exposure in the 6-months preceding enrollment. Both frailty and malnutrition were prevalent with an average clinical frailty score of 6.5 (s = 1.0) or halfway between moderate and severely frail, and a malnutrition indicator categorical score of 2.1 (s = 0.7). Of note, no residents experienced diarrheal symptoms nor were diagnosed with CDI during the course of this study.

Of the 123 elders with multiple samples, there were 41 (33.3%) with a single positive sample and 30 (24.4%) with multiple samples positive for C. difficile. The number and percentage of residents colonized by C. difficile did not vary significantly by the nursing home facility nor floor/wing in which the elder lived. We did not observe any significant differences in resident demographics nor clinical scores (both frailty and malnutrition) between colonized and non-colonized residents (Table 1). The only medication significantly associated with C. difficile colonization (single and multiple) was proton pump inhibitors (Table 1). Remarkably, elders taking a PPI daily were 63% less likely to be colonized with C. difficile (OR 0.37, 95%CI 0.17,0.82). No other medication showed any significant associations and the only medical condition associated with colonization was a history of a cerebrovascular accident (CVA). Residents colonized with C. difficile had a non-statistically significant higher percentage of an antibiotic exposure within the preceding 6 months.

Using longitudinal shotgun metagenomic sequencing reads from our NH elders profiled for microbial species abundances with Metaphlan225 in combination with demographic, clinical, and medication data we sought to investigate what microbiome and clinical features associate with higher rates of C. difficile colonization in the NH environment. We identified a total of 789 species, and after applying a 10% prevalence cutoff we ended up with 218 which we used for the remainder of the analysis. We started by applying unsupervised learning methods, such as correspondence analysis and t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE), and, as expected, found that interindividual variability overwhelmingly accounted for the majority of the information in the data (Supplemental Figure 1). Therefore, in order to identify microbiome features that are associated with C. difficile colonization, while also accounting for patient-specific effects, we chose to apply mixed-effect random-forest regression.26,27 This modeling approach has significant advantages compared to traditional multi-linear regression techniques, as it is agnostic to model structure (e.g. non-parametric regression), it does not need to meet common assumptions underlying classical regression techniques and is able to intrinsically perform ranked feature selection. We modeled the relative abundance of every species as a function of patient’s sex, age, PPI (yes/no), antibiotic in the last 6 months (yes/no), GABA Analogs (yes/no), Benzodiazepines (yes/no), Valproic Acid (yes/no), Thiazide diuretics (yes/no), Antiplatelet Medications (yes/no), Oral Medications for Diabetes (yes/no), and C. difficile prevalence (Never, One time Point, Multiple Time points, as 0, 1, 2). Because PPI was found to associate with lower C. difficile colonization (Table 1), we hypothesized that this could be microbiome-mediated and hence included in the modeling a C. difficile-PPI interaction term. Finally, the patient identifier was used as a random effect. The final model that we trained to data was therefore of the form
Xs,i = fCC+1| ID
, where X is the relative abundance of species s in sample i,
f
is a general non-linear function (the random forest) applied to the Clinical Covariates (CC) as fixed effects and
1|ID
corresponds to the random effect to account for multiple samples from the same patient. The advantage of this approach is that it allows training using multiple samples from the same patients without needing to average them out. We used permutated importance analysis to determine significance of covariates in predicting microbe abundances.28

As we determined that PPI is negatively associated with C. difficile prevalence in our bivariate analysis (Table 1), we hypothesized that this protection could be gut microbiota dependent. We therefore investigated the microbiota species that were characterized by having a significant (p-value BH adjusted <0.05) C. difficile-PPI interaction coefficient from the mixed-effect random forest modeling. From these species, we found that a subset displaying a greater abundance in PPI-treated elders without C. difficile compared to PPI-untreated and whose abundance was decreasing with increasing C. difficile prevalence. According to these criteria, we identified a set of nine species (Figure 3).

Nursing home elders demonstrated high C. difficile prevalence in our study with over half having at least one C. difficile positive sample and 1 in 4 elders having multiple positive samples. This colonization pattern suggests, and we further hypothesize, that a subset of elders in the NH may serve as a source of transmission to other individuals. In an attempt to better understand these individuals, we looked for clinical and microbiome associations. Among the clinical, we found daily proton pump inhibitor exposure was associated with a 63% reduced risk of C. difficile colonization (i.e. more non-colonized residents were daily PPI users). Reduced abundances of symbiotic or butyrate-producing organisms and higher abundances of pathogenic, inflammatory, or bile acid growing bacterial species were associated with C. difficile colonization.

The prevalence of C. difficile colonization observed in our study is consistent with prior reports that have demonstrated a range of colonization in the NH environment with prevalence rates as low as 20% to over 50%.14,21 We have expanded upon prior cross-sectional reports by following elders longitudinally. We demonstrate not only a high prevalence but also patterns of colonization where a subset of elders has multiple C. difficile samples over time. Elders with multiple positive samples may represent a group of long-term colonized elders who are more likely to serve as reservoirs of C. difficile relative to those with only one positive sample, or transiently colonized elders.

There are few studies of C. difficile colonization in the elderly, fewer involving elders living in nursing homes. The systematic review noted above did not reveal any association with PPI and C. difficile in the elderly.45 Among older hospitalized adults, treatment upon admission with PPIs has not been shown to be associated with C. difficile colonization.46 The use of PPI was also shown not to be associated with C. difficile colonization in previous studies with a lower number of subjects, 68 long-term care elders, although a non-statistically significant higher percentage of colonized residents were on a PPI.21 Our findings suggest that changes in the intestinal microbiome with acid-reducing medication use may be associated with a less favorable environment for C. difficile colonization.

Elders in our study with Once and Multiple types of C. difficile colonization demonstrated a pattern of decreased abundances of symbiotic and/or butyrate-producing organisms and consequent reduction in pathways leading to butyrate production. These elders were found to display increased abundances in pathogenic, inflammatory, or bile acid growing species, along with increased capacity for the production of known inflammatory molecules such as LPS.

Here we are reporting on the association of lower risk for C. difficile colonization among nursing home elders taking a PPI daily and propose that a possible mechanism lies in the differences in microbiome composition between users and non-users of PPIs. Among non-colonized elders taking a PPI, we noticed enrichment in gut bacteria such as Eubacterium species and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii. The Eubacterium spp. are an important butyrate-producing bacterial species which contributes to the maintenance of the gut barrier functions, and has both immunomodulatory and anti-inflammatory properties.29 Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, one of the most abundant and important butyrate commensal bacteria of the human gut microbiota,69,70 also show enrichment in non-colonized PPI users. The subset of species displaying a greater abundance in PPI-treated elders without C. difficile compared to PPI-untreated and whose abundance was decreasing with increasing C. difficile prevalence included species five (C. symbiosum, D. longicatena, E. eligens, E. rectale and F. prausnitzii) belong to the Clostridiales order. These species have also been associated with protection against inflammatory and infectious conditions in both mice and humans, including C. difficile infection.71–73 Vincent et al. (2013) found that Eubacteria and Faecalibacterium are depleted in CDI patients.73 It additionally reported a decrease in the family Bacteroidaceae, which is consistent with our analysis finding B. uniformis enriched in PPI with no CD and reduced with higher prevalence of C. difficile, an association noted by others.74–76 Our findings suggest that changes in the intestinal microbiome among elders exposed to a PPI may be associated with a less favorable environment for C. difficile colonization.

This study had several notable strengths and limitations. One limitation of this study is that it did not have four stool samples from each resident. This may have led to misclassification of the secondary outcome of multi-colonization in these residents. This is the largest longitudinal cohort of nursing home elders reporting microbiome composition. It is also the largest study to survey NH residents for C. difficile colonization. That being said this study is still limited in the number of residents enrolled. A more robust cohort would help us to take a much deeper look at the multiple levels of data and to better explore other classes of medications used less frequently by NH elders. There are potential confounding variables, specifically classes of medications the residents were taking (such as corticosteroids and immunosuppressants) that were not evaluated in this cohort due to the small number of residents on these drugs. Following up this investigation with a cohort including larger numbers of residents from more facilities would strengthen the findings and further explore the dysbiosis associations with medication exposure in the elderly and further address how these dysbiotic patterns are associated with C. difficile colonization.

In conclusion, C. difficile colonization is common among NH elders with a large portion of these colonized residents harboring this pathogen over the course of months. C. difficile colonization state was associated with an inverse relationship to PPI medication use and key healthy bacterial species are present in elders using a PPI who do not demonstrate colonization. Finally, we found that the abundances of several key intestinal bacterial species were associated with C. difficile colonization and thus describe a dysbiotic environment in which C. difficile can take residence and thrive. This microbiome is described as having lower abundances of symbiotic or butyrate-producing organisms with increased abundances of organisms that utilize bile acids or are considered pro-inflammatory or pathogenic bacterial species. Further work is needed to see if promoting an elder gut microbiome composition to one that resists colonization could affect the high rates of C. difficile colonization seen within the nursing home environment, thus providing a novel approach at preventing this devastating disease.

This prospective cohort study was approved by the institutional review board at the University of Massachusetts Medical School. This cohort is of NH residents ≥65 years of age who lived in one of five NH facilities in central Massachusetts. We approached residents who had been living in the facility for ≥1 month and did not have any diarrheal illness or antimicrobial exposure within the preceding 4 weeks. Our trained staff used a standardized Capacity for Informed Consent Instrument77 that combines capacity assessment questions with observation. If the resident was deemed unable to provide consent, we contacted the healthcare proxy to obtain informed consent. Residents were enrolled for a minimum of 4 months. All residents across the four facilities followed similar low-fiber diets and at each nursing facility, all the elders were fed the same meals that is typical for a nursing home diet. No patients suffered from dysphagia or had a feeding tube.

We conducted baseline and end of study medical record abstraction for factors associated with key study outcomes. These factors included: age, nutritional status, comorbidities, all medications, and frailty.16 Prior history of hospitalizations within the past year and antibiotic exposures in the past six months were collected from the medical record. Both daily and as needed medications were obtained from the facility’s medical record. Polypharmacy was defined using the most commonly reported definition of five or more daily medications.78 Polypharmacy has been shown to represent a determinant of gut microbiota composition independent of specific drug classes that have detrimental clinical consequences.79 We also obtained age, sex, race, and length of NH stay from the medical record. Clinical scoring systems were made from elders during baseline interviews and corroborated from family or facility staff. We used the Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI) to categorize patients’ medical comorbidities.80,81 The CCI is a method of predicting mortality by classifying or weighting comorbid medical conditions and has been widely used to measure the burden of medical diseases.82 Frailty was categorized according to the validated and widely utilized Canadian Study of Health and Aging’s (CSHA) 7-point Clinical Frailty Scale (CFS).83 This has been previously validated in demonstrating signatures of frailty in the gut microbiota.20,84,85 This frailly scale goes from very fit (1) to very severely frail (8). We did not enroll terminally ill patients into this study. We assessed nutritional status using the Mini Nutritional Assessment (MNA) tool.86–88 The MNA is a rapid assessment of nutritional status used routinely in elderly NH residents.88 Residents were categorized as normal (1), at risk (2), or malnourished (3) based on the MNA survey administered to the residents by trained research staff or the nurse caring for the resident if mentally impaired. All residents enrolled were monitored during their involvement in the study for any changes to their care or for new medication or hospitalization exposures.

DNA was extracted from samples using the PowerMagTM Soil DNA Isolation Kit on an epMotion 5075 TMX liquid handling workstation according to manufacture protocols (MO BIO Laboratories, #27,100-4-EP). Sequencing libraries were constructed using the Nextera XT DNA Library Prep Kit (Illumina, Inc., #FC-131-1096) and sequenced on a NextSeq 500 Sequencing System as 2 × 150 base pair-end reads. Shotgun metagenomic reads were first trimmed and quality filtered to remove sequencing adapters and host contamination using Trimmomatic89 and Bowtie2,90 respectively, as part of the KneadData pipeline v0.6.1 (https://bitbucket.org/biobakery/kneaddata) using human genome hg19 (GRCh37, GCA_000001405.1). Reads were then profiled for microbial taxonomic abundances using Metaphlan291 and for metabolic pathway abundance using humann233 (as in our previous work).20,27 Statistics for the sequencing is provided in Table 2:

Met = metagenomics, con = host contamination, pair = paired reads, unpair = unpaired reads

All samples were tested for C. difficile toxin genes to determine C. difficile colonization. This was done using real-time polymerase-chain reaction with AdvanSure RT-PCR kit (LG Life Science) for the simultaneous detection of tcdA and tcdB genes. The primer pairs used were

NK9-NK11 for the repetitive domain of the tcdA gene and NK104-NK105 for the tcdB gene. This method is based on TaqMan technology and has been shown to have very good test characteristics with 100% sensitivity and 98.3% specificity.92 We used the SLAN RTPCR detection system (LG Life Science) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.92 Each sample needed to be positive for both tcdA and tcdB genes to then be categorized as positive for C. difficile. Estimation of C. difficile colonization using qPCR instead than directly from shotgun metagenomics has been used several times previously by us and others93,94 and it allows to determine with better resolution the presence of this bacterium which is usually found at very low abundance in the GI tract (<1%) and could be undetected from metagenomic sequencing.

We defined “C. difficile colonization” as the detection of C. difficile toxin genes A or B using real-time polymerase-chain reaction in the absence of any diarrheal symptoms 4 weeks pre- and post- sample collection. We further divided C. difficile colonization into two categories. The first was elders with only one sample testing positive (one-time) while the second was if the elder had multiple samples positive (multiple). No elders in this study had diarrhea at any point.

Multivariable Logistic Regression Modeling. We first used multivariable logistic regression analysis to test whether clinical variables alone were associated with C. difficile colonization. To select the set of covariates for the multivariable model, we selected any covariates with a p < .20 from an unadjusted bivariate analysis. We ran two models, first with the outcome of any colonization time point and then again with the outcome of multiple colonization time points. We included all acid-reducing medications rather than proton pump inhibitors alone in the model given that both were significantly associated with the outcome.

To perform the within-patient analysis (e.g., differentiating positive and negative samples for elders that switch from negative to positive and vice-versa) we first calculated Shannon diversity and performed linear-mixed effect modeling as
Diversity=SamplePositivity+1|ID
. To classify samples as C. difficile positive vs negative, we applied Mixed-Effect Random Forest Classification. Permutated Importance Analysis was used to determine species significantly associated with sample positivity.

Sequences have been deposited in the NCBI SRA under accession PRJNA529586. Processed data, metadata and code to reproduce analysis in the paper is available at https://gitlab.com/vanni-bucci/2020_cdad_nh_paper.

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.

Supplemental data for this article can be accessed on the publisher’s website.

