The influence of the gut microbiome on BCG-induced trained immunity

The bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) vaccine protects against tuberculosis and heterologous infections but elicits high inter-individual variation in specific and nonspecific, or trained, immune responses. While the gut microbiome is increasingly recognized as an important modulator of vaccine responses and immunity in general, its potential role in BCG-induced protection is largely unknown.

Stool and blood were collected from 321 healthy adults before BCG vaccination, followed by blood sampling after 2 weeks and 3 months. Metagenomics based on de novo genome assembly reveals 43 immunomodulatory taxa. The nonspecific, trained immune response is detected by altered production of cytokines IL-6, IL-1β, and TNF-α upon ex vivo blood restimulation with Staphylococcus aureus and negatively correlates with abundance of Roseburia. The specific response, measured by IFN-γ production upon Mycobacterium tuberculosis stimulation, is associated positively with Ruminococcus and Eggerthella lenta. The identified immunomodulatory taxa also have the strongest effects on circulating metabolites, with Roseburia affecting phenylalanine metabolism. This is corroborated by abundances of relevant enzymes, suggesting alternate phenylalanine metabolism modules are activated in a Roseburia species-dependent manner.

Variability in cytokine production after BCG vaccination is associated with the abundance of microbial genomes, which in turn affect or produce metabolites in circulation. Roseburia is found to alter both trained immune responses and phenylalanine metabolism, revealing microbes and microbial products that may alter BCG-induced immunity. Together, our findings contribute to the understanding of specific and trained immune responses after BCG vaccination.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s13059-021-02482-0.

The bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) vaccine consists of the live attenuated microorganism Mycobacterium bovis and partially protects against tuberculosis caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis in humans. Epidemiological and experimental data provide evidence that BCG vaccination also protects against heterologous infections [1–3]. This nonspecific protection is at least partially explained by trained immunity, the process in which certain infections and vaccinations result in epigenetic and metabolic rewiring of innate immune cells that increases responsiveness upon subsequent restimulation with unrelated pathogens [4, 5]. In monocytes and natural killer cells, trained immunity induced by BCG vaccination leads to increased production of pro-inflammatory cytokines upon restimulation with nonspecific pathogens, such as Staphylococcus aureus and Candida albicans [6, 7]. These effects are enabled by modulation of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells in the bone marrow [8, 9] and last for at least 1 year [10]. However, BCG is not effective in all individuals, and host and environmental factors underlying inter-individual variability of specific and trained immune responses to BCG vaccination are currently incompletely understood [6, 11].

Studies investigating the role of the gut microbiome on BCG-induced trained immune responses, however, have not been performed to date. Here, we investigate the effect of the gut microbiota on the induction of specific and nonspecific immune memory responses in a cohort of 321 healthy, BCG-vaccinated individuals. Through associations with the increase in cytokine production after vaccination, we identify potential immunomodulatory species that are further supported and filtered by associations with plasma metabolites. This approach yielded a Roseburia genome that showed consistent associations with trained immune responses at two post-vaccination time points and enzyme-mediated effects on phenylalanine metabolites.

To study the influence of the microbiome on BCG-induced trained immunity, we vaccinated 321 healthy individuals of Western European background with BCG [18–75 years old, median age 23 years, 57% female, 83% body mass index (BMI) between 18.5 and 25]. Stool and blood samples were collected at baseline, prior to participants receiving the BCG vaccine. Blood was subsequently collected after 2 weeks and 3 months, as depicted in Fig.
1A. DNA was isolated from the 321 stool samples (“Methods”), amplified, and sequenced using whole genome sequencing. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) isolated from participants at each time point were subsequently stimulated ex vivo with S. aureus or M. tuberculosis; IL-6, IL-1β, and TNF-α were measured after 24 h and IFN-γ was measured after 7 days. Additionally, metabolites were analyzed in plasma from peripheral blood at baseline (Koeken et al. in preparation). Our approach consisted of (1) assembling all microbial species, (2) testing the microbes for modulatory effects on cytokine responses, (3) assessing whether immunomodulatory microbes have stronger effects on circulating metabolites compared to the other microbes, and (4) identifying which metabolites are associated with immunomodulatory microbial species (Fig.
1B).

Shifts in the relative abundance of individual species correlated with 25 variables (MaAsLin2 generalized linear model, PFDR < 0.25), of which 10 correlated with more species (Fig.
1G; Additional file 2: Table S1). In particular, vaginal yeast infection, sex, and daily exercise associated with most microbial species (Fig.
1G). Other species-specific variables that were missed by cluster associations included hypertension, hay fever during youth, and antibiotic use.

Cytokine production in the supernatant of stimulated PBMCs was measured to assess the trained immune response (IL-6, IL-1β, TNF-α after 24-h stimulation) and the specific immune response (IFN-γ after 7-day stimulation). IL-1β and TNF-α production upon S. aureus stimulation and IFN-γ production upon M. tuberculosis stimulation gradually increased 2 weeks and 3 months after BCG vaccination compared to baseline (Fig.
2A; Additional file 1: Fig. S3A). Trained immunity (indicated by increases in TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6 production) as well as specific (M. tuberculosis-induced IFN-γ) and heterologous lymphocyte-derived (S. aureus-induced IFN-γ) cytokine responses correlated with each other (Fig.
2B, C). The microbiome clusters did not show a significant divergence in any of the cytokine responses measured upon ex vivo stimulation of PBMCs (maximum P = 0.16 for IFN-γ with S. aureus, Additional file 1: Fig. S3B), prompting the search for a potential individual taxon or functional immunomodulatory factors.

We next examined the correlation between species relative abundance and individual cytokine production at both time points after vaccination (Fig.
2G). A Roseburia genome (MSP 112), only identifiable on the genus level, was negatively correlated with the increase in IL-1ß and TNF-α production at both time points (P = 2.67e−05, FDR = 0.0011, Fig.
2H). In the specific response model, Ruminococcus (MSP 091, P = 0.0012, FDR = 0.17) and E. lenta (MSP 181, P = 0.0030, FDR = 0.17) showed consistent negative and positive effects, respectively, on IFN-γ at both time points (Fig.
2I). The specific response model revealed the most associations between a single cytokine and microbial species, although for all the cytokine–stimuli combinations, the number of unadjusted associations ranged between 10 and 23 microbes (Additional file 4: Table S3).

Detectable changes in cytokine production yielded potential immunomodulatory species, whose exact numbers varied with selected statistical thresholds. To corroborate cytokine associations and narrow down the potential causal mechanisms, we compared the effects of immunomodulatory microbes on the plasma metabolome, measured as previously described [59]. A total of 1607 mass/charge (m/z) peaks were matched to known compound identities and clustered into 20 groups, enriched for eight major molecular classes (Additional file 1: Fig. S4A-C, “Methods”).

Combined evidence from the (i) modeled effects of microbes on cytokine production, (ii) associations between species relative abundances and the production of two trained immunity-related cytokines at both time points after vaccination, and (iii) effects of the immunomodulatory microbiome species on the plasma metabolome yielded the prediction that Roseburia-mediated phenylalanine metabolism influences trained immunity.

The effects on phenylalanine metabolites prompted us to investigate the Roseburia genomes and confirm the presence of relevant enzymes. We compared the differential enzymatic and metabolic potential of Roseburia to phylogenetically and biochemically related taxa by a deeper profiling of the stool metagenomes. All 345 identified MSPs were grouped by phylogenetic divergence using core genes (PhyloPhlAn 3.0, Additional file 1: Fig. S7), revealing a clade harboring most Roseburia species (Fig.
4A). The phylogenetically closest Firmicutes included five Ruminococcus, three Coprococcus and two Eubacterium rectale MSPs. While E. rectale is related to Roseburia in terms of butyrate production, we also included a biochemically distinct but abundant Actinobacteria Bifidobacterium (MSP 111). The assembled panel consisted of 59 MSPs derived from 85,208 assembled genes of Bifidobacterium (7 MSPs), Roseburia (13 MSPs), Ruminococcus (17 MSPs), Eubacterium (15 MSPs), and Coprococcus (7 MSPs), with each genus having more than 95% prevalence in the cohort (Fig.
4B).

A total of 15 m/z peaks matched to compounds from the phenylalanine pathway (KEGG ko00360), potentially spanning up to 19 compounds due to ambiguous matches. Species from the Roseburia genus significantly correlated with 11 of the 15 compounds in the pathway, of which MSP 112 contributed to six of these compounds (Spearman correlation, P < 0.05, Fig.
4E). The genera Ruminococcus, Coprococcus, Bifidobacterium, and Eubacterium each showed fewer associations (Fig.
4E). Taken together, Roseburia’s increased influence on the phenylalanine metabolism pathway compared to closely related species is confirmed through increased enzymatic potential and metabolite intensity.

Finally, we more closely investigated the 13 phenylalanine metabolism enzymes found within the Roseburia genus and their differential effects on circulating metabolites. Five of the enzymes (hisC, mhpE, paaH, yhDR, and paaF) were common to over half of the MSPs, while the remaining eight were more species-specific (Fig.
5A). The co-occurrence of aaaT (L-phenylalanine N-acetyltransferase) and paaI (acyl-CoA thioesterase) was specific to the immunomodulatory MSP 112, as they were not found together in any other Roseburia MSP. These enzymes act in the path from phenylalanine to N-acetyl-L-phenylalanine and phenylacetylglutamine, whose plasma concentrations were associated with increased Roseburia (MSP 112) abundance (Fig.
4E).

Additional evidence for the capability of Roseburia to alter compounds in the phenylalanine metabolism pathway is provided by a study that performed targeted metabolomics using reference standards on supernatants of individual microbial species grown in defined media [25], including Roseburia inulinivorans, a close relative of Roseburia (MSP 112) with species-level annotation (Fig.
4A). A change of at least twofold in R. inulinivorans supernatant was observed for two compounds: an increase in 2-hydroxyacetate, which is encoded downstream of yhDR and hisC, and a decrease in succinate, which is encoded upstream of mphE (Additional file 1: Fig. S8, Fig.
5D). Although these compounds were not detected using our plasma metabolomics methods, the direction of changes is aligned with the relevant genes and supports an active role of Roseburia in phenylalanine metabolism pathways.

Growing evidence suggests that the gut microbiome mediates effects on vaccine efficacy through microbial ligands, circulating metabolites or both. Here, we identified microbial species associated with BCG-induced specific (adaptive immune memory) and heterologous (trained immunity) responses. De novo assembly methods and associations with circulating metabolites and cytokines at multiple time points enabled us to obtain statistically robust microbial signals that would otherwise be missed by reference-based methods.

Limited sensitivity and coverage of current metagenomic methods do not exclude the existence of additional, undetected immunomodulatory microbes. Nevertheless, associations with cytokine expression, circulating metabolites, and differential presence of phenylalanine metabolism enzymes increase the confidence that the presence of Roseburia in the gut microbiome dampens trained immune responses after BCG vaccination. Further investigation of the role of phenylalanine metabolism in these responses is warranted in future studies, as a possible causal role between Roseburia species and phenylalanine metabolism is supported by recently published in vitro experiments and should continue to be investigated in similar controlled settings. Furthermore, since individuals included in this study were all from Western European ancestry, of adult age, and living in similar environments, these findings should be validated in additional cohorts of different age groups and of different genetic backgrounds. This study nevertheless provides a detailed insight into associations between assembled microbial genomes, plasma metabolites and subject-specific immune responses.

The data presented here details for the first time microbiome-associated effects on BCG vaccine responsiveness in a large human cohort. The pathways and microbial species that mediate BCG-induced trained and specific immune responses contribute to the understanding of subject-specific immunity and may inform personalized strategies to enhance vaccine efficacy.

In the 300BCG study, 321 healthy Dutch individuals were included from April 2017 until June 2018. Individuals were not included if they did not have a Western European ancestry, used systemic medication other than oral contraceptives and acetaminophen, used antibiotics 3 months before inclusion, received previous BCG vaccination, had a history of tuberculosis, any febrile illness 4 weeks before participation, vaccination 3 months before participation, or a medical history of immunodeficiency. Individuals were excluded for not meeting inclusion criteria (n = 2), medication use (n = 4), different time of vaccination (n = 18), or a missing stool sample (n = 1). At the hospital, written informed consent was obtained, stool and blood samples were collected, and participants were vaccinated with a standard dose of 0.1 mL BCG Bulgaria (InterVax) intradermally in the left upper arm. At 2 weeks and 3 months after vaccination, blood was again collected and a questionnaire was completed. This study was approved by the Arnhem-Nijmegen Medical Ethical Committee (NL58553.091.16) and performed in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.

Ficoll-Paque (GE Healthcare, UK) density gradient separation was used to isolate peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from EDTA whole blood. After washing twice with phosphate buffered saline (PBS), cells were counted with the Sysmex hematology analyzer (XN-450) and resuspended in culture medium consisting of Dutch modified RPMI 1640 (Invitrogen, USA) supplemented with 50 μg/mL gentamicin, 2 mM Glutamax (Gibco Life Technologies), and 1 mM pyruvate (Gibco Life Technologies). Five hundred thousand PBMCs per well were added to a round bottom 96-well plate (Greiner) and stimulated with culture medium (control), heat-killed Mycobacterium tuberculosis HR37v (5 μg/mL), or heat-killed Staphylococcus aureus (106 CFU/mL, clinical isolate), and incubated at 37 °C, 5% CO2, for 24 h or 7 days. Medium of 7 days stimulation was supplemented with 10% human pooled serum. After 24 h and 7 days, supernatants were collected and stored at −20 °C until further analysis.

IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α (R&D Systems) concentrations were measured in 24-h supernatants with ELISA, according to the manufacturer’s protocol. IFN-γ was measured in 7-day supernatants with Luminex (ProcartaPlex, Thermo Fisher), according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The cytokine concentrations were measured in pg/mL, adjusted for plate variation using linear model residuals, and log-transformed.

Plasma was obtained from participants by centrifugation of EDTA blood and was immediately stored at −80°C until further analysis. Flow injection-time-of-flight mass (flow injection TOF-M) spectrometry was performed by General Metabolomics (Boston, USA), as previously described [59]. A list of putative metabolites was annotated with a series of analysis strategies including deisotoping, decluttering, adduct detection, and library matching in KEGG, HMDB and CHEBI databases, resulting in 1,607 annotated features. All metabolomic measurements were performed in duplicate, and the average value was calculated for each sample per feature.

Stool samples were collected at home the day before or on the day of blood collection, time was recorded, and samples were stored in the refrigerator at home. At the hospital visit before BCG vaccination, samples were immediately aliquoted and stored at −80 °C.

Nucleic acids were extracted the AllPrep 96 PowerFecal DNA/RNA kit from QIAGEN (custom product # 1114341). This method pairs bead-beating on a Tissuelyser II (QIAGEN) with a 96-well AllPrep protocol and is available through QIAGEN. Bead-beating is performed twice at 20 Hz for 5 minutes each round with a rotation of the plate in between rounds. Purified DNA was stored at –20 °C. Metagenomic sequencing libraries were prepared from 2 ng of input DNA using the Nextera XT DNA Library Preparation kit (Illumina) according to the manufacturer’s recommended protocol. Prior to sequencing, libraries were pooled by collecting equal volumes of each library. Insert sizes and concentrations for each pooled library were determined using an Agilent Bioanalyzer DNA 1000 kit (Agilent Technologies) prior to sequencing on an Illumina NovaSeq 6000 with 151 bp paired-end reads to yield ~ 10 million paired-end reads per sample. Data was analyzed using the Broad Picard Pipeline which includes de-multiplexing and data aggregation (https://broadinstitute.github.io/picard).

The quality control for sequencing data was conducted using Trim Galore! to detect and remove sequencing adapters (minimum overlap of 5 bp) and kneadData to remove human DNA contamination and trim low-quality sequences (HEADCROP:15 SLIDINGWINDOW:1:20), retaining reads that were at least 50 bp. Metagenomic reads from all cohorts were assembled individually for each sample into contigs using MegaHIT [60], followed by an open reading frame prediction with Prodigal [61] and retaining only full length genes (containing both start and stop codon).

For comparison with the 500FG cohort, we used the sample pipeline as described in the associated publication [12]. After the kneadData quality control step, marker-gene based taxonomic annotation tool MetaPhlAn [68] yielded relative abundances of 202 species, of which 199 were shared between the two cohorts.

The abundances of MSPs were normalized to relative abundance in each sample. The clusters were determined based on the Jensen-Shannon divergence and a consensus hierarchical clustering with pvclust using 100 bootstrap runs. The number of clusters was determined to maximize the difference of average between- and within-cluster divergences.

We tested variables known for at least 200 samples and had a minimum 40 samples per categorical variable level. Maaslin2 generalized linear model was used to model differential abundance of each MSP and the recommended threshold of PFDR < 0.25 was applied.

Significance of increased log cytokine expression over three time points was assessed using paired Kruskal-Wallis test. The T-test was used to determine significance of fold changes from the baseline time point for 2 weeks and 3 months. Spearman correlation was used to test for significant correlations between cytokine levels.

To find potential immunomodulatory species affecting the magnitude in the immune response after BCG vaccination, we combined the data on cytokine expression over three time points with stool samples at baseline and subjects’ age and sex. We included 303 samples vaccinated in the morning and at least two cytokine measurements (i = 1...303) and 163 metagenomic species (MSPs) with at least 20% prevalence (m = 1...202). Cytokine expressions (c) were quantified as fold change against the baseline for measurements after 2 weeks and 3 months (t = 2 weeks, 3 months). To equalize the variance in cytokine expressions, the fold changes were standardized for each cytokine and time point using the z-score transform.

where β0, βa, and βs are the ordinary least squares coefficients and the explained variance is estimated as squared Pearson correlation between ranked MSP abundance and residuals γc,t,i. Note that this estimate is conservative in the context of a single isolated MSP, as the effect of age and sex is explained away using their full least squared coefficients.

Metabolite intensity was standardized (z-scored) across samples. Clusters were obtained using k-means, with the number of clusters determined by optimal matching to the molecular classes (from HMDB database) using adjusted random index (ARI) measure. The two dimensional projection was obtained using t-SNE.

To compare intensity of multiple metabolites with abundance of multiple enzymes, the respective intensities and abundances were averaged and Spearman correlation was calculated.

The KEGG pathways KGML data formats were used to link metabolite and enzyme identifiers with metabolic pathways. The enzyme and pathway identifiers used the KEGG ortholog (ko) format. The metabolite features mapped to 721 KEGG compound identifiers, contained in 350 metabolic pathways. Out of 10,049 enzymes associated with the 350 pathways, 2726 were detected in the stool metagenomes.



Kevin Pang was the primary editor of this article and managed its editorial process and peer review in collaboration with the rest of the editorial team.

The review history is available as Additional file 8.

Publisher’s Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Martin Stražar and Vera P. Mourits contributed equally to this work.

