Alterations of the Skin and Gut Microbiome in Psoriasis and Psoriatic Arthritis

Numerous scientific studies in recent years have shown significant skin and gut dysbiosis among patients with psoriasis. A significant decrease in microbiome alpha-diversity (abundance of different bacterial taxa measured in one sample) as well as beta-diversity (microbial diversity in different samples) was noted in psoriasis skin. It has been proven that the representation of Cutibacterium, Burkholderia spp., and Lactobacilli is decreased and Corynebacterium kroppenstedii, Corynebacterium simulans, Neisseria spp., and Finegoldia spp. increased in the psoriasis skin in comparison to healthy skin. Alterations in the gut microbiome in psoriasis are similar to those observed in patients with inflammatory bowel disease. In those two diseases, the F. prausnitzii, Bifidobacterium spp., Lactobacillus spp., Parabacteroides and Coprobacillus were underrepresented, while the abundance of Salmonella sp., Campylobacter sp., Helicobacter sp., Escherichia coli, Alcaligenes sp., and Mycobacterium sp. was increased. Several research studies provided evidence for the significant influence of psoriasis treatments on the skin and gut microbiome and a positive influence of orally administered probiotics on the course of this dermatosis. Further research is needed to determine the influence of the microbiome on the development of inflammatory skin diseases. The changes in microbiome under psoriasis treatment can serve as a potential biomarker of positive response to the administered therapy.

Psoriasis is a chronic recurrent skin disease affecting approximately 2% of the global population. According to literature data, it is associated with higher prevalence of such comorbidities as cardiovascular disease, hypertension, obesity, metabolic syndrome and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) [1]. Various drugs have been proposed in the treatment of this condition, such as topical medications based on corticosteroids and vitamin D derivatives, and systemic treatments based on suppressions of various inflammatory axes [2,3]. It has been shown that patients with psoriasis develop Crohn’s disease three times more often than the general population, while patients with Crohn’s disease will develop psoriasis seven times more often than the general population [4,5].

The influence of microbiota (i.e., the collection of bacteria, fungi, and parasites inhabiting the human body) has attracted the attention of scientists in recent years. Research on the microbiome—that is, the genetic material contained in these organisms—made it possible to learn more about the species composition in various parts of the human body, as well as to show changes in the course of various diseases.

Research on the microbiome has used a variety of analysis techniques: cultured bacterial polymerase chain reaction (PCR), species-specific PCR, 16S rRNA (ribosomal ribonucleic acid) gene fragment, or full-length PCR, which hindered the possibility of an objective comparison of the test results [4]. However, the non-culture-dependent methods—DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) and ribosomal RNA sequencing—resulted in the development of research on the microbiome. In the most recent studies on the microbiome, the sequencing of 16S rRNA V1–3 and V3–V4 regions, which is more effective and cheaper than metagenomic shotgun sequencing, was performed. In several papers, investigators indicated that V1–V3 amplicons give more informative data in cutaneous microbiome analysis, while V4 and V3–V4 are more appropriate in gut microbiome research [4]. The Human Microbiome Project, a huge project investigating the human microbiome with the use of 16S rRNA sequencing, enabled the dynamic development of further research on a specific ecosystem inhabiting the human body [6,7].

According to literature data, bacterial phyla—Actinobacteria, Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes and Proteobacteria—and bacterial genera— Cutibacterium, Corynebacterium and Staphylococcus—predominantly inhabit healthy human skin [8]. The composition of the microbiota may vary significantly depending on the host’s place of residence, body area, age, presence of comorbidities, hygiene level, medications used, and external conditions [9].

Significant clinical studies on the cutaneous microbiome in psoriasis are presented in Table 1.

↓—decreased; ↑—increased; rRNA—ribosomal ribonucleic acid.

Interaction between the commensal organisms and the host occurs through recognition of the microbial-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs) by the specific pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) [32]. As a result of this interaction, microbiota can modulate the human postnatal immune system [33].

The important role of the skin microbiome in psoriasis may be proved also by the fact that the concentration of beta defensin—an antimicrobial protein in the blood and skin of patients correlates with the concentration of IL-17, which is considered the main inflammatory cytokine in the pathogenesis of psoriasis. Moreover, it has been shown that the concentration of this protein decreases after treatment with secukinumab, which is an anti-IL-17 antibody and is directly proportional to PASI [40]. Further research is needed to investigate if the alteration of the skin microbiome in psoriasis is the cause or the consequence of the effective treatment of this dermatosis.

Human intestinal microbiota constitutes the unique ecosystem consisting of more than 100 trillion cells, which are encoded by 5 million genes. It is composed of bacteria (mostly of six phyla: Bacteroides, Actinobacteria, Fusobacteria, Firmicutes, Verrucomicrobia, and Proteobacteria), fungi, viruses, protozoa and Archaea [41].

Significant clinical studies on the intestinal microbiome in psoriasis are presented in Table 2.

↓—decreased; ↑—increased; rRNA—ribosomal ribonucleic acid.

Numerous studies have provided evidence for the existence of the gut–skin axis, which is dependent on the microbiome.

On the basis of the above information, it seems that influencing the intestinal microflora of patients can improve not only the condition of the skin but also reduce the development of metabolic disorders.

Genome studies have provided evidence that polymorphisms in signaling pathways, including IL-23 (interleukin 23), may contribute to the development of inflammatory diseases such as spondyloarthropathies (SpA) and inflammatory bowel diseases [107,108]. Interesting results were provided by studies on the mouse model of arthritis and enteritis—SKG model, in which the carrier of the ZAP70 mutation is associated with disturbances in the signal pathway mediated by the prescription TCR (T-Cell Antigen Receptors), IL-23/IL-17 [109,110]. In this model, administration of the microbial component β1,3-glucan resulted in the development of enteritis and arthritis. However, the disease did not develop in individuals under conditions devoid of microbes [111]. Similarly, TNF-overexpressing mice (TNF∆ARE/+) used in scientific research as a model of development SpA and IBD did not develop ileitis under microbial-free conditions [112]. Recently, it has been shown that germ-free TNF∆ARE/+ mice do not develop Crohn-like ileitis [113].

Based on the literature data, interstitial dysbiosis can have a major impact on the psoriasis comorbidities development (Figure 1).

New research has provided evidence for the effects of psoriasis treatments on microbiome changes. Topical calcipotriol can inhibit the abundance of Malassezia population in the psoriatic skin by inducing the production of the antimicrobial peptide—cathelicidin [122,123].

In the other study, treatment with secukinumab—human anti-Th17 monoclonal antibody resulted in the higher expression of phylum Proteobacteria and lower abundance of Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes than in the therapy with ustekinumab (IL12/23 inhibitor) [128]. Moreover, a higher expression of Enterobacteriacea and Pseudomonadaceae under secukinumab therapy was observed. In contrast, no significant changes, except for genus Coprococcus, in the gut microbiome was observed under ustekinumab treatment. Significant differences in the baseline gut microbiome between responders and non-responders to secukinumab treatment were also noted. The authors concluded that the microbiome may be an important biomarker of the efficacy of secukinumab therapy [128].

Some scientific studies have provided evidence that the use of probiotics has a positive effect on the course of psoriasis [43,129,130].

It has been demonstrated that the mean IgA anti-gliadin antibodies (AGA) are higher in patients with psoriasis than in the general population. Investigators evaluated the impact of a gluten-free diet in those who had with positive AGA tests on the severity of psoriasis [136,137]. In the group of IgA–AGA-positive patients on a gluten-free diet, a significant reduction in PASI was noted compared to the IgA–AGA-negative group. It is noteworthy that 60% of IgA–AGA positive patients experienced a deterioration in their skin condition after re-entering their normal diet. None of the IgA–AGA-negative patients noticed changes in their skin condition after returning to a regular diet [137]. Interestingly, the lower expression of the Ki-67+ cell population (a biomarker of cell proliferation) as well as dermal tissue transglutaminase in the psoriatic lesions after a gluten-free diet was noted. No significant changes in the skin of patients with a negative AGA test were discovered following the diet [138].

The PUBMED and Science Direct databases have been searched for articles relevant to this review. The analysis took into account the research studies published by March 2021. The databases were searched using the terms “microbiome” or “microbiota” and “psoriasis” or “psoriatic arthritis”. A total of 1204 search results were obtained. In the first phase of analysis, duplicated publications were eliminated (= 50). Subsequently, research studies wrote in any language other than English, performed on an animal model, meta-analyses, review articles, and case reports were excluded (n = 503). After the quality assessment, most relevant articles concerning alterations skin (Table 1) and gut (Table 2) microbiome in psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis were selected. The studies selection scheme is presented in the Figure 2.

Further research is needed to determine the influence of the microbiome on the development of inflammatory skin diseases. This would enable a better understanding of the pathogenesis of psoriasis and perhaps help to develop targeted therapies for this dermatosis. The changes in microbiome under psoriasis treatment can serve as a potential biomarker of positive response to the administered therapy.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

