Characterization of the gut microbiome in a porcine model of thoracic spinal cord injury

The gut microbiome is a diverse network of bacteria which inhabit our digestive tract and is crucial for efficient cellular metabolism, nutrient absorption, and immune system development. Spinal cord injury (SCI) disrupts autonomic function below the level of injury and can alter the composition of the gut microbiome. Studies in rodent models have shown that SCI-induced bacterial imbalances in the gut can exacerbate the spinal cord damage and impair recovery. In this study we, for the first time, characterized the composition of the gut microbiome in a Yucatan minipig SCI model. We compared the relative abundance of the most dominant bacterial phyla in control samples to those collected from animals who underwent a contusion-compression SCI at the 2nd or 10th Thoracic level.

We identify specific bacterial fluctuations that are unique to SCI animals, which were not found in uninjured animals given the same dietary regimen or antibiotic administration. Further, we identified a specific time-frame, “SCI-acute stage”, during which many of these bacterial fluctuations occur before returning to “baseline” levels.

This work presents a dynamic view of the microbiome changes that accompany SCI, establishes a resource for future studies and to understand the changes that occur to gut microbiota after spinal cord injury and may point to a potential therapeutic target for future treatment.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12864-021-07979-3.

The gut microbiome is a diverse network of bacteria which inhabit our digestive tract. This collection of microbes consists of beneficial (probionts) and pathogenic (pathobionts) bacteria, whose concentrations must be carefully maintained to function symbiotically within the host. Today, we recognize that gut microbiota are critical for a number of key physiological processes such as the development and maintenance of cellular metabolism, nutrient absorption, and immune system development [1–3]. Further, there is increasing interest in the inter-dependent communication pathway which exists between the gut microbiome, the immune system, and the central nervous system (CNS), referred to commonly as the “gut-brain axis” or “gut-CNS axis”. The CNS can influence the composition of the gut microbiome via the autonomic nervous system by modulating gut motility, intestinal transit times, gut permeability and through the luminal secretion of various hormones [4]. Conversely, bacteria residing in the intestinal tract can “communicate” with the CNS directly via immune cells or nerve fibers as well as indirectly by secreting neuroactive metabolites (such as short chain fatty acids [SCFAs] and choline) produced by the fermentation of microbiome-accessible carbohydrates [5, 6]. These neuroactive metabolites can then cross the intestinal barrier, enter systemic circulation and potentially cross the blood-brain barrier to influence neural activity and inflammation [7–9].

Here we used a porcine model (Yucatan) to investigate the effect of contusive/compressive SCI on the composition of the gut microbiome before and up to 7 weeks after injury. To the best of our knowledge, the gut microbiota of Yucatan minipigs has not been characterized previously. Our goal was therefore to determine a baseline composition of the gut microbiome in our established Yucatan pig model of SCI [19, 20] and examine the effects of severe thoracic SCI longitudinally. Further, we sought to characterize the disruption that may be induced by our standard “post-surgical diet” or antibiotic treatment on non-SCI animals in an attempt to isolate the effect of SCI from other factors known to induce gut bacterial dysbiosis.

In this longitudinal study, microbiome composition determined pre-SCI was compared to microbiome composition up to 7–8 weeks thereafter. Twenty-three Yucatan pigs were divided into four groups: Control (n = 9), Diet (n = 3), Antibiotic (n = 3), and SCI (n = 8). gDNA samples (n = 192) were extracted from a total of 262 porcine fecal samples and the bacterial microbiome composition was determined with 16S rRNA sequencing. Samples from two SCI pigs > 49 days after injury were omitted because a second, non-SCI surgery was performed 52 days after the initial spinal insult. A single sample from one of the animals at 8 days post-SCI was omitted as an outlier due to a stark compositional dissimilarity (confirmed by Q test) between samples collected from this animal at 7- and 9-days post-SCI. This left 93 samples in the control setting, 45 samples in the diet and antibiotic groups, and 78 samples collected from SCI animals (see Fig. 1).

Phylum level taxonomy of the most dominant bacterial populations in the control setting are presented in Fig.
2. In Yucatan minipigs, we found that approximately 98% of the total bacterial abundance was classified into 6 phyla. We found the majority of bacterial species belong to the Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes phyla, comprising approximately 90% of all bacteria in porcine feces. A smaller fraction of bacteria belongs to the Spirochaetes (4.24%), Proteobacteria (2.23%), Tenericutes (1.01%) and Actinobacteria (0.47%) phyla.

For each phylum, we established a “baseline range” by assembling the centered log-ratio (CLR) transformed values of all fecal samples collected from the Control group as well as those collected before treatment from the four groups and plotted them longitudinally. This range represents the expected microbial composition of Yucatan pigs at the phylum level which can serve as a reference dataset for future microbial analyses as well as the expected stability of this phylum in untreated pigs. Herein, we utilize a baseline range to compare our expected CLR values to those obtained after treatment to infer whether the alterations can be considered significantly different.

Due to considerable temporal differences in CLR values of the most dominant bacterial phyla noted following SCI, particularly within the first 2 weeks after injury, we decided to divide the SCI samples into two phases, acute (0–14 days post-SCI) and subacute (> 14 days post-SCI) and analyze them as separate treatment groups.

As we collected samples weekly, we were able to assess the stability of the microbiome over time both within and between subjects. Using volatility control charts in QIIME2, we plotted the stability of the microbiome longitudinally in our various treatment groups (Fig. 9). The temporal stability or volatility of a metric between individual subjects or groups of subjects can be an important measurement, indicating periods of disruption, disease, or abnormal events. Microbial volatility, the variance in microbial abundance, diversity, or other metrics over time, can be a marker of ecosystem disturbance, disease or abnormal events [23–25] and provides another important metric for comparison between experimental groups. Using the Shannon diversity index [26], a higher degree of variability or “volatility” between samples would result in a lower value on the index, whereas more stability between and within samples would result in a higher Shannon score. In the control group, we noted the greatest degree of volatility when the animals initially arrived at the treatment facility (Fig.
9). Over time, we found the microbiome became more stable in our control animals. When assessing the stability (or volatility) of the microbiome before and after SCI, we noted the gut ecosystem to be most volatile (least stable) within the first ~ 10 days after injury (Fig.
9) and to rebound to baseline levels shortly thereafter. This trend is similar to the observations noted in the relative abundance of the dominant bacterial phyla and was also noted in non-SCI animals receiving Enrofloxacin treatment. No significant change in volatility was found in the dietary cohort.

This study presents a longitudinal characterization of the Yucatan pig gut microflora before and after traumatic SCI. There were three main aims of this study. First, we sought to describe the intestinal microbiome of Yucatan pigs and determine its composition as well as its stability over time at the phylum level. Second, we examined how SCI changed this baseline microbiome composition in a time-dependent manner, from 1 day to 7 weeks post-injury. Third, we sought to distinguish which changes in microbiome composition could be attributable to the antibiotics or dietary alterations that are associated with the experimental SCI. To address these research objectives, we used our established porcine model of thoracic contusive SCI [19, 20] and examined the alterations to the bacterial ecosystem over time.

Diet is perhaps the single most important determinant of the gut microbial composition throughout one’s life [58, 59]. Interestingly, the administration of our standard surgical diet had a minimal impact on the composition of the gut microbiome, with no statistically significant difference between pre- and post-dietary samples in most of the analyzed bacterial phyla, with the exception of Proteobacteria and Tenericutes. Studies have shown that the consumption of high-fat, low-fiber diets can result in increased levels of Proteobacteria relative to low-fat high-fiber diets, as seen in European children [60]. Furthermore, the consumption of artificial sweeteners and emulsifiers (commonly used as additives in processed foods), has also been shown to favour Proteobacteria [61, 62]. Therefore, it is possible that increasing the volume of wet dog food nourished various Proteobacteria species in the gut resulting in increased detection during next-generation rRNA sequencing.

This is the first longitudinal SCI study in a large animal model to compare and contrast the impact on the microbial ecosystem at acute and subacute phases of traumatic SCI. Clearly, the greatest degree of bacterial fluctuation and α-diversity in Yucatan pigs occurs within the acute window from 0 to 14 days post-SCI. The time-dependent nature of these results differs from those presented in Kigerl et al. 2016 such that more drastic changes are noted from 14 days post-injury onward in their study and there was no statistically significant change in Bacteroidales and Clostridales concentrations in the first week after injury. Our longitudinal results show a different kinetic response to SCI surgery and antibiotic treatment such that the most dramatic change in microbial composition is noted within the first 2 weeks after treatment.

This highlights the gap in our understanding of the impact of SCI on the microbiome when comparing the pre-clinical and clinical studies. Those performed in murine models examine the acute and subacute phases of injury and generally occur < 4–8 weeks post-SCI [42, 49, 66]. In contrast, human studies have to date been largely confined to more chronic SCI patients [33, 40, 41] although we are aware of efforts to characterize the microbiome in acutely injured patients. In order to address this issue, studies need to be conducted longitudinally in acute SCI patients within the first week of their injury with prospective assessment of functional outcomes with microbial composition to correlate specific bacterial groups with outcome measures such as sensorimotor recovery, or neuropathic pain. It may be possible to utilize the microbiome as a predictive biomarker for recovery from neurological impairment similar to the Stroke Dysbiosis Index [67]. It is, of course, acknowledged that individuals who suffer a spinal cord injury are subjected to a plethora of other “physiologic perturbations” that may influence their microbiome such as enteral feeds, surgical procedures, antibiotics, and a myriad of other medications. Similar to our experiments, these issues will undoubtedly cloud the interpretation of microbiome changes that occur as the direct result of the neurologic injury. Second, we must consider extending animal studies to more chronic stages to examine how the long-term GI tract impairments and neurological recovery influence the microbiome and visa versa.

It is worth noting the limitations of the present study. First, we acknowledge the absence of a non-SCI treatment group which received both Enrofloxacin as well as the post-surgical dietary regiment. This cohort of animals would provide us with a more representative depiction of the microbial composition post-SCI. Second, we acknowledge the fact that we did not perform a sham SCI surgery to best imitate pre/post-surgical SCI conditions. This would ultimately be the most representative account of the microbiome changes that occur in a non-SCI animal receiving all the other experimental/surgical conditions as the SCI animals. Such conditions include not just antibiotics and dietary changes but also anesthesia, pain medications, stress response, etc. While the costs and time requirements for such a study are beyond the scope of this work, we suggest that our dataset will serve as an important benchmark and resource for future work. In addition, we believe it should be mentioned that the contusion/compression model of thoracic SCI carries several intrinsic limitations. For instance, we acknowledge that the compression and contusion injury in human patients is normally caused by structures surrounding the spinal cord such as the intervertebral discs, vertebral bone, ligaments, epidural components, articular processes and capsules, etc. and these different anatomical structures are not only compressing/contusing the spinal cord but also inducing important inflammation which would affect the general autonomic afferents/efferents differently with unknown implication in the gut microbiome. Further, we acknowledge that the antibiotic group was given oral as opposed to IV antibiotics and although the dose of antibiotics was adjusted to account for the route of drug administration, it is recognized that different methods of drug delivery can have different effects on the gut microbiome [50, 51, 53, 68]. In addition, medications used to treat SCI animals in the present study such as Fentanyl and Metaclopramide can influence digestion by decreasing and increasing gastric motility, respectively. Therefore we acknowledge that these agents can certainly influence the composition of the gut microbiome and further, the duration of given administration can also affect such outcomes. We encourage other studies to pursue this investigation as the results will no doubt uncover some interesting implications of various treatments after injury.

We also acknowledge the relatively small group size (n = 3) for the diet and antibiotic treated animals, which makes the interpretation of the variability observed in the microbiome changes difficult. Finally, the authors acknowledge the variation of the SCI localization, degree of contusion and duration of compression differ between animals and this produces different levels of dysfunction and is therefore a possible source of microbial variation.

The data presented in this study provides a better understanding on the microbial response to SCI in the porcine microbiome. Further, we found specific bacterial phyla whose kinetic responses were unique to SCI animals and were not seen in non-SCI minipigs who received the same post-surgery diet or antibiotic regiment. We believe this information will be critical for further microbial studies involving neurological insults and could also aid in the design and development of bacterial-based therapeutic interventions post-SCI.

All animal experiments were performed in accordance with the guidelines of the Canadian Council for Animal Care, carried out in compliance with the ARRIVE guidelines and approved by the University of British Colombia’s Animal Care Committee (A16–0311 SCI in Pigs).

Female Yucatan pigs (n = 23, purchased from either S&S Farms, CA, USA, or Sinclair Bio-resources, Columbia, MO) weighing 20-30 kg were group-housed at our large animal facility. For information regarding housing, husbandry and environmental enrichment please see previous publications [19, 20]. Upon arrival, all animals were introduced to a 3:1 mixture of pellets (300 g, Mazuri) and 100 g wet dog food (Pedigree, Meaty Loaf)(referred to as “standard diet”) twice daily with ad-libitum access to water. Animals were kept in a separate holding area for 14 days to quarantine before the initiation of any experimental procedure.

In order to answer these research questions, we divided our animals into four treatment groups: Control (n = 9), SCI (n = 8), Diet (n = 3) and Antibiotics (n = 3). A schematic of the experimental conditions is show in Fig. 1.

A group of uninjured “Control” animals (n = 9) were fed the standard diet and did not receive antibiotics throughout the study’s duration (3–7 weeks). All animals were administered their respective diets twice daily, first in the morning (0700–0800 am) and then in the evening (1600–1700 pm). It is worth noting that all samples collected before a given treatment were also considered Control specimens.

Animals in the “Antibiotics” group (n = 3), were fed the standard diet and received oral Enrofloxacin (Baytril 10 mg/kg) antibiotic tablets for 5 days. These animals remained untreated thereafter to assess the effect of post-surgical antibiotics. Enrofloxacin is a fluoroquinolone which is efficacious against a variety of bacterial pathogens in different animal species and is commonly used to treat respiratory and gastrointestinal tract infections caused by gram-negative bacteria. Nielsen & Gyrd-Hansen (1997), demonstrated that a therapeutically active concentration of Enrofloxacin could be achieved for at least 24 h in pigs at an oral dose of 10 mg/kg and an IV dose of 5 mg/kg. Therefore, in order for us to best mimic the antibiotic dose (IV 5 mg/kg daily for 5 days) given to our minipigs after injury, and without the ability to administer IV antibiotics to intact minipigs for ethical and practical reasons, we delivered enrofloxacin orally at a dose of 10 mg/kg for 5 days.

In the “Diet” group, we assessed the impact of the post-surgery diet on gut microflora. These n = 3 uninjured animals were fed the post-surgery diet for 5 days, before returning to the standard diet (9 days). The “Diet” consists of a 1:1.5 mixture of pellets (150 g, Mazuri) and wet dog food (225 g, Pedigree, Meaty Loaf)(referred to as “post-surgery diet”) for 5–7 days. The ratio of wet dog food to pellets is modified after surgery as wet dog food is easier for the animals to chew and digest. Animals in the Diet group were housed in separate holding areas for the duration of their study (14 days).

SCI animals (n = 8) were subjected to a contusion/compression injury consisting of a 50 g weight drop at either the T2 or T10 level, followed by sustained compression, described in more detail below: Porcine Model of Thoracic SCI. All SCI animals received antibiotic treatment (Enrofloxacin (Baytril), intravenous (IV), 5 mg/kg) for the first 5–7 days after surgery along with the standard post-surgical diet as described above.

Surgical procedures for spinal cord injury (SCI) and post-operative care were performed as previously described [20, 69, 70]. Animals (n = 8) were pre-anesthetized with an intramuscular (IM) injection of Telazol (4–6 mg/kg), Xylazine (1 mg/kg), and atropine (0.02 mg/kg). Animals were endotracheally intubated, and mechanically ventilated at ~ 15/breaths/min. General anesthesia was maintained with either a gas mixture of O2 (0.6%) and N2 (1.4%) and Isoflurane at 0.5–5% concentration or a mixture of Propofol (6–12 mg/ml), Fentanyl (8–14 mcg/kg), and Ketamine (5–12 mg/kg). Midazolam was given (0.2 mg/kg/hr., IV) to 4 of 8 animals.

Further, all procedures described in this study have been discussed in length during prior consultations with licensed on-site veterinarians. Our veterinarians continue to educate themselves on current techniques of anesthesia, surgery and analgesia (workshops and conferences, consultation with acknowledged experts in the field of research) and will utilize and teach new techniques as they arise to improve both the surgical and anesthetic methods used. In addition, refinements to prevent/minimize pain and discomfort was implemented through the use of aseptic surgical techniques performed by experienced surgeons. Anesthesia was be administered and carefully monitored throughout the procedure by trained animal care technicians.

Fecal sampling date, time, and description were logged for all sampling timepoints. Feces were generally collected fresh in the morning directly from the pen and a sample from the interior of the feces was immediately transferred into an RNase-free 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube, using a stainless-steel rod which was pre-sterilized with 70% ethanol (EtOH). All samples were labelled, and stored in a − 70 °C freezer for cryopreservation until further processing. All materials were sterilized with 70% EtOH between each use.

Fecal samples were collected on pre-determined days before and after their respective treatment (Fig.
9). A total of 262 fecal samples were analyzed using 16S rRNA gene sequencing, (described in detail in the paragraph below: DNA extraction and 16S rRNA gene sequencing). It is worth noting that animals in the present study participated in other ongoing research projects and were therefore euthanized at the conclusion of those studies according to their experimental timeline.

DNA was extracted using the MagAttract PowerSoil DNA KF Kit, according to standard protocol (Qiagen; Hilden, Germany). DNA was visualized on an agarose gel and quantified using Qubit fluorometry, according to manufacturer’s instructions (ThermoFisher; Waltham, MA). The v3 and V4 regions of the 16S rRNA gene were PCR amplified using primers F: 5′-TCGTCGGCAGCGTCAGATGTGTATAAGAGACAGCCTACGGGNGGCWGCAG and R: 5′- GTCTCGTGGGCTCGGAGATGTGTATAAGAGACAGGACTACHVGGGTATCTAATCC using 12.5 ng input DNA per sample. These amplicons were then converted to sequencing libraries using an 8-cycle indexing PCR with Nextera XT primers (Illumina; San Diego, CA). Libraries were cleaned using Ampure XP beads, according to manufacturer’s instructions (Beckman Coulter; Pasadena, CA) and QC’d using Agilent (Santa Clara, CA) Bioanalyzer and Qubit fluorometry. Libraries were then pooled and sequenced over two MiSeq v3 flow cells (Illumina) to generate paired-end 300 bp reads. Raw data was processed using bcl2fast v2.20.0.422 to generate demultiplexed fastq files.

Illumina sequencing data from each experiment were processed and analyzed using QIIME2 (v2019.7.0). Sequencing analyses were performed by blinded specialists. In brief, paired reads were trimmed to remove low-quality bases (Q < 20), adapter, and primer sequences using the Cutadapt module within QIIME2. Resultant reads were denoised and merged using DADA2. The reads were assigned to species-equivalent amplicon sequence variants (ASVs) at 99% similarity by QIIME2 (phylogeny align-to-tree-mafft-fasttree) using the feature-classifier classify-sklearn algorithm against the Silva_132 release reference sequences (https://www.arb-silva.de/documentation/release-132). As datasets collected via 16S rRNA sequencing are considered “compositional” due to an arbitrary total produced by the sequencing instrument (Gloor G et al. 2017), a centered log-ratio (CLR) transformation was performed on all time series plots to analyze the relative abundance of each phylum in the present study. Stacked barplots and alpha diversity metrics were not transformed. Principal component analysis (PCA) was performed on CLR values generated by ALDEx2 (medians of each distribution were calculated from these values). PICRUSt2 was used to generate functional predictions, using default parameters. Differential abundance of microbes and functional classifications were calculated (ALDEx2). Alpha diversity metrics (species richness, species evenness and volatility charts) were analyzed using QIIME2. Plots were generated in R (version 4.0.5) using either ggplot2 or PCATools (version 2.3.13, https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/PCAtools.html).

Differences in CLR values between treatment groups at the phylum level were assessed using a one-way ANOVA via PRISM Graphpad software (version 8.2.1). Statistical hypothesis testing (Graphpad) was used to correct for multiples comparisons. Group comparisons were then assessed relative to the control group using an independent student t-test (two-tailed). Unless otherwise specified, we use the term “microbiome” to refer to the bacterial gut microbiome. Wilcoxon Rank Sum test and Welch’s t-test statistics were computed using SCI and Control as groups of interest. Data was subsetted based on a significant p-values of < 0.05 in all cases, using a Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) post-hoc correction. Comparisons between alpha diversity metrics (species richness and evenness) were assessed using Kruskal-Wallis analysis (QIIME2). All tests of significance were two-sided and significance was set at p < 0.05.



Publisher’s Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

