The relationship between the gut microbiome and mild cognitive impairment in patients without dementia: a cross-sectional study conducted in Japan

Recent studies have revealed an association between the dysregulation of the gut microbiome and dementia. However, whether this dysregulation is associated with mild cognitive impairment (MCI), an early stage of cognitive decline, in patients without dementia remains unclear. We performed a cross-sectional analysis to determine the association between the gut microbiome and MCI. Data, including patient demographics, risk factors, cognitive function, and brain imaging, were collected. The gut microbiome was assessed through terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis. Multivariable logistic regression models were used to identify factors independently associated with MCI. Graphical modelling was used to illustrate mutual associations between MCI and identified factors. We analysed 82 patients, 61 of whom exhibited MCI. Patients with MCI had a higher prevalence of Bacteroides. Furthermore, patients with more Bacteroides were more likely to present with white matter hyperintensity and high voxel-based specific regional analysis system for Alzheimer’s Disease (VSRAD) scores, indicating cortical and hippocampal atrophy. A multivariable logistic regression analysis revealed that a greater prevalence of Bacteroides was independently associated with MCI. Graphical modelling also showed a close association between Bacteroides and MCI. In conclusion, an increased prevalence of Bacteroides is independently associated with the presence of MCI in patients without dementia.

Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) refers to a very early stage of cognitive decline in patients not yet exhibiting dementia and is an important predictive risk factor for dementia1. Many people present to health services with MCI, which occurs in up to 20% of people older than 65 years of age1, and 10–15% of patients with MCI develop dementia annually2. Because the number of patients with dementia has been increasing in Japan, a comprehensive strategy for dementia research has been introduced, which includes analyses of the characteristics of patients with MCI3. A multifactorial assessment of MCI can be useful for preventing the progression from MCI to dementia.

We are conducting a clinical study that was designed to investigate the association between the composition of the gut microbiome and a patient’s clinical condition, as assessed using activities of daily living (ADL) scales and cognitive function measures. This study has been named the Gerontological Investigation of Microbiome: a longitudinal estimation study (Gimlet study)5 and is being performed at the National Center for Geriatrics and Gerontology (NCGG) (Aichi, Japan). During our baseline analysis, we found that the dysregulation of the gut microbiome, as assessed by terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism (T-RFLP) analysis, which is one of the most well-established and reliable 16S ribosomal RNA-based methods, is cross-sectionally and strongly associated with dementia, independent of traditional dementia biomarkers5. Moreover, we found that the presence of dementia, in addition to the presence of cardiovascular risk factors, indicates the advanced dysregulation of the gut microbiome13. In the present sub-study of the Gimlet study, we examined the relationship between the gut microbiome and MCI among patients without dementia who had enrolled in the Gimlet study. We hypothesized that there would be differences in the compositions of the gut microbiome between patients with MCI and those with normal cognitive function (NC).

We previously analysed 128 patients in the Gimlet study. Of these, 46 were excluded: 34 had dementia, and 12 provided an insufficient quantity of faecal samples. Therefore, we analysed the remaining 82 eligible patients without dementia for this sub-analysis (female: 52.4%; mean age: 73.9 ± 8.1 years; mean Mini-Mental State Examination [MMSE] score: 27). Patients were stratified according to their levels of cognitive function and their enterotypes: 61 (74.4%) were classified as MCI, and 21 were classified as NC (Tables 1–3); 38 were enterotype I (46.3%), 5 were enterotype II (6.1%), and 39 were enterotype III (47.6%).

Compared with NC patients, those with MCI were older (MCI vs. NC: median years, 77 vs. 69, P < 0.001), had a higher prevalence of hypertension (63.9% vs. 38.1%, P = 0.045) and were more likely to present with indications of cerebral small vessel disease (SVD), such as white matter hypersensitivity (WMH) (34.4% vs. 4.8%, P = 0.009), and impaired instrumental ADL scores (44.3% vs. 9.5%, P = 0.004). Additionally, patients with MCI had higher scores on the Dementia Behaviour Disturbance Scale (DBDS), Zarit Caregiver Burden Interview (ZBI), and voxel-based specific regional analysis system for Alzheimer’s Disease (VSRAD) (median scores: 10 vs. 2, P < 0.001; 11 vs. 6, P = 0.043; and 0.96 vs. 0.52, P = 0.010, respectively), as well as lower Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS) scores (median score: 2 vs. 4, P = 0.032) and reduced cognitive function, as demonstrated by lower scores on the MMSE, Raven’s Coloured Progressive Matrices (RCPM), Frontal Assessment Battery (FAB), and Logical Memory subtests I and II of the Wechsler Memory Scale-Revised (LM-WMSR) (median scores: 25 vs. 29, P < 0.001; 28 vs. 32, P = 0.003; 11 vs. 14, P < 0.001; 8 vs. 16, P = 0.001; and 3 vs. 10, P = 0.001, respectively) and higher scores on the Clinical Dementia Rating Scale-Sum of Boxes (CDR-SB) and Alzheimer’s Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive Subscale (ADAS-cog) (median scores: 2 vs. 0, P < 0.001; and 8 vs. 5.7, P = 0.003, respectively). Patients with MCI had more enterotype I microbes and fewer enterotype III microbes than patients with NC (55.7% vs. 19.1%; and 37.7% vs. 76.2%, respectively, P = 0.009), suggesting a higher prevalence of Bacteroides and a lower prevalence of ‘other’ bacteria (Tables 1–3).

As described, we stratified the enrolled patients according to the enterotypes of their microbes and performed the following comparisons: enterotype I vs. non-enterotype I and and enterotype III vs. non-enterotype III (Tables S1 and S2, respectively). When compared with non-enterotype I patients, patients with increased levels of enterotype I microbes were more likely to exhibit a higher prevalence of cerebral SVD components (enterotype I vs. non-enterotype I: silent lacunar infarcts [SLI], 5.3% vs. 2.3%, P = 0.594; WMH, 39.5% vs. 15.9%, P = 0.024; cerebral microbleeds [CMB], 23.7% vs. 11.4%, P = 0.155; and cortical superficial siderosis [CSS], 7.9% vs. 2.3%, P = 0.332), higher VSRAD scores (median score, 0.96 vs. 0.80, P = 0.112), lower global cognitive function (median score, MMSE, 25 vs. 27, P = 0.046; CDR-SB, 2 vs. 0.5, P = 0.002), and impaired memory function (LM-WMSR I, 8 vs. 11, P = 0.134; and LM-WMSR II, 2 vs. 5, P = 0.041). No significant differences were observed for demographics or risk factors (e.g., mean age, 77 vs. 75, P = 0.145) between enterotype I patients and non-enterotype I patients (Table S1). In contrast, compared with non-enterotype III patients, patients with more enterotype III microbes had a lower prevalence of cerebral SVD components (enterotype III vs. non-enterotype III, SLI, 2.6% vs. 4.7%, P = 1.000; WMH, 15.4% vs. 37.2%, P = 0.045; CMB, 10.3% vs. 23.3%, P = 0.148; and CSS, 2.6% vs. 7.0%, P = 0.617) but were more likely to have low VSRAD scores (median score, 0.69 vs. 1.00, P = 0.048) and increased global cognitive function (median score, MMSE, 27 vs. 25, P = 0.071; and CDR-SB, 0.5 vs. 2, P = 0.007) (Table S2). Although there appeared to be significant differences regarding the prevalence of hypertension and alcohol consumption between enterotype III and non-enterotype III patients, no significant differences were observed for the Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes (F/B) ratio (Tables S3 and S4). No significant differences were observed for enterotypes between males and females (Table S5).

Multivariable logistic regression analyses were performed to identify factors that are independently associated with MCI. Due to the small number of patients, these analyses were performed in step-by-step increments of the number of independent variables: model 1 (adjusted for age, sex, education year, apolipoprotein E [ApoE] ε4 carrier, enterotype, and F/B ratio), model 2 (stepwise adjusted for model 1 and prevalence of risk factors), and model 3 (stepwise adjusted for model 2, magnetic resonance imaging [MRI] findings, and single photon emission computed tomography [SPECT] findings). Multivariable logistic regression analyses revealed that increased levels of enterotype I microbes was associated with the presence of MCI, independent of age, sex, education years, ApoE ε4, traditional risk factors, and brain imaging (model 1: odds ratio [OR 10.2], 95% confidence interval [95% CI], 2.23–62.7, P = 0.002; model 2: OR 5.95, 95% CI, 1.61–28.2, P = 0.006; and model 3: OR 5.36, 95% CI, 1.30–28.7, P = 0.019; Table 4). Conversely, enterotype III was independently associated with the presence of MCI (model 1: OR 0.09, 95% CI, 0.02–0.42, P = 0.002; model 2: OR 0.19, 95% CI, 0.05–0.65, P = 0.008; and model 3: OR 0.19, 95% CI, 0.05–0.65, P = 0.008) (Table 5).

Graphical modelling was performed to visualize the mutual associations among factors used in the multivariable logistic regression analyses. Accordingly, modelling showed that the presence of MCI was more likely to be associated with age and was equally associated with ApoE ε4 and enterotype I. Enterotype I was closely associated with the presence of MCI when compared with the other factors. Furthermore, a close association between CMB and WMH was shown by this modelling (Fig. 1).

The primary finding of our present study was that the increased prevalence of Bacteroides, defined as enterotype I, was independently associated with the presence of MCI in patients without dementia. Specifically, patients with an increased prevalence of Bacteroides were more likely to have lower global cognitive function (indicated by MMSE and CDR scores) and impaired memory dysfunction (indicated by logical memory subtests) compared with non-enterotype I patients, although there were no significant differences in demographics and risk factors, such as age, sex, and hypertension.

Although this sub-analysis study contains a small number of patients and our analysis is preliminary, our findings provide supporting evidence for a relationship between the gut microbiome and cognitive impairment. Longitudinal assessments of the gut microbiome using next-generation sequencing technology, assessments of the various metabolites produced by the gut microbiome, and assessments of diet patterns should be investigated in future studies to clarify the underlying mechanism that connects the gut microbiome with cognitive function.

We showed that components of the gut microbiome, in particular Bacteroides, may be associated with the presence of MCI in patients without dementia. We speculate that some gut microbiome metabolites could affect cognitive functions through a microbiome–gut–brain axis. Further studies are warranted to examine such relationships.

This study was a sub-analysis of our previously published, single-centre observational study (Gimlet study)5. The aim of this study was to investigate the association between the gut microbiome and MCI in patients without dementia. This study complied with the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the Institutional Review Board at the National Center for Geriatrics and Gerontology (No. 1191). Informed consent was obtained from all patients and their families before participation in this study. The Gimlet study is registered with the UMIN Clinical Trials Registry (UMIN000031851). Detailed information has been provided in the supplementary file and in the previous report5.

Patients were eligible for the Gimlet study if they met the following criteria: (1) were able to undergo a brain MRI; (2) provided informed consent in writing; (3) provided informed consent for the NCGG Biobank to store their clinical data, blood, and faecal samples; and (4) were accompanied by a study partner who could assess the patient’s condition. Patients were excluded if they met the following criteria: (1) were unable to undergo an MRI examination or the MRI scan could not be evaluated because of movement; (2) had local lesions, such as cerebral infarctions, that were detected by MRI before enrolment and that could significantly affect cognitive function; (3) had a history of a major psychological disorders or current, serious or unstable alcohol or drug abuse; (4) had ≤6 years of education; (5) had a history of cancer of the digestive tract; or (6) were judged by an investigator to be ineligible to participate as a study subject (e.g., recent use of antibiotics, brain tumour, encephalitis/meningitis, normal pressure hydrocephalus, Huntington’s disease). Patients were also excluded from this sub-analysis if they met the following criteria: (1) had dementia; or (2) were unable to provide sufficient faecal samples to facilitate the analysis of metabolites both now and in the future.

All participants underwent a comprehensive geriatric assessment23 using the following: (1) demographic characteristics; (2) risk factors, such as hypertension, dyslipidaemia, diabetes mellitus, ischaemic heart disease, chronic kidney disease, smoking habits, or a history of stroke and alcohol consumption; (3) basic and instrumental ADL scales, assessed using the Barthel Index24 and Lawton and Brody scale25; (4) global cognitive function, assessed using the MMSE26 and CDR27; (5) neuropsychological testing, using the ADAS-cog28, RCPM29, FAB30, and LM-WMSR31; (6) laboratory variables, including ApoE ε4 as a risk factor for AD; (7) ankle brachial index and pulse wave velocity, as indicators of arteriosclerosis32 and the ‘impact’ of pulse33; (8) brain imaging, such as MRI and SPECT; (9) an assessment of other factors, such as the presence of frailty34 and subjective hearing loss; and (10) an assessment of social and lifestyle factors, e.g., using the Mini-Nutritional Assessment-Short Form (MNA-SF) to assess nutritional status35. Clinical samples and data were provided by the NCGG Biobank, which collects clinical data for research.

In the Gimlet study5, patients were divided into two categories, using measures that reliably indicate the presence of dementia: (1) a group without dementia (MMSE ≥ 20 and CDR < 1), and (2) a group with dementia (MMSE < 20 and/or CDR ≥ 1). In the present sub-study, the patients without dementia were further divided into two categories: MCI and NC. MCI was defined as MMSE ≥ 20 and CDR = 0.5, indicating possible, very mild dementia and suggesting that the patient has a higher risk of developing dementia36. NC was defined as MMSE ≥ 20 and CDR = 0.

Patients underwent a 1.5 T MRI of the brain (Philips Ingenia, Eindhoven, the Netherlands). MRI scans were obtained, including diffusion-weighted imaging, fluid-attenuated inversion recovery imaging, T2-weighted imaging, T2*-weighted gradient echo imaging, 3D T1-weighted sagittal and axial coronal views, and 3D time-of-flight MR angiography scans. The presence and components of cerebral SVD were categorised using standards for reporting neuroimaging vascular changes37, including SLI, WMH, CMB, and CSS. Moreover, VSRAD advance software (Eisai Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) was used to quantify cortical and hippocampal atrophy, using standardised z-scores. Increased VSRAD scores suggest the potential presence of AD, as this score reflects hippocampal atrophy, one of the characteristics of the AD brain38. Patients also underwent N-isopropyl-p-[123I]-iodoamphetamine-SPECT. The presence or absence of reduced blood flow in the area of the posterior cingulate gyrus and/or the precuneus was assessed as a surrogate marker of AD39.

Faecal samples were collected at home, just after evacuation, by patients or their family members, using scoop collection tubes, while patients were consuming their usual diets, and samples were frozen and preserved at −81 °C at the NCGG Biobank. After all samples were collected, the gut microbiome was analysed by the TechnoSuruga Laboratory (Shizuoka, Japan), using T-RFLP analysis40. T-RFLP analysis is one of the most well-established and reliable 16S ribosomal RNA-based methods, especially when considering its high throughput and reproducibility. First, T-RFLP was used to classify gut microbes into the following 10 groups: Prevotella, Bacteroides, Lactobacillales, Bifidobacterium, Clostridium cluster IV, Clostridium subcluster XIVa, Clostridium cluster IX, Clostridium cluster XI, Clostridium cluster XVIII, and ‘others’. Second, by referencing the Human Faecal Microbiome T-RFLP profile41,42, the gut microbiome was stratified into three enterotypes: enterotype I included Bacteroides at >30%, enterotype II included Prevotella at >15%, and enterotype III included the remaining bacteria. Third, the F/B ratio was examined, as an increase in the F/B ratio is indicative of dysbiosis43. The phylum Firmicutes included the Lactobacillales and Clostridium clusters, and the phylum Bacteroidetes included Bacteroides and Prevotella.

Continuous, ordinal, and categorical variables are expressed as the mean ± standard deviation, median and interquartile range, and frequency or proportion (percentage), respectively, and were compared using an unpaired Student’s t-test, a Wilcoxon rank-sum test, and a χ2 test, respectively. First, patients were divided into two groups, according to the presence or absence of MCI, and their clinical characteristics and the compositions of their gut microbiomes were compared using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test and χ2 test, respectively. Second, patients were also divided into two groups, either enterotype I and non-enterotype I, or enterotype III or non-enterotype III, to compare their clinical characteristics based on Gimlet baseline data. This division indicated that there were a small number of patients with enterotype II. Third, multivariable logistic regression models were performed to identify factors that were independently associated with MCI. Backward stepwise multivariable logistic regression analyses were performed by adjusting for patient demographics, ApoE ε4, gut microbiome (enterotype and the F/B ratio), risk factors, brain MRI findings, and blood flow reductions on SPECT images. Last, graphical modelling was generated to illustrate mutual associations among the factors used in the multivariable logistic regression analyses, including traditional risk factors and gut microbiome, to visualize and compare mutual relationships. Appropriately, ORs are presented as 95% CIs. All comparisons were two-tailed, and P < 0.05 was considered to represent statistical significance. Data were analysed using the JMP 11.0 software package (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA), and graphical modelling was generated using R (R Language and Environment for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria).



Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

is available for this paper at 10.1038/s41598-019-55851-y.

