Efficacy of Probiotics-Based Interventions as Therapy for Inflammatory Bowel Disease: A Recent Update



Probiotics such as Lactobacillus spp. play an important role in human health as they embark beneficial effect on the human gastrointestinal microflora composition and immune system. Dysbiosis in the gastrointestinal microbial composition has been identified as a major contributor to chronic inflammatory conditions, such as inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Higher prevalence of IBD is often recorded in most of the developed Western countries, but recent data has shown an increase in previously regarded as lower risk regions, such as Japan, Malaysia, Singapore, and India. Although the IBD etiology remains a subject of speculation, the disease is likely to have developed because of interaction between extrinsic environmental elements; the host’s immune system, and the gut microbial composition. Compared to conventional treatments, probiotics and probiotic-based interventions including the introduction of specific prebiotics, symbiotic and postbiotic products had been demonstrated as more promising therapeutic measures. The present review discusses the association between gut dysbiosis, the pathogenesis of IBD, and risk factors leading to gut dysbiosis. In addition, it discusses recent studies focused on the alteration of the gastrointestinal microbiome as an effective therapy for IBD. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and other viral infections on IBD are also discussed in this review. Clinical and animal-based studies have shown that probiotic-based therapies can restore the gastrointestinal microbiota balance and reduce gut inflammations. Therefore, this review also assesses the status quo of these microbial-based therapies for the treatment of IBD. A better understanding of the mechanisms of their actions on modulating altered gut microbiota is required to enhance the effectiveness of the IBD therapeutics.

IBD, globally known as inflammatory bowel disease are referred to the chronic inflammatory conditions of the human gastrointestinal tract (GI). The inflammation affects the function of the gastrointestinal tract including food digestion, absorption of nutrients, and excretion of undigested materials (Darb Emamie et al., 2021, Desai et al., 2016, Spiller and Major, 2016). IBD causes symptoms such as abdominal pain, diarrhea, rectal bleeding, fatigue, and weight loss. In addition, it has been linked to other inevitable convolutions such as abscesses, fistulas, stenoses, colitis-associated neoplasias, and colorectal cancers (Asha and Khalil, 2020, Spiller and Major, 2016). Confusion with symptoms between IBD and Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) exists in some cases. Both are gastrointestinal disorders were 0.3 to 0.5% and 7 to 21% of the world populations affected by IBD and IBS, respectively (Ananthakrishnan, 2015, Kaplan, 2015, Spiller and Major, 2016). Both diseases impose a large burden on patients, affecting the quality of living, also increasing the financial burden, directly on health care cost and indirectly in the overall economic growth of a nation (Alatab et al., 2020, Ananthakrishnan, 2015). Despite sounding similar, IBS has its distinguishable features compared to IBD. Both are chronic conditions that lead to similar manifestations including severe abdominal pain and cramping that cause an urgent bowel movement. However, the gastrointestinal disorder of IBS affects the lower region of the gastrointestinal tract, particularly in the small and large bowel (Casen et al., 2015; Darb Emamie et al., 2021). Patients with IBS often experience chronic diarrhea, constipation, and bloating symptoms. Meanwhile, IBD is characterized by gut inflammation. Severe inflammation results in worse symptoms including bloody stools, loss of appetite, massive weight loss, and could lead eventually to colonic cancer (Casen et al., 2015). Apart from environmental factors, recent data reported that the host’s genetic factors play an important role during the progressive development of IBD, either through microbial dysbiosis or influence over the host’s immune system (Casén et al., 2015, Darb Emamie et al., 2021, Spiller and Major, 2016).

There is no known complete cure for IBD (Hazel and O’Connor, 2020). Current therapies practiced are based on pharmacological approaches to reduce inflammation, disease relapse and promote clinical remission (Casén et al., 2015, Zimmermann and Curtis, 2019). The traditional medicines used for IBD treatment are amino salicylates, corticosteroids, thiopurines, and folic acid antagonists (Hazel and O’Connor, 2020). Selection criteria for alternative effective therapy must be concerned with the frequency of disease relapse, disease severity, and the disease complication level (Asha and Khalil, 2020, Mahlich et al., 2017). However, the efficiency of current treatments is temporary and relieves symptomatic complications due to a remarkably high dosage (Asha and Khalil, 2020, Darb Emamie et al., 2021). Additionally, the lesion site and clinical history of the patient also influence the therapeutic management. Although UC and CD share common clinical diagnostics, the site and characteristics of inflammations distinguish them (Spiller and Major, 2016). This clinical difference, together with differences in the host’s genetic and environmental make-up, as well as the immune state, affects the patient’s response towards therapy. This explains the need for more clinical studies and medical interventions to achieve the most effective and promising therapy for UC or CD (Ananthakrishnan, 2015, Spiller and Major, 2016). The most extensively investigated hypothesis for the development of IBD includes an altered immune system and a disrupted host’s gut microbiome (Franzosa et al., 2019, Li et al., 2015, Zuo et al., 2018). The human body together with its gastrointestinal microbial community is regarded as a “superorganism”. The human gut microbiome has been estimated to be composed of one hundred times greater number of genes than the host’s genome (Bäckhed et al., 2015, Casén et al., 2015). Clarke et al. (2014) proposed the gut microbiota as an unrecognized “human metabolic organ” due to its multiple roles in digestion, modulation, and physical differentiation of human tissue. Therefore, it would be a possible cure for IBD if the dysbiotic gut microbiota could revert to its original state, without adverse side effects (Bäckhed et al., 2015, Li et al., 2015). Several studies have demonstrated alternative therapies using probiotics and specific dietary supplements such as prebiotics to modulate the gastrointestinal microbiome (Altun et al., 2019, Amoroso et al., 2020, Naseer et al., 2020). Additional studies confirmed the efficacy of utilizing the commensal microbiota to stimulate immune function and mucosal integrity (Chen et al., 2020, Kim et al., 2020). Recent well-designed randomized clinical trials had extended the promising impacts of probiotics, prebiotics, and synbiotic therapies for IBD treatments in patients (Franzosa et al., 2019, Goodrich et al., 2014). Therefore, here we present the most current research on the role of the human gastrointestinal microbiome and factors causing gut dysbiosis that leads to IBD, and studies that support the role of probiotics, prebiotic, and synbiotic therapies in combating IBD.

For many decades, IBD had been referred to as a Western disease and thought to be infrequent in the Eastern region (Ananthakrishnan, 2015, Chiba et al., 2019). Howbeit, growing neoteric data has suggested that the prevalence of both UC and CD of the Eastern countries continues to rise in parallel to rapid urbanization culture (Chiba et al., 2019, Mak et al., 2020). In 2013, a large-scale population study was performed comprising eight Asia-Pacific countries from Mainland of China, Macau, Hong Kong to ASEAN countries of Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore and Indonesia, and Sri Lanka (Ng et al., 2013). The epidemiology study also compared the incidence of IBD in Australia. Based on the study, the recorded Asian incidences were 1.37 per 100 k individuals, in comparison to 23.67 incidences per 100 k individuals in Australia. The mainland of China recorded the highest incidence 3.44 per 100,000in Asia (Ng et al., 2013, Ng et al., 2016). Although it is still lower compared to Western countries, the prevalence of IBD in the Asia region has doubled in the last decade (Mak et al., 2020). Despite the variations in the numbers, UC is more prevalent in Asian countries compared to CD (Ng et al., 2016). Yet, present-day data begins a contrasting trend where the prevalence of CD is revolting among the developed Asian countries including South Korea, Hong Kong, and Japan (Ong et al., 2018). Recent reports revealed that Asian IBD patients share many similarities with their Western counterparts. Kim et al. (Kim et al., 2015) had demonstrated that the prevalence of UC and CD had elevated to 5.0 and 3.6 per 100,000 individuals respectively from the year 2006 to 2012, based on a large population epidemiological study conducted in South Korea. This incidence has risen 10-fold from 1986 to 1990 (Kim et al., 2015). Meanwhile, the neighboring country Japan recorded a prevalence of UC at 140,000 compared to 40,000 of CD, based on records from the Ministry of Health Labor and Welfare, Japan. A Japanese study reported that the significant burden of IBD suffered by Japanese patients is four times higher risk of unemployment issues in the Japanese population (Mahlich et al., 2017).

As previously noted, the highest rates of IBD tend to be in high-income countries, namely Europe and North America (Ananthakrishnan, 2015). Additionally, most of the studies reported the highest incidence rates in West regions (Chiba et al., 2019, Desai et al., 2016). Based on recent meta-analysis prevalence rates for both sexes from 1990 to 2017, was 422 per 100,000 population. The study also reported the highest age-standardized mortality rate in the year 2017 in western Europe, which was 0.97 per 100 000 population. Further, the study reported a prevalence rate of 0.83 per 100,000 population by the higher-income regions of North America (Alatab et al., 2020, Mak et al., 2020). The higher incidence of IBD in high-income regions has been noted since the industrial revolution in the 1700 s, with the transformation from rural to urban living believed to be a major driver for the increased incidence of IBD. This societal transformation comprises increased pollution rates and dietary changes involving reduced plant-fiber consumption (Chiba et al., 2019, Desai et al., 2016). Over the decades, the Western world experienced stabilized incidence numbers but recorded a steadily rising prevalence (Alatab et al., 2020).

Clarke et al. (2014) proposed the human gut microbiome should be recognized as a human vital organ due to its role not only in the gut but in other systems as well. The number of cells is estimated to be far greater than the number of host cells, with a ratio of 10:1 and an approximate weight of 1 to 2 kg in an average adult (Chiba et al., 2019, Clarke et al., 2014). The estimates of human and bacterial cells found in a healthy human body had been revised recently where the microbe in the human body outnumbers the human own cells by about 10:1. The actual numbers of human microbiota were estimated to be 1013 to 1014 with around a 1:1 ratio of microbes to human cells. The study derived the new ratio based on the total microbial cells found in the colon of a healthy human. A healthy human gut is composed of a diverse and complex microbiome, and it varies in concentration by the site. In the colon, the population reaches 1011 to 1012 cells per gram of the luminal content (Bäckhed et al., 2015, Clarke et al., 2014, Goodrich et al., 2014, Selvamani et al., 2021). It was estimated that the gut microbiome harbor 100-fold more genes than humans. These genes mostly code for enzymatic proteins not found in the host to facilitate the metabolic process. They also regulate the physiology of the host, especially the immune system (Chang and Kao, 2019). Human gut microbiota develops from a low diversity at birth into an overly complex and matured community, after the introduction of solid foods. The microbiota achieves stability by 9 to 12 months of age (Bäckhed et al., 2015, Selvamani et al., 2021). The gut microbiota becomes resilient to perturbations including changes in the types of food and exposure to antibiotics (Lange et al., 2016, Zimmermann and Curtis, 2019). Overall, the predominant gastrointestinal microbial composition belongs to the phyla of Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, Actinobacteria, Fusobacteria, Proteobacteria, and Verrucomicrobiota (Bäckhed et al., 2015, Franzosa et al., 2019, Selvamani et al., 2021). The phyla of Firmicutes comprises the largest genera including Lactobacillus, Bacillus, Clostridium, Enterococcus, and Ruminococcus. Members of the Clostridium genera represent almost 95% of the gastrointestinal Firmicutes. Meanwhile, Bacteroidetes are predominantly composed of genera such as Bacteroides and Prevotella. In addition, the phyla of Actinobacteria are proportionally lower in abundance and mostly represented by the Bifidobacterium (Amoroso et al., 2020, Bäckhed et al., 2015, Casén et al., 2015, Chang and Kao, 2019, Clarke et al., 2014, Selvamani et al., 2021, Sokol et al., 2017).

The advent of genetic tools and the revolution of metagenomic studies over the last two decades revealed that abnormal alterations occurred in the human gastrointestinal microbiota framework and functions (Selvamani et al., 2021, Xie et al., 2016). The recent high-throughput DNA sequencing technology has not only helped in the understanding of the complex microbiome in the human body, but also for characterizing disease-associated microbiota changes, together with precisely specifying the altered microbial species (Casen et al., 2015). The traditional culture-based analysis suspected that IBD was solely caused by single pathogenic microorganisms, like Mycobacterium avium subspecies paratuberculosis (MAP); adherent-invasive Escherichia coli strains (AIEC), or Clostridium difficile (Li et al., 2015). However, advancing genomic studies in the present day has depicted a more precise and thorough understanding of the collective role of the gut microbiome. Among many genomic studies that have been reported, the integrative Human Microbiome Project (HMP) is one of the excellent resources that evaluates the core microbiome and its transitions from a healthy-balanced state to a dysbiotic state (Parada Venegas et al., 2019).

As mentioned earlier, the complex human gut microbiota varies taxonomically and functionally based on location in the gastrointestinal tract. Within the same individual microbial complexity undergoes variations due to several factors including age transition, gene expressions, food consumption, lifestyle, environmental factors, and medications such as an antibiotic (Bajinka et al., 2020, Lange et al., 2016). However, the multitude of factors that intervene with the gut microbiome also harmed human health. Gastrointestinal dysbiosis is an alteration and disturbance of the diversity of gut microbiota (Carding et al., 2015, Sokol et al., 2017). Numerous human gastrointestinal diseases including diabetes, IBD, and obesity were found to be associated with these abnormal prominent features of the gastrointestinal microbiome (Alhagamhmad et al., 2016, Sasaki and Klapproth, 2012). Accumulating evidence in an animal model and clinical studies had revealed that dysbiotic conditions of the gut microbial populations are linked to IBD or its associated symptoms. Numerous animal studies used germ-free mice (GF) to evaluate gastrointestinal dysbiosis associated with IBD. GF mice were inoculated with gastrointestinal microbiota collected from IBD patients. This induced expression of pro-inflammatory genes in GF mice models, compared to control study which is inoculated with healthy gastrointestinal microbiota. These studies also revealed that GF mice inoculated with IBD microbiota developed severe colitis (DeGruttola et al., 2016, Singh et al., 2016). The term “Dysbiosis” refers to a disproportion condition in the gut microbial populations and this disparity is often associated with indisposition of health state (Carding et al., 2015, Casén et al., 2015, Sokol et al., 2017). The microbial disparity could be a loss or introduction of microbial population in the healthy state composition. Therefore, gut dysbiosis could be from three causes: (1) reduction and insufficient population of commensal microflora; (2) loss of diversity in commensal microbiota; and (3) great competition between the commensal microbiome and pathogenic flora (Casén et al., 2015, Singh et al., 2016, Zuo et al., 2018).

A Study conducted by Pascal et al. (2017) also reported that loss of beneficial microbes was more abundant in CD patients, and such organisms are involved in butyrate production (Pascal et al., 2017). These bacterial metabolites are well-known for their role in reducing pro-inflammatory cytokines during anti-inflammatory (Goodrich et al., 2014). Meanwhile, the members of Firmicutes are the primary producers for butyrate and short-chain-fatty acids (SCFA) in the human gastrointestinal tract (Parada Venegas et al., 2019). Reduction in the SCFA increases inflammation and affects the colonic barrier functions (Chen et al., 2020, Desai et al., 2016). The impaired gut barrier leads to the invasion of pathogenic microorganisms that increases the IBD severity. Elevation of pathogenic microbes in the gastrointestinal environment such as the species of Enterobacteriaceae and Bacteroides fragilis was found to be a secondary inflammation state in the gastrointestinal tract of IBD (Carding et al., 2015, Li et al., 2015). High endotoxic LPS was found in the outer membrane of both pathogenic microorganisms. These endotoxic LPS were found to exhibit the suppressive impact of the regulation of T-lymphocytes or in the activation of the helper-T cells via the host’s TLR signaling pathway (Parada Venegas et al., 2019). The endotoxic expression from these opportunistic pathogens was evaluated with capabilities to induce inflammation in the gut and leads to a progression of colitis in animal models (Carding et al., 2015, Parada Venegas et al., 2019). In another related study, distinctive adhesive characteristics were reported in the E. coli samples isolated from CD and UC patients (Lee et al., 2019). In comparison to CD biopsy samples, the isolates of E. coli associated with UC were found to harbor more adhesive and virulent determinants. The UC-associated E. coli isolate was positive for pathogenicity factors such as OmpA, AfaE, and USP (Lee et al., 2019, Sasaki and Klapproth, 2012). The virulent E. coli isolates are originated from phylotype B2 and D, which can cause inflammatory effects. The in vitro studies using these E. coli isolates in macrophage cultures had demonstrated a reconcilable increase in the UC pathogenicity (Lee et al., 2019). Thus, these findings strongly indicate dysbiosis serves as a factor of gastrointestinal inflammation that contributes to IBD (Carding et al., 2015, Casén et al., 2015, DeGruttola et al., 2016). Takashi et al. (2016) characterized a decline in the abundance of butyrate-producing bacteria during dysbiosis of CD patients. The decline was observed in the genera of Faecalibacterium, Eubacterium, Bacteroides, and Ruminococcus in CD patients. However, the contrast found was that the genera of Actinomyces and Bifidobacterium increased their population in the gastrointestinal environment of CD patients (Takahashi et al., 2016). The study reported the occurrence of gut dysbiosis in CD patients with significant reduction of butyrate-producing bacterial species including Bacteroides uniforms, Blautia feces, Roseburia inulinivorans, Ruminococcus torques, Clostridium lavalense, and F. prausnitzii (Rivière et al., 2016, Takahashi et al., 2016).

As gut dysbiosis is anticipated as a key factor for the pathogenesis of IBD, the most vexing question is: What would be the origin of gastrointestinal dysbiosis? Bujinkan et al. (2020) had highlighted that various extrinsic factors lead to gut dysbiosis which is extensively studied but poorly linked the varying degree of consequences to respective factors (Bajinka et al., 2020). Notably, there are several studies that discussed the factors that cause human gastrointestinal dysbiosis, based on previously published works (DeGruttola et al., 2016, Pittayanon et al., 2020). Specifically, Bajinka et al. (2020) had reviewed extrinsic factors that are associated with dysbiosis including mode of delivery; effect of dietary (high fat; fiber; animal fat and amino acids; gluten; sucralose); different types of diet therapy (Mediterranean or Vegan diet); the effects of antibiotics and drugs; the effects of prebiotics; oxidative stress, and the impacts of socioeconomic status (Chiba et al., 2019, Racine et al., 2016). Fig. 1 summarizes the different lumen conditions between healthy gut and dysbiosis, together with factors that possibly lead to gut dysbiotic conditions.

Moreover, other extrinsic factors such as exercise, oxidative stress, quality of water, and socio-economic status of an individual also significantly alter the framework of gut microbiota (Bajinka et al., 2020). Notwithstanding, Chang and Kao (Chang and Kao, 2019) reviewed that the impact of host factors should not be neglected on gut dysbiosis. Despite the compelling evidence on the extrinsic factors, the study highlighted the importance of host genetic factors that are responsible for the modulation of gut microbial compositions (Goodrich et al., 2014, Xie et al., 2016). A comprehensive understanding of host genetics could open the window of opportunity for alternative and effective therapeutic strategies by manipulating the gastrointestinal microbiome (Xie et al., 2016). Goodrich et al. (2016) evaluated the association between hosts’ genes in the modulation of the gastrointestinal microbiome by performing a comparative study in fecal samples of 416 twin pairs (Goodrich et al., 2016). The study reported that the relative abundance of commensal microbiota in the gut was influenced by the host’s genetics. This group of researchers had expanded the investigation with 1126 twins and successfully reported the involvement of notable host genes associated with microbial diversity (Goodrich et al., 2016). The study demonstrated that the relative abundance of Bifidobacterium in the gastrointestinal environment is based on the association between the bacterial lactase gene with the host’s ALDH1L1 gene locus. This has explained the existence of a co-evolution link of a host’s blood pressure with formate production by the gut bacterium. The study also projected the association of other genes that were involved in the barrier defense, metabolism, and diet-sensing (Goodrich et al., 2014, Goodrich et al., 2016).

Despite the accumulating evidence, there are more profound utterances that misapprehended the concept of gut dysbiosis with IBD. One of the key questions that arise is: what time does the gastrointestinal microflora become dysbiotic – before or after IBD? Is gut dysbiosis is the actual cause of IBD or it is just a secondary symptom of IBD? As mentioned earlier, there are several extrinsic factors and host factors that cause gut dysbiosis. Among them, antibiotics are generally known to kill broad microbial components. Despite the benefits of antibiotics, their usage has been linked to short- and long-term health issues. Antibiotic administration was found to cause perturbations in the intestinal microbial compositions (Lange et al., 2016, Yoon and Yoon, 2018). The world’s first true antibiotic – penicillin was found to have less impact on the microbial composition (Zimmermann and Curtis, 2019) However, amoxicillin which is widely prescribed for skin, throat, and urinary tract infections were found to increase the abundance of Enterobacteriaceae, mainly Citrobacter spp., Enterobacter spp., and Klebsiella spp. Similar perturbations were also observed as side effects of macrolides, ketolides, clindamycin, tigecycline, Fosfomycin, cephalosporins, and clavulanate (Zimmermann and Curtis, 2019). Many antibiotics induced a decline in the relative abundance of butyrate-synthesizing microflora in the gut environment (Takahashi et al., 2016).

The modification of Koch’s postulates and the development of advanced methods to distinguish a healthy microbiome from dysbiosis conditions are required. This is as important as the existence of a substantial inter-individual variability and manipulation by the confounding factors (DeGruttola et al., 2016, Singh et al., 2016). In addition, most studies focused on the correlation between inflammation and the gastrointestinal microbiome. Indeed, the human gut microbiome is also comprised of fungi and viruses. Successful therapy in animal models failed to reduce or control fungal colonization. This has raised questions on the causative role of fungi in the healthy gut microbiome and inflammation. Antibiotic exposure in IBD treatment was found to promote the expansion of fungal taxa (Sokol et al., 2017). A recent study, involving adults experiencing IBD symptoms, showed a differential relative abundance of fungi compared to healthy individuals (Yeoh et al., 2021). Analogously, the perspicuous role of viruses in the IBD is still not well understood to date (Liang et al., 2020).

Historically, the term Probiotic was derived from Greek, meaning “for life”. In 1954, Ferdinand Vergin who studied the destructive side-effects of antibiotics and other anti-microbial agents on the gastrointestinal microbial populations first introduced the term ‘Probiotics’ (Brüssow, 2020, Naseer et al., 2020). However, the term was subsequently changed over the purpose and benefits. The WHO and FDA had defined Probiotics as live microorganisms that can be administered in an adequate amount to confer health benefits (Asha and Khalil, 2020). Since 2013, this definition was maintained by the International Scientific Association for Probiotics and Prebiotics (ISAPP) (Darb Emamie et al., 2021, Palumbo et al., 2016). The commonly used probiotics comprise the genera of Lactobacillus, Bifidobacteria, and Saccharomyces yeasts (Selvamani et al., 2021). The efficacy of probiotics mostly depends on the microbiological and physiological properties of the selected strains (Darb Emamie et al., 2021). Briefly, the probiotics must be able to withstand human consumption, transit through differential conditions of the gastrointestinal tract, and they should produce a significant physiological impact on the host’s microbial ecosystem and immune system (Asha and Khalil, 2020). Many studies have reported the mechanism of action of probiotics and mostly they are species or strain specific. Appropriate selection of the probiotic strain is paramount for the promising success of the therapy (Altun et al., 2019). Therefore, to evaluate the effectiveness of each probiotic action, the mechanism underlying the probiotic action must be well understood. Recent studies have demonstrated the potential mechanisms of action underlying the therapeutic action of probiotics in patients with IBD (Altun et al., 2019, Fedorak et al., 2015, Matsuoka et al., 2018). Among the potential mechanisms that could be linked to probiotic action (Fig. 2) is the alteration of the gastrointestinal microbiome, modulation of intestinal barrier function, and modulation of the host’s immune response.

Probiotics are also well-known for modulating the host’s immune responses and several studies reported this effect in probiotic therapy for IBD (Darb Emamie et al., 2021, Singh et al., 2016). Probiotic treatment was proven to downregulate the expression of proinflammatory cytokines like tumor necrosis factor-α (TNFα), interleukin-6 (IL-6), and interferon-gamma, inducible nitric oxide synthase, and matrix metalloproteinase activity in inflamed mucosa of active IBD or experimental ulcerative colitis (Ananthakrishnan, 2015, Chen et al., 2020). The host’s immune cells secrete excessive amounts of inflammatory substances, including cytokines and active oxides during adverse IBD conditions. The pathogenic infections also caused the secretion of IL8 and TNFα from intestinal epithelial cells (D’Incà et al., 2011). Recent works have evaluated the impact of probiotic therapy on immunomodulation in IBD patients. Xia et al. (2020) demonstrated that probiotic therapy over the DSS-induced colitis model has proven to suppress the NF-κB signaling pathway (Xia et al., 2020). Supporting this, another animal model and the in-vitro study reported that probiotic therapy using Bifidobacterium lactis decreased the NF-κB signaling during the pro-inflammatory expression (Tamaki et al., 2016). A study by Fedorak et al. (Fedorak et al., 2015) had demonstrated that the VSL which is a commercial probiotic preparation composed of one strain of Streptococcus thermophilous, three Bifidobacteria strains and four different strains of Lactobacilli, had decreased the inflammatory cytokines, effectively in the intestinal mucosa. Similarly, in another study, a mix of 11 strains of Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium were tested, and they found 5 strains that had high potential for the management of IBD through immunomodulation in the host’s body (Chen et al., 2020).

The health benefits of prebiotics and dietary fibers being part of the human meal down have been well described before civilization. The great Greek physician - Hippocrates had described in 450 BCE, that coarse wheat attributes of laxation compared to refined variety (Asha and Khalil, 2020). Scientifically, the term ‘prebiotics’ is firstly defined as “a non-digestible food ingredient that beneficially affects the host by selectively stimulating the growth and/or activity of one or a limited number of bacteria in the colon, and thus improves host health” (Darb Emamie et al., 2021). Later in the year 2004, ’prebiotics’ was further defined with additional criteria such as 1) being impervious to adverse gastric conditions and mammalian enzymatic degradation as well as intestinal absorption; 2) being able to be fermented by the gastrointestinal microflora, and 3) selective enrichment of growth or activity of gastrointestinal microflora to enhance health benefits (Asha and Khalil, 2020, Darb Emamie et al., 2021). Now, the International Scientific Association of Probiotics and Prebiotics (ISAPP) has redefined the term of prebiotics as “a substrate which selectively fermented by the gut microflora and bestowed health benefits to the host”. This new definition allows non-carbohydrate substances also recognized as prebiotics and application prebiotics are not only restricted to the gastrointestinal tract (Naseer et al., 2020). The example of prebiotics is numerous. The majority of the prebiotics belong to carbohydrates under oligosaccharide subsets. Fibers and carbohydrate-based prebiotics are distinguished by two measures. Firstly, the degree of polymerization (DP) where fibers have DP of 3 or higher. Secondly, fibers are indigestible by endogenous enzymes compared to prebiotic oligosaccharides (Ananthakrishnan et al., 2013). The most common prebiotics known for their beneficial impacts would be fructooligosaccharides (FOS), galactooligosaccharides (GOS), starch-derived oligosaccharides, and other oligosaccharides such as pectin, galacturonic acid, and arabinose (Naseer et al., 2020). Vegetables and fruits are the natural sources of prebiotics such as asparagus, sugar beet, garlic, chicory, onion, Jerusalem artichoke, wheat, honey, banana, barley, tomato, rye, soybean, human and cow milk, peas, beans, and recently the seaweeds and microalgae also were reported (Desai et al., 2016) However, natural sources/foods often contained in low concentrations of prebiotics. Thus, prebiotics is also manufactured on large industrial capacity from raw materials such as lactose, sucrose, or starch (Kanwal et al., 2020, Li et al., 2020a, Li et al., 2020b).

Prebiotic fermentations by specific microflora of the gut produce SCFAs, lactic, acetic, propionic, and butyrate acids. These SCFAs are produced through several systemic and colon-specific pathways (Berni Canani et al., 2017). Acetate is widely used up as cell fuel to generate for muscles and colon. Propionic acid is utilized during the synthesis of cholesterol molecules. Butyrate receives particular attention exerts various benefits to the host, such as improving metabolism, promoting anti-inflammatory actions, and modulating the host’s immune system (Takahashi et al., 2016). Therefore, prebiotic consumption was proven to enhance the host’s immune function, strengthen colonic integrity, decrease infection rate, down-regulate allergic responses, and improve the digestion process. However, these effects are not directly imposed upon prebiotic ingestion. A recent review suggested that the benefits of prebiotics are attained indirectly, as the prebiotic fermentations alter the gastrointestinal microbiota compositions (Darb Emamie et al., 2021, Naseer et al., 2020). Numerous animal model studies have shown that prebiotics had improved over the mucosal barriers by enhancing the growth of probiotics that are capable of upregulating epithelial defense mechanisms (Asha and Khalil, 2020, Naseer et al., 2020).

Large numbers of clinical studies were previously conducted regarding antibiotic therapy for IBD (Lange et al., 2016, Zimmermann and Curtis, 2019). As the current understanding of the pathogenesis of IBD also involved intestinal microflora, antibiotics are extensively prescribed to reduce IBD-associated microbial concentration in the host’s gut. However, antibiotic treatment can be associated with negative outcomes as well (Lewis et al., 2015). In addition, antibiotic treatment does not always result in a uniform outcome. Studies have shown the adverse impact of antibiotics altering gut microbial populations. The perpetuated consumption of antibiotics with higher concentrations had impacted gastrointestinal microfloral activity (Yoon and Yoon, 2018). The growing evidence on the role of gastrointestinal microbiota in combating IBD could be utilized to manipulate the microenvironment and cure the inflammatory process (Casen et al., 2015). Rapid advancement in metagenomics and molecular studies does not only describes the pathogenesis of IBD but also helped to explore alternative remedies for IBD by alteration of the gastrointestinal microbiome (Xie et al., 2016). Probiotics, prebiotics, and their synbiotic approaches are being emerging strategies that target the gut microbiome, slow the progression of IBD, and restore intestinal health (Asha and Khalil, 2020). Although the beneficial impacts of probiotics, prebiotics, and synbiotics therapies have been established, the collective data is still insufficient to support the impact on restoration and recovery of the host’s gut microbiome. Therefore, further studies particularly in IBD are needed to evaluate and understand the potential therapies in the amelioration of gastrointestinal disorders.

As the enteric microflora become more aberrant in IBD patients, a significant decline of probiotics especially Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus spp. was observed in many studies (Matsuoka et al., 2018, van der Waal et al., 2019). Pathogenesis of IBD might be engendered by the rising of abnormal microflora in the gut. Oral administration of probiotics is widely practiced for various health improvements, including as therapies for gut-related disorders (Altun et al., 2019, Pilarczyk-Żurek et al., 2017, van der Waal et al., 2019). Studies conducted to evaluate the efficiency of probiotics in the IBD, that demonstrated in animal models are summarized in Table 1 and the clinical intervention are summarized in Table 2.

Several studies reported the usage of multi-strain probiotic preparations and commercial probiotic preparations (Altun et al., 2019, Chen et al., 2020, Mardini and Grigorian, 2014). Among them, VSL#3 is well known for its effectiveness and there are numerous supportive data for use in IBD (dos Santos Cruz et al., 2020, Fedorak et al., 2015, Mardini and Grigorian, 2014, Tursi et al., 2010). This commercial probiotic mixture comprises three genera of bacteria with a total of 8 different strains that exert different probiotic effects. The VSL#3 contains L. acidophilus, L. Plantarum, L. casei, L. delbrueckii subspecies bulgaricus, B. breve, B. longum, B. infantis, and S. salivarius (Fedorak et al., 2015, Mardini and Grigorian, 2014). This commercial probiotic preparation has been widely used for UC, and other IBD symptoms to restore the microflora, attenuate inflammation and reduce microbial translocation. The probiotic strains in VSL#3 participate in various health regulation mechanisms which have been appraised in-depth, by recently published review works (dos Santos Cruz et al., 2020, Mardini and Grigorian, 2014). Tursi et al. (2010) reported a significant cure of UC with long-term consumption of this commercial VSL#3 probiotic preparations, compared to placebo (Tursi et al., 2010). In addition, Mardini and Grigorian (2014) reported a meta-analysis that stated consumption of VSL#3 in combination with standard therapy is significantly more curative compared to standard therapy alone in UC associated patients (Mardini and Grigorian, 2014). However, one of the probiotic formulations was administrated to prevent the recurrence of CD after surgery. Fedorak et al. (2015) published the first assessment on the prevention of recurrence of endoscopic CD by using VSL#3. These findings showed long-term consumption of VSL#3 is highly linked to promising and effective outcomes to reduce IBD (Fedorak et al., 2015).

Prebiotic therapy was proven to alter and restore the gastrointestinal microbiome by flourishing the growth of commensal microbiota. These prebiotics were also found to enhance resistance towards disease-inducing microorganisms (Liu et al., 2016, Morse et al., 2010, Naseer et al., 2020; Sakena et al., 2020). Surprisingly, more studies were performed in animal models compared to human trials, in the reduction of IBD (Table 3 and Table 4). A low number of significant prebiotic-associated human clinical trials was also reported in other recent reviews and meta-analyses (Naseer et al., 2020). A limited number of studies is a major drawback and not sufficiently conclusive to support the utilization of prebiotics to treat IBD. Most of the prebiotics used for the animal study were polysaccharides extracted from vegetables such as kale (de Albuquerque et al., 2010; yam (Li et al., 2020a, Li et al., 2020b), from fruits such as grapes (Li et al., 2020a, Li et al., 2020b), from mushrooms such as Ganoderma lucidum (Xie et al., 2019), and herbs (Gou et al., 2019). In contrast, most of the human clinical trials reported usage of fructo-oligosaccharides for prebiotic therapy of IBD (Benjamin et al., 2011, De Preter et al., 2007, Kim et al., 2020, Morse et al., 2010). Available data had demonstrated that FOS-enriched inulin supplementation for patients with CD, had shown elevated levels of acetaldehyde and butyrate productions (De Preter et al., 2007, Morse et al., 2010). The fructooligosaccharides (FOS) are the short-sugar polymers that contain fructose residues (Naseer et al., 2020). Most of the gut microflora is characterized by an ability to break down the FOS compounds. Therefore, FOS are mainly required to increase the population of endogenous microflora, especially Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium (Azpiroz et al., 2017). Fermentation of FOS in the gastrointestinal environment enhanced SCFA productions, as well as organic acids and butyrate which are required to enhance immunomodulation in the gut (Takahashi et al., 2016, Zha et al., 2020). These could be the reason behind the extensive applications of FOS as prebiotic therapy for IBD. Prebiotics generally have no life-threatening or severe side effects. The human genome does not encode the digestive enzymes for prebiotics. Naturally, the human gastrointestinal environment is rich with prebiotic fermenting microflora. Only the prebiotic chain length could be an influential parameter to develop any side effects or failure in fermentation (Naseer et al., 2020). FOS supplemented to IBD patients in a range of 2.5 to 15 g per day, either one- or two-time consumption (Benjamin et al., 2011, Morse et al., 2010). Azpiroz et al. (2017) reported that increasing doses of FOS supplementation was associated with an increase in fecal Bifidobacterium (Azpiroz et al., 2017). Additionally, in vitro and animal studies also revealed the effect of FOS on the enrichment of other bacterial abundance such as the major butyrate-producing species in the human gut (Rivera-Chávez et al., 2016, Rivière et al., 2016).

Recently, mushrooms and their polysaccharides are being recognized as a promising source of prebiotic fibers. The mushroom polysaccharides are widely used as prebiotic fibers with various beneficial impacts on the human gut microbiota (Liu et al., 2020a, Liu et al., 2020b, Xie et al., 2019). β-glucans are the most notable mushroom polysaccharide which regarded as medicinal prebiotics. However, mushrooms contain different types of polysaccharides which have similar prebiotic potentials as β-glucans and these include α-glucans, chitin, mannans, xylans, and Galatians (Liu et al., 2020a, Liu et al., 2020b). Xie et al. (2019) reported that the Ganoderma lucidum polysaccharide (GLP) prebiotics bring down the disease activity index significantly and increase SCFA production with an enrichment of SCFA producing bacteria, including Ruminococcus. The study also reported a reduction of pathogenic microflora such as Escherichia and Shigella spp. in the rat model (Xie et al., 2019).

Synbiotics refer to preparations composed of both prebiotics and probiotics (Darb Emamie et al., 2021, Rogha et al., 2014). However, DeGrutelle et al. (2016) had the term ‘symbiotic’ to refer to such preparations. Symbiotics usually referred to a type of relationship that exists between two living organisms or groups of organisms in a niche that could be harmful or beneficial to each other. However, Darb Emamie et al. (2021) re-defined such preparations with the term ‘synbiotics’- referring to the synergistic conditions where the probiotics metabolize the supplemented prebiotics to stimulate specific refabrications of dysbiotic gut and hosts health. The synergistically acting probiotics and prebiotics stimulate the growth of selective microorganisms or activate specific metabolism by gut microflora (Darb Emamie et al., 2021, DeGruttola et al., 2016). Table 5 summarizes the administration of synbiotics in the animal model studies and Table 6 summarizes clinical intervention for IBD treatment in patients by using selected synbiotics. These studies revealed a significant improvement over inflammations through modulation of the immune system. A clinical trial with a random placebo control study evaluated the efficacy of synbiotic therapy for UC patients (Altun et al., 2019). The patients consumed synbiotic preparations that consists of six probiotic strains and prebiotic FOS. The findings revealed a significant reduction of inflammations and showed an amelioration of the disease status (Altun et al., 2019, Liang et al., 2021). The study by Liang et al. (2021) demonstrated the efficiency of synbiotic preparations in reducing IBD-linked diarrhea symptoms, through a double-blind random placebo clinical trial. The synbiotic preparation was composed of prebiotic FOS with B. lactis DSMZ 32269; B. bifidum DSMZ 32403; B. longum DSMZ 32946; L. acidophilus DSMZ 32418, and L. rhamnosus FloraActiveTM 19070–2. The feelings of incomplete bowel movements, pain at the rectal, flatulence, and diarrhea were significantly ameliorated in the patients compared to placebos (Liang et al., 2021).

FMT is an emerging milestone in microbial therapy for patients with metabolic disorders associated with gut dysbiosis. FMT is a technique of transferring healthy fecal microbial preparation to patients with metabolic disorders (Shinde et al., 2019). The technical approaches of FMT include oral capsules; enemas, nasogastric or nasojejunal tubes which are used to restore the healthy gastrointestinal microbiome (Colman et al., 2014; Nicco et al., 2020). The oldest intervention of FMT will be dated back to the 4th century when ‘yellow soup’ - prepared from human stool was consumed to treat severe diarrhea (Zhang et al., 2012). There were historical descriptions of fresh and fermented fecal preparations prescribed for patients experiencing constipation, abdominal pain, diarrhea, dating back until the 6th century of the Ming Dynasty (Wang et al., 2018). Then, FMT was widely used in veterinary fields since the 17th century, to cure gastrointestinal diseases among equines and ruminants (Shinde et al., 2019). In the recent years before 2013, the application of FMT was generally limited to patients with CDI incidence (Zhang et al., 2012). At present, several studies demonstrate successful and efficient therapy using FMT (Colman et al., 2014; Nicco et al., 2020).

FMT was found to significantly alter the microflora compositions in the UC patients compared to control patients (not administered with FMT) and to healthy donors. Tian et al. (2019) evaluated the Bacteroidetes proportions in patients with UC, which showed a gradual upward trend after treatment. Several genera such as Bacteroides, Proteus, and Prevotella were significantly enriched compared to the original healthy donors. Meanwhile, the population of pathogenic Klebsiella genus and Streptococcus genus before treatment were found to decrease significantly after FMT (Tian et al., 2019). Reduction in the abundance of Prevotella with enriching the proportion of Klebsiella and Streptococcus were important factors to the onset of UC (Pilarczyk-Żurek et al., 2017). Another study also evaluated the remission of active UC linked to several microflorae such as Clostridium cluster IV and XVIII; Barnesiella spp.; Blautia spp.; Parabacteroides spp.; Dorea spp., and Ruminococcus spp. The study, which used colonoscopy infusion reported that microflora such as Fusobacterium spp. and Sutterella spp. were linked to no remissions (Sood et al., 2019). Unfortunately, some studies reported conflicting results where FMT therapy failed to ameliorate disorder and restore gut dysbiosis (Khoruts et al., 2016; Sood et al., 2019). The disease was found to flare following the FMT, compared to placebo. Rossen et al. (2015) reported no significant differences among UC patients for both clinical and endoscopic remissions. Khoruts et al. (2016) reported that more than a quarter of analyzed IBD patients had disease flare following the FMT. In this context, several studies found that the effectiveness of FMT to treat IBD is not predictable (Borody et al., 2013; Cammarota et al., 2014). Therefore, it is still unknown whether FMT fits the treatment paradigm. In addition, all reported systematic and meta-analyses have highlighted a low number of thorough investigations of FMT (Borody et al., 2013; Sood et al., 2019). Despite reported significant and positive taxonomic alteration in the gut of patients diagnosed with FMT, the observations are still inconsistent and their function, as well as the metabolic consequences, are not well documented (Sood et al., 2019). FMT could be a promising therapy for UC but CD and other IBDs including chronic constipation, pouchitis, and irritable bowel syndrome, the data collected were too limited to predict better conclusions (Borody et al., 2013; Paramsothy et al., 2017).

The term ‘biotic’ originates from a Greek word -‘biōtikós’, – which is defined as ‘about life’ referring to a biological system composed of living organisms with an interaction with the external environment. This term is currently being used in the ‘biotics’ family terms after pro-, pre-and syn-biotics (Aguilar-Toalá et al., 2018, Żółkiewicz et al., 2020). The types and functional characteristics of bioactive compounds secreted during microbial fermentation are enclosed under this ‘postbiotic’ criteria (Aguilar-Toalá et al., 2018, Amoroso et al., 2020). Recently several investigators proposed different descriptions to define these new interventions under the ‘biotics’ family. According to Nataraj et al. (2020), ‘postbiotics’ refer to preparations made of metabolic products or non-viable products synthesized by commensal microorganisms. The study refers to microorganisms that originate from the host and are known to produce specific biological products in the host’s body (Nataraj et al., 2020). Although various definitions have been proposed and used widely, hitherto none of the international regulatory bodies or scientific or research associations have recognized a specific definition (Aguilar-Toalá et al., 2018, Żółkiewicz et al., 2020).

Rising concern on a healthy lifestyle has drawn more innovative applications in functional food productions. Several studies reported the effectiveness of probiotics, such as fermented milk products, in the reduction of numerous infectious diseases (Matijašić et al., 2016; Shadnoush et al., 2015). Probiotic L. paracasei fermented milk was reported to reduce infections in respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts of young children (Berni Canani et al., 2017). The bacterium was heat-killed, yet it has shown positive alteration in the human gut, similar to performed by living cells. Viable cells in fermented products will be inactivated at the time of consumption. However, the postbiotics mechanisms are still not described clearly, even so, a scientific hypothesis has been made as microbial fermented foods still can perform and may influence similar beneficial functions as the live cells (Aguilar-Toalá et al., 2018, Nataraj et al., 2020, Żółkiewicz et al., 2020). Fermented products may influence microflora compositions and host health (Amoroso et al., 2020). Notwithstanding that several studies have confirmed the potential of postbiotics, it is still poorly evaluated as a novel therapeutic approach in CD or UC. However, several animal models and cell-line-based studies were used to develop postbiotic therapy for IBD (Nataraj et al., 2020). According to Żółkiewicz et al. (Żółkiewicz et al., 2020), postbiotics could be an attractive and modern therapeutic strategy as this method does not contain living microbial cells. All the risks associated with the probiotic and synbiotic therapies would be minimized. The study also suggested that postbiotic therapy could maintain similar efficacy as previous alternative therapies with no serious side effects (Żółkiewicz et al., 2020). In addition, postbiotic therapies also allow researchers to study methods of concentrating or mixing different bioactive components to speed up the recovery process or alteration based on the patient’s requirements. This serves as an attractive strategy for managing IBD among different groups of patients such as age, gender, or even different regions.

Human gut microflora plays a crucial role in triggering, progressing, maintaining, and exacerbating IBD. Specific bacterial strains are overrepresented, and some important commensals are suppressed during IBD. A decrease in relative abundance and microbial diversity has been found to dysregulate the host’s immune responses. Several studies have evaluated the factors involved in the alterations of gut microbiota that lead to a dysbiotic state. Gut dysbiosis is highlighted as a key stakeholder associated with IBD. Regrettably, the investigations conducted so far are still unclear regarding the specific core microbiome that is established in a healthy state as well as during IBD pathogenesis. The probiotic, prebiotic, and synbiotic therapies could represent a valid armamentarium to retore the gut dysbiosis, modulate gut microbiota, and eventually might lead to a potential cure for IBD. The probiotic mechanisms of action on IBD are diverse and complex to understand to date. Briefly, probiotic-based therapies can reduce and repair intestinal permeability towards pathogenic microorganisms. The probiotic therapies also induce the intestinal immune system by promoting Th I cell differentiation, gut barrier function, and synthesis of essential proteins. However, several reported significant clinical outcomes are still at low numbers and insufficient to make an effective prediction of future treatments. Therefore, a well-defined and intensive multidisciplinary clinical study must be developed to understand the impact of probiotic, prebiotic, and synbiotic therapy on IBD. Recent publications had opened new opportunities to investigate other interventions such as microbial-derived products (postbiotics) as novel therapies for inflammatory diseases.

SS, VM, KP, TV, HA, ST, and IZ were involved in drafting the manuscript and data collections from different literature sources. HE and BA were involved in the review design, data collection, and interpretation, manuscript drafting. All authors reviewed and approved the final version of the review.

No funding was associated with this review.

No data was generated in this study.

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

Peer review under responsibility of King Saud University.

