Host phylogeny and life history stage shape the gut microbiome in dwarf (Kogia sima) and pygmy (Kogia breviceps) sperm whales

Gut microbiomes perform crucial roles in host health and development, but few studies have explored cetacean microbiomes especially deep divers. We characterized the gut microbiomes of stranded dwarf (Kogia sima) and pygmy (K. breviceps) sperm whales to examine the effects of phylogeny and life stage on microbiome composition and diversity. 16S rRNA gene sequence analysis revealed diverse gut communities (averaging 674 OTUs) dominated by a few symbiont taxa (25 OTUs accounted for 64% of total relative abundance). Both phylogeny and life stage shaped community composition and diversity, with species-specific microbiome differences present early in life. Further analysis showed evidence of microbiome convergence with host maturity, albeit through different processes: symbiont ‘accumulation’ in K. sima and ‘winnowing’ in K. breviceps, indicating different methods of community assembly during host development. Furthermore, culture-based analyses yielded 116 pure cultures matching 25 OTUs, including one isolate positive for chitin utilization. Our findings indicate that kogiid gut microbiomes are highly diverse and species-specific, undergo significant shifts with host development, and can be cultivated on specialized media under anaerobic conditions. These results enhance our understanding of the kogiid gut microbiome and may provide useful information for symbiont assessment in host health.

Host-associated microbes are established members of nearly every living organism1 and can be essential for health homeostasis2, 3. The intestinal microbiome, in particular, plays a critical role in mammalian health and development4. Intestinal symbionts are hypothesized to contribute to three fundamental properties that benefit the host and perhaps encourage host-specificity: (1) nutrient acquisition (i.e. digesting otherwise un-digestible material), (2) trophic processes (immune system development and epithelial cell regulation), and (3) protection against pathogens via competitive exclusion (i.e. colonization resistance)5, 6. It is speculated that core intestinal symbionts are gut-specific, possessing genes essential for survival in the gut environment7. Phylogeny strongly influences the composition and diversity of mammalian microbiomes, with an individual’s microbial profile remarkably similar to other individuals of the same species8, 9. Thus, regardless of age, sex or geographic location, a given host species contains a shared set of symbionts, or symbiont functions, termed a ‘core’ microbiome10–12. Within host species, individual variation in microbiome composition also occurs, including individuals harboring unique symbiont taxa11, that result from factors such as diet, environment, and host physiology, which collectively shape microbiomes as unique as a fingerprint.

In this study, we used stranded kogiids from the mid-Atlantic United States to apply both sequence and culture-based methods to characterize the kogiid gut microbiome. Our objectives were to characterize the gut microbiome in juvenile kogiids and compare the composition and diversity with those of adults using culture-independent (molecular) techniques. We also aimed to couple culture-based and sequence-based approaches in kogiid whales to link overall microbiome composition and symbiont function, a two-step process. First, dominant symbionts must be isolated in pure culture. Second, viable cultures must be experimentally tested for specific functional attributes. While the primary focus herein was the former step, we also conducted a chitin utilization assay as proof-of-concept for the latter. Chitin degradation is a potentially beneficial symbiont function in the kogiid gut, since chitin is a structural feature of kogiid prey (cephalopods with chitinous beaks and pens)18, is difficult for mammals to digest and represents a nutrient source for some microbes23. Work in humans has revealed advantages to pairing traditional culturing methods with sequence-based approaches to provide in-depth characterizations of gut microbiome symbionts23. There have been very few attempts to culture cetacean gut symbionts, but culturing may prove useful in understanding the gut microbiome during health and disease24, 25. We hypothesized that (1) kogiid gut microbiomes will exhibit differences in composition and diversity based on host life stage, and (2) dominant kogiid gut symbionts can be isolated in pure culture by optimizing growth conditions for anaerobic spore-formers26.

A total of 5,944 OTUs were recovered from all 25 individual kogiids, encompassing one archaeal phylum and 11 bacterial phyla (Fig. 1). Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes dominated the kogiid gut microbiome, together accounting for ~ 75% of the total gut communities and ~ 66% of all recovered OTUs (Table S1). Actinobacteria, Proteobacteria, Synergistetes, and Verrucomicrobia were also relatively common phyla, in addition to six rare (< 1% relative abundance) phyla (Table S1). Abundant phyla owed their dominance to a small fraction of the total OTUs belonging to each lineage: five OTUs (< 1% of total Bacteroidetes OTUs) constituted ~ 85% of all Bacteroidetes, and only two OTUs (< 1% of total Actinobacteria OTUs) accounted for ~ 53% of all Actinobacteria symbionts.

Phylum-level differences in composition were observed between kogiid species, but not between life history stages. Actinobacteria, Bacteroidetes, and Synergistetes exhibited significant differences in their relative abundances between K. sima and K. breviceps (all life history stages), but no significant phylum-level differentiation occurred between juvenile and adult gut microbiomes (both hosts, Table
1). Similarly, comparisons of phylum-level differences within each host species revealed no significant differences across life history stages for K. sima and only one differentially abundant phylum in K. breviceps (Verrucomicrobia, Table S2).

Fifty OTUs comprised the kogiid core gut microbiomes (i.e. OTUs present in every sampled individual), representing six bacterial phyla with over half of the core OTUs belonging to the phylum Firmicutes (Table S3). Together, core OTUs accounted for only ~ 10% of the total number of OTUs, but ~ 75% of the total number of recovered sequences. The trend of a small fraction of OTUs dominating a large portion of the total community was also observed when identifying core communities in juvenile and adult kogiids. Adult kogiids harbored the largest core community, consisting of 136 OTUs that comprised ~ 93% of total community, but only ~ 1% of the total number of OTUs present in adults (Table S3). Juvenile kogiids shared fewer OTUs, their core consisting of 54 OTUs that comprised ~ 78% of the total community yet ~ 1% of the total number of OTUs detected in juveniles (Table S3). Between juvenile and adult kogiids, 50 of the 54 core juvenile taxa were present in the adult core communities. The 4 core juvenile taxa not detected in adult communities corresponded to 2 OTUs affiliated with the phylum Bacteroidetes (OTU00089, OTU00226) and 2 OTUs affiliated with the phylum Firmicutes (OTU00080 genus Ruminococcus, OTU00137 order Clostridia; Table S3). Overall, the core symbionts dominated kogiid gut microbiomes, with 24 of the 25 most abundant OTUs present in the kogiid core (Table S3).

The 25 most common OTUs were the primary drivers of community divergence and exhibited differential abundances between life history stages and host species. Together, these 25 abundant OTUs accounted for > 50% of the dissimilarity between juveniles and adults (in both host species, Table S4) and > 50% of the dissimilarity between K. sima and K. breviceps (in both life stages, Table
2). Comparing across host species, juvenile kogiids exhibited more differentially abundant taxa (n = 8) compared to adults (n = 4), with greater contributions to community dissimilarity (23% in juveniles, 12% in adults, Table
2). Comparing within host species, K. breviceps exhibited greater microbiome shifts across life stages compared to K. sima, with four differentially abundant OTUs contributing 6.6% to community dissimilarity (compared to 1 OTU contributing 3.7% in K. sima, Table S4). Thus, at the OTU level, host species had a stronger effect on microbiome composition than life stage.

Community-level analysis of the gut microbiomes revealed sharp distinctions between host microbiomes. K. sima and K. breviceps hosted significantly distinct gut microbiomes based on OTU relative abundance (Table
3, PERMANOVA, p < 0.001). Comparisons of juvenile and adult whales further revealed significant shifts in microbiome similarity across life stages (PERMANOVA, p < 0.001). Differences between life stage remained when considering an individual host species, with strong distinctions between juvenile and adult gut microbiomes in K. sima (PERMANOVA, p < 0.004) and K. breviceps (PERMANOVA, p < 0.002). No significant differences were detected in community similarity based on sex (ANOSIM, p = 0.985) or carcass condition at examination (ANOSIM, p = 0.260). Significant differences in microbiome similarity were also detected between hosts and life history stages when considering symbiont membership (OTU presence-absence, PERMANOVA p < 0.015), indicating differences across hosts and ontogeny are driven by both the relative abundance of taxa and by symbiont membership (Table
3).

Kogiid hosts exhibited high OTU-level diversity (Table S6), with the diversity (1/D), evenness (E1/D), and dominance (d) of gut microbial communities differing significantly between life stages (ANOVA, p < 0.005), but not between species (ANOVA, p > 0.050, Fig. 3). A significant interaction between host species and life history stage (ANOVA, p < 0.010) was detected for species richness (S), indicating variation in OTU richness between hosts was dependent upon life stage. Indeed, while juveniles exhibited higher OTU richness than adults when grouping data from both host species, these trends were driven by the high richness in juvenile K. breviceps (824 ± 24 SE, Fig. 4). Accordingly, symbiont richness was significantly higher in juvenile K. breviceps compared to juvenile K. sima and adult K. breviceps (post hoc Tukey’s HSD, p < 0.05, Fig. 4). No significant difference in richness was observed between adults, suggesting that symbiont richness stabilizes with host maturity across both species (post hoc Tukey’s HSD p > 0.05). Interestingly, while symbiont richness declined with age in K. breviceps, it appeared to increase with age in K. sima, although not significantly, illustrating differences in how the gut microbiome develops with host maturity in these two closely related species of cetaceans.

A total of 116 isolates were cultured from kogiid fecal samples, representing three bacterial phyla: Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, and Proteobacteria (Table
4). The majority of cultured symbionts were affiliated with the phylum Firmicutes, followed by Bacteroidetes and Proteobacteria. The 116 isolates matched to 25 OTUs from the culture-independent microbiome dataset with a threshold of > 97% similarity. Two cultured OTUs were of particular interest for downstream characterization: OTU00004 and OTU00006. These OTUs were identical matches (100% sequence identity) to dominant symbiont OTUs in the microbiome dataset, core members of each kogiid host, and among the 25 most dominant symbionts (Tables
2, Table S3). Additionally, OTU00004 was differentially abundant between juvenile and adult K. breviceps hosts (Table S4). When classified with the Greengenes database, OTU00004 was affiliated with the family Peptostreptococcaceae, and was further classified as Clostridium sordellii with the National Centre for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) non-redundant database. OTU00006 was identified as Clostridium perfringens. These data highlight the ability of complex culture media and anaerobic conditions to isolate dominant cetacean gut symbionts in pure culture.

Chitin digestion was observed in one of the 14 isolates tested in this experiment (isolate 15–7, Table S7). The isolate belonged to the bacterial genus Clostridium, and was further classified as Clostridium paraputrificum, a chitinolytic bacterium previously isolated from human feces27, 28, by the NCBI non-redundant database (> 97% identity).

The characterization of gut microbiomes in juvenile kogiids expands our understanding of the composition and development of gut symbionts in K. sima and K. breviceps. Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes dominated the gut microbiomes of juvenile K. sima and K. breviceps, consistent with previously characterized adult kogiids22, as well as other marine and terrestrial mammals17, 29. The species-specific differences in gut microbiomes of K. sima and K. breviceps reported in adult whales22 were also evident early in life. Further, significant shifts in the composition and diversity of symbiont communities were observed between life history stages, including a trend towards microbiome convergence with host maturity. Core gut microbiomes consisted of a relatively small number of highly abundant OTUs, with core communities displaying considerable overlap between juvenile and adult kogiids. In addition, two of these symbionts were successfully isolated in pure culture, confirming that dominant members of the gut community can be cultivated and functionally characterized for a more holistic picture of kogiid microbiomes.

Kogiid whale morbidity and mortality has been linked to various disease states and anthropogenic factors (e.g. parasitism and plastic ingestion, respectively)18, but the specific cause of many strandings is uncertain. The relationship between microbiome dysbiosis and overall health has been linked in humans50 and could extend to marine mammals. Combining culture-independent and culture-based methods may clarify kogiid health states through whole microbiome characterizations and the identification of key community members. The characterization of the kogiid gut microbiome and the cultivation of dominant symbionts within this study contributes to the relatively sparse amount of data on kogiid microbiomes and may help elucidate the role of the gut microbiome in the health and disease of these commonly stranded cetaceans.

To characterize the kogiid gut microbiome, fecal samples were recovered during necropsy of stranded K. breviceps (n = 18) and K. sima (n = 9) from North Carolina and Virginia between 2008 and 2018 (Table S8), and subsequently stored at − 80 °C. Differences in sample number between species is a reflection of a greater number of K. breviceps that strand than K. sima off the coast of North Carolina51. Sampled individuals were from two life history stage classifications, juvenile (K. breviceps n = 7, K. sima n = 5) and adult (i.e. sexually mature) (K. breviceps n = 9, K. sima n = 4), and from both sexes. All sampled individuals stranded alone except for two cow-calf pairs (K1–K14, K4–K17). One of the adults was pregnant (K1), and the second (K4) had milk present in her mammary tissues. No individuals exhibited direct human-induced mortality, and all were stranded in fresh to moderate carcass condition (Table S8).

DNA extracts were prepared from 200 mg of fecal material with the DNeasy PowerSoil Kit (Qiagen). Microbial communities of juvenile samples (n = 12) were characterized by 16S rRNA gene sequencing (V4 region) on an Illumina MiSeq platform at Molecular Research LP (Shallowater, TX), as described previously for adult samples22. Briefly, DNA extracts were used as templates for PCR amplifications with the universal bacterial/archaeal forward primer 515F and reverse primer 806R52, pooled in equimolar concentrations, purified and sequenced on an Illumina MiSeq. Combined raw datasets from adult and juvenile samples were processed simultaneous in the mothur software package (version 1.39.5)53 as detailed previously22. Briefly, sequences were quality-filtered, aligned to the SILVA database, and non-target, chimeric, and singleton sequences were removed. High-quality sequences were grouped to form operational taxonomic units (OTUs) at 97% identity using the OptiClust algorithm in mothur54. Consensus sequences were obtained for each OTU and classified with the Greengenes database (May 2013 release, mothur-formatted)55. To account for variation in sequence depth, sequences from each fecal sample were subsampled to the lowest read count (29,656 sequences). Sequence data were deposited as FASTQ files in the Sequence Read Archive of the National Center for Biotechnology Information (SRA NCBI) under accession number SUB6765511.

To compare microbiome similarity between kogiid hosts, beta-diversity calculations were performed based on OTU-dependent metrics (Bray–Curtis similarity) in PRIMER (version 6.1.11, PRIMER-e Ltd.), and OTU-independent metrics (UniFrac distance) in mothur. Beta-diversity metrics were also analyzed based on symbiont relative abundance (OTU relative abundance Bray–Curtis, weighted UniFrac) and symbiont membership (OTU presence-absence Bray–Curtis, unweighted UniFrac) within the microbiome. Significant differences in microbiome similarity across the factors host species (K. breviceps vs. K. sima), life history stage (juvenile vs. adult) and an interaction term (host species × life history stage) were determined by permutational multivariate analyses of variance (PERMANOVA). Permutation multivariate analyses of dispersion (PERMDISP) were performed to compare dispersion between factors. Two-way analyses of similarity (ANOSIM) were performed in PRIMER to detect differences between sex and carcass condition.

A one-way similarity percentage species contributions (SIMPER) analysis was performed in PRIMER to identify the percent contribution of specific OTUs to the community and the overall similarity or dissimilarity between hosts. MetaStats and LefSe were also conducted in mothur to identify significantly differentially abundant OTUs between host life stages, with OTUs considered differentially abundant if significant (p < 0.05) using both statistical methods. Significant differences in relative abundance of phyla were determined by Student’s t tests performed in JMP (version 12.0) assuming equal variance unless the test for equal variance failed (F test 2-sided, p < 0.05) and corrected for multiple comparisons (Benjamini–Yekutieli false-discovery rate control56 and an experiment-wise error rate of alpha = 0.05). Core gut communities were identified herein as OTUs present in all sampled host individuals. Core symbiont OTUs were determined for each host species (K. breviceps and K. sima) and life history stage (adult and juvenile).

To assess technical variation across sequencing runs, five samples (K14, 17, 18, 21, and 22) were separately extracted and sequenced, then re-analyzed with the full data set (in place of the original sequencing runs for these five samples). Sequencing results were consistent across runs; for example, all statistical trends in microbiome similarity (beta-diversity) were consistent between data sets (Tables S9–S12). Further, no significant differences in composition (Bray–Curtis similarity) were detected between replicate runs of the same samples when analyzed in isolation (PERMANOVA, p = 0.697). Accordingly, replicate data indicate that our findings are robust to technical artefacts and were excluded from final analyses present herein.

Cultivation work was conducted on the same sample set as above for DNA-based characterization, except for one sample (K12) that lacked sufficient material and two additional, fresh samples (K26, K27) from stranding events that occurred during the tenure of this study and were examined prior to sample storage at − 80 °C (Table S8). Fecal material was homogenized separately and diluted in phosphate-buffered saline (0.1 g of fecal material in 1 mL of solution). Serial tenfold dilutions were performed to 10–4 and 100 µl of each dilution was plated on YCFA agar supplemented with 2 g/L of glucose as previously described for isolating anaerobic gut symbionts26, 57. All media and materials were kept in anaerobic conditions at least 24 h before use. Plates were incubated in anaerobic conditions using the BD GasPak EZ anaerobe container system at 37 °C.

Following a previously described method60, chitin assays were performed to test the ability of isolates to utilize chitin as a nutrient source. A total of 14 isolates were each grown in 5 mL of YCFA for 48–72 h. Isolates were spotted on modified YCFA plates covered with a 2% chitin slurry solution. YCFA agar was modified by reducing glucose and yeast extract components to one-tenth of the original concentration. Plates were incubated anaerobically at 37 °C for seven to ten days. Chitin utilization was visible by a clearing of the 2% chitin slurry solution. Serratia marcescens, a facultative anaerobe known to digest chitin61, 62, was used as the positive control for chitin utilization.

As described in a previous publication22, all research activities were carried out under a NOAA Stranding Agreement to UNCW and research protocols were approved by UNCW’s Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (protocols A0809-019, A1112-013, A1415-015 and A1718-011). There is considerable uncertainty surrounding the status of Kogia sima and K. breviceps, with both species categorized as “Data Deficient” on the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species (https://www.iucnredlist.org). This study relied solely upon postmortem sampling of stranded kogiid whales from North Carolina and Virginia, responded to under authorization of the US Marine Mammal Protection Act. Animals were either found freshly dead (n = 7) died during initial response (n = 6) or underwent humane euthanasia (n = 12) for reasons unrelated to this study following consultation with the National Marine Fisheries Service and under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian in accordance with the American Veterinary Medical Association Guidelines for the Euthanasia of Animals (2013 Edition).



Publisher's note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

is available for this paper at 10.1038/s41598-020-72032-4.

