Fermented Foods, Health and the Gut Microbiome

Fermented foods have been a part of human diet for almost 10,000 years, and their level of diversity in the 21st century is substantial. The health benefits of fermented foods have been intensively investigated; identification of bioactive peptides and microbial metabolites in fermented foods that can positively affect human health has consolidated this interest. Each fermented food typically hosts a distinct population of microorganisms. Once ingested, nutrients and microorganisms from fermented foods may survive to interact with the gut microbiome, which can now be resolved at the species and strain level by metagenomics. Transient or long-term colonization of the gut by fermented food strains or impacts of fermented foods on indigenous gut microbes can therefore be determined. This review considers the primary food fermentation pathways and microorganisms involved, the potential health benefits, and the ability of these foodstuffs to impact the gut microbiome once ingested either through compounds produced during the fermentation process or through interactions with microorganisms from the fermented food that are capable of surviving in the gastro-intestinal transit. This review clearly shows that fermented foods can affect the gut microbiome in both the short and long term, and should be considered an important element of the human diet.

Fermented foods have been a component of the human diet from ancient times. Among the earliest evidence for the deliberate application of fermentation has been found in pottery vessels discovered in China dating from 7000 BC that were used to ferment rice, honey, and fruit [1]. However, it is likely that inadvertent production and consumption of fermented foods significantly predate this, as foods must have undergone spontaneous fermentation during storage [2]. While microorganisms, first discovered in the 1670s by Antoni van Leeuwenhoek, originally received much attention as agents of food spoilage and disease, useful applications, including their ability to produce antibiotics against pathogenic bacteria and to positively impact human health, were soon discovered [3]. However, probably the most important function that microbes have played throughout human history is their involvement in food preservation via fermentation [3,4]. Fermentation is the process whereby alcohols, carbon dioxide, and/or organic acids are produced by microorganisms, primarily from sugars and under mostly anaerobic conditions, for production of energy [5]. The accumulation of alcohol and organic acids and the associated increase in acidity of the food substrates inhibits the growth of other microorganisms and the activity of enzymes in the food system, thus reducing the rate of spoilage and resulting in foods with extended shelf-life.

In this review, a brief introduction to fermented foods and their potential health benefits is followed by a discussion of the ability of fermented foods to impact the gut microbiome, either through fermented food communities surviving gastric transit and becoming established transiently or permanently as part of the gut microbiome, or through provision of nutrients that support the growth of indigenous gut microbiota; in addition, we explore the potential nutritional and health benefits associated with such interactions.

The earliest evidence of food fermentation dates from the Neolithic period, ~7000 BC, in China [1], a period that coincides with the development of agriculture and thus of seasons in which an abundance of food was available followed by periods of relative scarcity. Cultivation of crops started in the Fertile Crescent of Southwest Asia ~9000 BC, and there is evidence that goat, sheep, and cattle were domesticated by 7000 BC [12]. Domestication of animals provided a source of meat and milk, which in its raw form has a very short storage time before spoiling. However, rudimentary processes to convert milk to cheese by fermentation had emerged by 6500 BC, the key benefit of which was an extended shelf life; a mechanism was thereby found to save food available in a time of plenty for one of relative scarcity. The process of making cheese had the additional advantages of (i) concentrating the fat, protein, and mineral content of the milk thus producing an energy-dense and nutritious food, and (ii) removing lactose, making the cheese accessible to adults, who at that time were mostly lactose intolerant and could not consume milk post-infancy [12].

The process of fermentation has been exploited by almost all peoples and has been applied to plant materials (including fruits, seeds, tubers and other vegetative and non-vegetative materials) and animal materials (including meat, milk, fish, and eggs), reflecting the base foods available in different regions [2,13].

It is difficult to definitively establish the number of fermented foods produced globally; most estimates suggest that there are in excess of 5000 different kinds [14]. However, when local and regional variations are considered, this figure is likely to expand significantly. For example, different classification schemes can be used to classify cheese, and while certain approaches suggest as few as eighteen primary cheese types, when local modifications based on variations in procedures, microorganisms, and milk types are taken into account it is generally accepted that in excess of 1000 cheese varieties are available globally [15]. Different approaches have been used to characterize or group fermented foods, the most common of which are based on the raw/non-fermented food substrate, resulting in groupings of fermented foods made from (1) cereals, (2) vegetables, (3) legumes, (4) roots/tubers, (5) milk, (6) meat, (7) fish, (8) alcoholic beverages, and (9) miscellaneous [16].

As a consequence of their ancient origins, there is a strong regional bias in the distribution and popularity of different fermented foods. For example, throughout much of East and South Asia and the southern regions of India fermented legumes, in particular soyabeans, as well as vegetables, fish, and meat are common components of the diet. In West Asia, Northern India, Europe, and North America, fermented cereals, including wheat, barley, and oats, are used to make bread, and fermented dairy and meat products are more common. In Africa and South America fermented seeds, including sorghum, maize, millet, cassava, and legumes, are an important component of the diet, as are fermented milk and meat products [16]. A recent review by Tamang and colleagues (2020) expertly demonstrates these differences in the origins of fermented foods around the world [2].

Fermentation is a process whereby substrates are converted to alcohols, carbon dioxide, and/or organic acids, predominantly anaerobically [5]. From the microorganisms’ perspective, the purpose of fermentation is energy production [17]. Microbes adapted to diverse environments exhibit a range of different fermentation pathways; the pathways most relevant to fermented foods are listed in Table 1.

* Certain LAB, referred to as facultative heterofermentative LAB, can ferment by either the homo- or heterolactic fermentation pathway depending on environmental conditions or substrate availability. ** Certain members of this genus. *** Certain members of this family.

Lactic acid bacteria are responsible for the malolactic fermentation process that is involved in the production of wine as well; this predominantly takes place after alcohol fermentation by yeast [34]. This reaction converts L-malic acid to L-lactic acid and carbon dioxide and results in the production of other flavour compounds of interest such as diacetyl [35], leads to deacidification of the wine, and promotes microbial stability [36]. The predominant LAB associated with this process is Oenococcus oeni, although other Lactobacillaceae and Pediococcus species can be used [37].

The primary microorganisms responsible for the main fermentation pathways that occur in food are discussed above and are listed in Table 1. Traditionally, food fermentation has relied on the microbiota naturally occurring in the raw food material or obtained by transferring the microbiome from previously-fermented products. However, under modern large-scale commercial food production systems well-characterized or defined starter cultures are now widely used to ensure reproducible products capable of consistently meeting high consumer standards, and the safety status of these microbes are established to ensure the safety of consumers [38].

In addition, many fermented foods are eaten without further processing or preparation, and thus contain microbial populations of up to 108 CFU/g; these can potentially gain entry to the human gastrointestinal tract, where they may interact with or become established as part of the gut microbiome [57,58].

As discussed above, while fermented foods have a long history of safe use, there is a growing popular consensus that consumption of fermented foods results in positive health effects. Much of this is driven by popular observations that fermented foods in general use unprocessed raw ingredients, contain little or no added preservatives, colours or flavourings, and are made using long-established, sustainable, and in many cases traditional technologies. Consumers may be attracted to the concept that these are “live foods” containing natural and diverse microbiota.

It is incumbent upon the relevant research community to generate data to clarify and identify the benefits of such foods, if any exist. In support of this, a number of controlled human dietary studies have recently been undertaken which sustain these popular perceptions of health benefits [57]. These studies include investigations that revealed strong associations between weight management and consumption of fermented dairy products [59], reduced risk of cardiovascular disease, type 2 diabetes, and mortality associated with consumption of yoghurt [60,61,62,63], and enhanced glucose metabolism and reduced muscle soreness following acute resistance exercise as a consequence of consuming fermented milk [64]. Consumption of kimchi was linked to anti-diabetic and anti-obesity effects [65,66], while consumption of different fermented foods was associated with alterations in mood and brain activity [67,68,69] and in the gut microbiome [70]. However, reports have identified a lack of sufficient clinical trials, variation in the different fermented foods being investigated, and inconsistencies among ethnic groups in suggesting that more studies need to be undertaken in order to confirm the potential benefits of fermented food consumption [71].

It well established that fermentation can enhance the digestibility of complex carbohydrates and proteins through the breakdown of starch to oligosaccharides and polypeptides to amino acids [72,73]. Fermentation allows for the destabilization of the casein micelle by bacteria present in milk, enhancing milk protein digestibility [24,74]. Fermentation, in particular with respect to cheese, facilitates the concentration of key nutrients through removal of water and enhances the bioavailability of calcium, which is important for skeletal health [75].

In addition, bioactive compounds can be produced through protein, lipid, and carbohydrate catabolism during the fermentation process, and can result from the range of microbial metabolites produced during the process [78]. Indeed, production of vitamins and antioxidants during food fermentation has been reported for many LAB species, in particular members of the newly-rebranded Lactobacillaceae family [79,80,81,82]. Bioactivities linked to lowering of blood pressure and cholesterol, improvement in metabolic syndromes, anti-cancer effects, and improvement in immune function have all been described [80]. Vitamins B7, B11, and B12 are produced in fermented dairy products by Lactobacillaceae (e.g., Lactiplantibacillus plantarum, Lactobacillus delbrueckii, Limosilactobacillus reuteri), Propionibacterium, Bifidobacterium, and several species of Streptococcus [83]. Folic Acid (B11) is necessary for development, and reproduction and prevents against certain disorders including some cancers and cardiovascular diseases, while many metabolic processes require B12 as a cofactor, including nucleic and amino acid metabolism [84]. Non-dairy fermented foods contain microbes which synthesize vitamins [29]. Shalgam is a Turkish fermented beverage consisting of black carrots and turnips; its resident microbiota consists predominantly of Lactobacillaceae along with Leuconostoc and Pediococcus [85]. This beverage is an abundant source of vitamins A, B, and C as well as other minerals and polyphenols [29,85]. Antioxidants exert beneficial functions in food and protect against the damaging effects of free radicals, and are produced in fermented foods by microbial esterases [79]. Kombucha, a fermented sweetened tea, contains many antioxidants with positive effects on health, including antagonistic effects towards progression of neurodegenerative diseases, diabetes, and certain cancers [29]. Many other fermented foods have been shown to positively contribute to different aspects of human health, such as kimchi, a fermented cabbage, which is capable of anti-atherogenic effects that are triggered by the active compound 3-(4′-Hydroxyl-3′,5′-dimethoxyphenyl) propionic acid (HDMPPA) [86].

The release of bioactive peptides as a result of protein hydrolysis during fermentation has been investigated by multiple groups. A well-studied example of bioactive peptide release as a consequence of catabolism of protein involves angiotensin-1-converting enzyme (ACE)-inhibitory peptides, a group of peptides with hypertension-lowering capabilities [80]. LAB from both dairy and non-dairy sources can produce ACE-inhibiting peptides during fermentation of milk [87]. They are primarily produced in fermented dairy foods such as yogurt and cheese, although different casein molecules can be targeted depending on the starter LAB cultures used [88]. Two lactotripeptides, isoleucine–proline–proline (IPP) and valine–proline–proline (VPP), which are not digested and remain intact and able to cross the mucosal surface to confer their antihypertensive benefits, have received much attention [87]. For example, in one study, spontaneously hypertensive rats were fed a fermented milk beverage containing a Lactobacillus helveticus strain, a species known for its ability to release ACE-inhibitory peptides from milk protein, which significantly lowered blood pressure when compared with controls [89]. Human trials have yielded promising results as well. A meta-analysis of the published literature on human intervention trials confirmed the efficacy of IPP and VPP, including those in functional foods; Asian patients in particular reported a decrease in blood pressure which appeared to be independent of age, lactotripeptide dosage, length of treatment, or initial blood pressure readings at a level that was statistically significant [90]. ACE-inhibitory peptides have been identified in non-dairy products such as fermented meat sausages made using strains of Latilactobacillus sakei and Latilactobacillus curvatus [91].

Many food fermentation microbes are capable of producing high molecular weight exopolysaccharides (EPS) from simple sugars present in the raw food product. EPS can be produced by Zymomonas, Leuconostoc, Pediococcus and Streptococcus species, and members of the Lactobacillaceae family [79]. Examples of EPS production include acetan, xanthan, and kefiran, several of which are important from a food manufacturing point of view. Xanthan is used for its desirable rheological characteristics when added to fermented milk products [92]. In terms of health, EPS-producing LAB have been found to have a role in immunomodulation, which can be either stimulatory or suppressive depending on various factors [93]. Dendritic cells bind to ingested microbial EPS via their pathogen recognition receptors through epithelial cell tight junctions, migrate with the EPS ‘antigen’ to other lymphoid tissues, and further communicate with other immunomodulatory cells such as Natural Killer cells, which can invoke inflammatory responses when appropriate [93]. EPS production in fermented foods has been examined in terms of cardiovascular disease (CVD) due to their ability to bind cholesterol, such as the ability of Pediococcus-produced β-glycans to lower serum cholesterol levels [93]. While prebiotics and probiotic bacteria are capable of lowering cholesterol through various mechanisms, EPS appears to lower cholesterol by binding bile (of which cholesterol is a constituent) from the intestines to the bacterial cell envelope, thus reducing bile reabsorption and recycling. Consequently, de novo synthesis of bile in the liver results in lowered serum cholesterol levels [94]. A paper in 2002 reported that EPS-producing starter cultures were able to bind the bile salt cholic acid, while another study in 2010 demonstrated the ability of EPS-producing bacteria to bind bile from liquid growth media and that the amount of EPS produced was correlated with a decrease in broth cholesterol levels [94,95]. An in vivo study investigating the ability of β-glucan-producing Lacticaseibacillus paracasei to lower serum cholesterol in mice found that a significant decrease was observed when compared to control mice that were not given the EPS-producing Lacticaseibacillus strain [96]. Additionally, this study showed that the gut microbiome was modified as a result of receiving the EPS-producing Lacticaseibacillus paracasei [96]. A similar study was performed on humans with elevated serum cholesterol levels who were fed fermented oat-based products containing an EPS-producing Pediococcus damnosus strain [97]. This study concurrently noted that a statistically significant reduction in total cholesterol was seen in the group who were given the fermented product, along with a significant increase in the relative abundance of faecal Bifidobacterium species (which are beneficial gut microbes) and total faecal bacterial counts [97]. Thus, fermented foods containing EPS can positively influence gut health.

The ability of fermented foods to modulate the gut microbiome has been documented by several groups with varying degrees of success. Changes are generally recorded as overall shifts in microbial populations, and do not necessarily reflect the microbial content of the fermented foods in question. A recent study evaluated the effect of general fermented plant intake on microbial and metabolomic differences in consumers versus non-consumers (nearly 7000 participants total), and determined that beta diversity was significantly different between consumers versus non-consumers [70]. Microbiomes of consumers of such fermented products were associated with Bacteroides spp., Pseudomonas spp., Dorea spp., Lachnospiraceae, Prevotella spp., Alistipes putredinis, Oscillospira spp., Enterobacteriaceae, Fusobacterium spp., Actinomyces spp., Achromobacter spp., Clostridium clostridioforme, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, Bacteroides uniformis, Clostridiales, and Delftia spp. [70]. In parallel, 115 separate participants who consumed fermented foods at various frequencies were investigated for a four-week duration, and it was found that microbes associated with the consumers of fermented foods consisted of both fermented food-associated microbes (e.g., Lactobacillus acidophilus, Levilactobacillus brevis, Lactobacillus kefiranofaciens, Lentilactobacillus parabuchneri, Lactobacillus helveticus, and Latilactobacillus sakei) and microbes not associated with fermented foods (including Streptococcus dysgalactiae, Prevotella melaninogenica, Enorma massiliensis, Prevotella multiformis, Enterococcus cecorum, and Bacteroides paurosaccharolyticus) [70]. In a similar fashion to the previous study, Wastyk and colleagues (2021) examined the effects of a diet rich in fermented foods (including fermented dairy products, vegetables and non-alcoholic beverages) on eighteen healthy adults over a period of seventeen weeks in parallel to a diet high in fibre [98]. The dietary intervention consisted of an initial four-week period whereby the quantity of fermented food in the diet was increased, followed by a six-week ‘maintenance’ period of very high fermented food intake, and closed with a ‘choice’ period of four weeks in which participants could maintain whatever level of fermented food intake they desired. The fermented food-rich diet resulted in an increase in alpha diversity of the gut microbiome that was not observed with the fibre diet. Interestingly, the increase in microbiome diversity remained during the designated ‘choice’ period despite intake being higher during the ‘maintenance’ period, with a strong relationship between time and diversity [98].

Thus, fermented foods have been shown to have the capacity to modify gut microbiome populations, although it can often be unclear as to how these changes are brought about. While this has been shown in the above examples for a myriad of different fermented food types, the results cannot be directly compared due to highly variable parameters, including the use of both healthy and disease models and the various methods by which microbes are quantified. Fermented foods may interfere with the gut microbiome through its own microbiome or through the nutrients present in its matrix. Therefore, in an effort to provide objective evidence that clearly demonstrates whether or not fermented foods can modulate the human gut microbiome, more in-depth and well-defined human feeding studies need to be undertaken. In these studies, the microbiomes of both the fermented food and the human gut need to be established using the most advanced and sensitive tools available in order to permit changes at both the genus and the species level to be determined.

In addition to the benefits of fermented foods to the host, certain chemicals present in fermented foods can affect the host’s gut microbiome directly. The production of two types of chemicals in particular have come under scrutiny due to their documented effects on microbial populations, polyphenols and dietary fibre, the latter of which leads to the in vivo production of short-chain fatty acids [115].

Thus, fermented foods have the potential to impact gut microbiota by modifying levels of particular compounds within food. Polyphenols have been shown to directly impact the microbial composition of the gut, while SCFA can induce a more favourable environment for the growth of beneficial gut microbes or impact mucus concentration, which acts as both an energy source and binding site for gut microbes.

As discussed above, fermented foods contain large and diverse microbiomes, many species of which are to be found within the gut microbiota as well; thus, it is reasonable to propose that fermented foods could be a source of these microorganisms. However, in order for this to occur the fermented food microbiota must have the capacity to survive the environmental stresses of the digestive tract. This requires tolerance to low pH and bile, traits used in the selection of probiotic bacteria. Many groups have investigated the microbiota of fermented foods as a source of new probiotic bacteria, and many have found bacteria that are capable of surviving gastric transit, implying that this property may be common among the microbiota found in fermented foods. Potential to survive gastric transit can be investigated using a range of in vitro models and using either purified bacterial cultures grown in laboratory media or by incorporating the test organism into the model food matrix.

Although the relative abundance of fermented food microbiota are not uniform, the gut microbiome is exposed to and interacts with these allochthonous bacteria following ingestion either transiently or on a more long-term basis [180,181]. The above studies suggest that it is possible for the microbiome of fermented food products to have varied effects on the host gut microbiome, with many of the resident bacteria present in the food microbiome associated with beneficial responses in the gut and able to harbour potentially probiotic microorganisms. However, in order to establish with greater confidence that the microbiome of fermented foods can survive gastric transit, more consistent and standardized models of the human gastrointestinal tract, such as the INFOGEST 2.0 model, need to be applied and the results confirmed in human feeding studies.

Fermented foods have an important place in human history, and while their primary function was originally shelf life extension of seasonal foods, health benefits associated with their consumption have long been recognized [6]. Almost all the primary foodstuffs consumed by humans can be subjected to fermentation [182]. Many of these have regional origins linked to the prominent foods produced in different localities. Local modification and adaptation of the fermentation process has greatly added to the diversity of fermented foods, as in the case of cheese; while cheese is made using milk from a limited number of mammal species, variations in fermentation technology have resulted in >1000 cheese varieties [15]. As described above and summarized in Table 1, there are six primary food fermentation pathways, and the starter microorganisms responsible for these are well characterized. However, a diverse range of non-starter microbes are associated with most fermented foods, the full extent of which is only now becoming apparent with the application of high-throughput DNA sequencing technologies [4]. Recently, a freely accessible online database has been established that functions as an archive for the annotated genomic, metagenomic, transcriptomic, and metataxonomic information of microbes associated with fermented foods, enabling evaluation of individual strains as potential starter cultures [183]. This tool has the potential to reveal the full diversity of fermented food-associated microbes, and has useful practical applications in the fermented food industry.

The human gut microbiome has received much attention in recent years, with increasing evidence that it impacts both physical and mental health [184,185] and that many metabolic disorders are associated with disruption to the gut microbiome [186,187]. Lifestyle, including diet, can impact the gut microbiome, and there is increasing interest in the potential of exploiting foods to positively modulate it [187,188,189,190]. Fermented foods offer an opportunity to positively impact the gut microbiome by either (I) providing nutrients to promote or inhibit members of the gut microbiome, or (II) members of the food microbiome establishing residence in the gut and/or interacting with the resident gut microbiome. However, few studies to date have specifically investigated the impact of fermented food consumption on the gut microbiome. Certain bioactive compounds produced by the microbes within food, including polyphenols and SCFAs, can have beneficial effects when consumed. Certain microbial strains found in food are capable of surviving digestion, and fermented foods can act as useful vehicles to carry probiotic strains safely into the gut. However, there are very few studies which focus on the potential of microbiota from fermented foods to impact the gut microbiome; one study investigating the consequences of yoghurt consumption observed higher levels of LAB associated with the gut contents [179]. In addition, most studies of the gut microbiome focus on the microbiota of the large intestine, due primarily to ease of sampling; however, it is likely that fermented foods have more influence on the microbiome in the small intestine, as this location exhibits a higher proportion of LAB and other more aerotolerant bacteria often associated with fermented foods. The possibility that fermented foods impact the gut microbiome is intriguing, and merits more study and additional efforts to include investigations of the small intestine.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

