Gut microbiome of century-old snail specimens stable across time in preservation

Museum biological specimens provide a unique means of gathering ecological information that spans wide temporal ranges. Museum specimens can also provide information on the microbial communities that persist within the host specimen. Together, these provide researchers valuable opportunities to study long-term trends and mechanisms of microbial community change. The effects of decades-long museum preservation on host-microbial communities have not been systematically assessed. The University of Colorado’s Museum of Natural History has densely sampled Oreohelix strigosa (Rocky Mountainsnail) for the past century; many are preserved in ethanol, which provides an excellent opportunity to explore how the microbiome changes across time in preservation.

We used 16S rRNA (ribosomal ribonucleic acid) gene amplicon sequencing to examine Oreohelix strigosa gut microbiomes from museum specimens across a 98-year range, as well as within short-term preservation treatments collected in 2018. Treatment groups included samples extracted fresh, without preservation; samples starved prior to extraction; and samples preserved for 1 month, 6 months, and 9 months. General microbiome composition was similar across all years. Sample groups belonging to specific years, or specific short-term treatments, showed unique associations with select bacterial taxa. Collection year was not a significant predictor of microbial richness, though unpreserved short-term treatments showed significantly higher richness than preserved treatments. While the year was a significant factor in microbiome composition, it did not explain much of the variation across samples. The location was a significant driver of community composition and explained more of the variability.

This study is the first to examine animal host-associated microbiome change across a period of nearly one century. Generally, geographic location was a greater factor in shaping gut microbiome composition, rather than a year collected. Consistent patterns across this temporal range indicate that historic specimens can answer many ecological questions surrounding the host-associated microbiome.

Video Abstract video file.(100M, mp4)

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s40168-022-01286-z.

The microbiome is an evolutionary adaptation that has allowed many animals to capture and utilize resources in their environment [1]. The gut microbiome is particularly important to study as it provides insight into both host-specific and population-level subtle changes in environmental patterns and microbial communities. It is imperative to understand how microbiomes shift over broad temporal and spatial gradients as changes in the microbiome can impact the host response to stressors [2]. Analyzing past trends in microbiome shifts is also paramount to predicting future trends and safeguarding rare species that depend on their symbiotic microbes [3]. Historic museum specimens provide the long-term data needed to form a more comprehensive picture of how environmental changes impact microbial communities and predict how microbiomes will shift due to future changes [2, 4]. The specimens also provide a unique and often underappreciated means of gathering ecological information spanning wide geographic ranges [5].

Though there is a substantial dearth of research examining the long-term effects of museum preservation on the microbiome, one study has shown that museum-preserved fish microbiomes can be captured through high-throughput sequencing, though this study had small sample sizes likely due to formalin-fixated samples which contributed to high dropout rates in the data [6]. Another study by Neu et al. (2021) showed that bivalve tissue preserved in ethanol for up to 10 years was successful at providing high-resolution information regarding trends in microbial community compositions [2]. Other studies have found that microbial richness is less dramatically affected by most preservation methodologies in short-term storage experiments [14] and that methodological consistency is more important than time of preservation [15]. Based on these past findings, we predicted that microbial community composition and diversity would not significantly differ among sample populations from different years. Collectively, this work advances our knowledge of the applicability of decades-old museum specimens to high-throughput sequencing projects and broadens knowledge on terrestrial gastropod gut microbiomes.

This study consists of data from 112 snails from two sources: 55 historical collected specimens from the University of Colorado Museum of Natural History’s (CUMNH) Invertebrate Zoology collections (for specimen information, see Supplementary Table 1) and 57 field collected specimens from localities within the state of Colorado (deposited in the CUMNH Invertebrate Zoology collections, see Supplementary Table 1).

The 55 historical specimens from the CUMNH collections were collected between 1920 and 2004. The sample selection from museum collections was based on (1) the sample size within each jar—in order to leave intact specimens for future study and morphological reference, we only sampled from lots that contained at least 15 specimens; (2) the distance between time points, as we strived to achieve both even spacing between years and a wide temporal spread of years in preservation. Based on these criteria, 3 samples were taken from the year 1920, 15 from 1974, 2 from 1980, 13 from 1982, 2 from 2000, and 20 from 2004 (Table
1).

In the summer months of 2018 (between July and September) when terrestrial snails of the Rockies are most active, we collected fresh, living samples of Oreohelix strigosa from three locations within the Colorado Front Range: (1) the University of Colorado Mountain Research Station in Ward, Colorado (MRS); (2) the 10-mile trail in Frisco, Colorado; and (3) the Gore Valley trail in Vail, Colorado. These freshly collected samples from 2018 (N = 57) included 15 from the MRS, 8 from Frisco, and 34 from Vail (Table
1). We used a qualitative collection method, i.e., collections made by direct visual searching, to collect specimens for this study, in accordance with Chalifour & Li [13] and Coppolino [16]. All collections were taken with the appropriate permitting for invertebrates. See Fig. 2 for a complete map of collection localities and corresponding years.

Samples classified as “fresh” underwent no preservation and were extracted immediately after sacrifice. For a subset of each locality population, we extracted gut tissue periodically at ethanol preservation lengths of 1, 6, and 9 months. This resulted in 11 fresh samples, 10 1-month preserved samples, 14 6-month preserved samples, and 17 9-month preserved samples (Table
2). Additionally, snails from each 2018 locality (a total of six samples) were kept under starvation conditions directly after collection with a natural photoperiod for approximately 1 week. They were given no food supplement of any kind. These starved snails were then sacrificed in the same manner as the other live snails.

All dissections in this study were performed aseptically, using sterile instruments. The soft body of the snail was removed by using fine forceps to gently pull the entire body out by the foot. In some cases, particularly of the older specimens, the soft body tissue had become too tough and could not be pulled out by the foot, so the apex of the shells was carefully broken and removed to expose the soft body, and then, the whole soft body was removed from the shells using forceps. The digestive tract was carefully isolated from the body, and a portion of gut was collected (Fig. 1C). We then re-preserved all shell and body parts individually in 80% ethanol after the necessary tissue was removed and re-catalogued these in the CUMNH collection accordingly.

Data were processed using the USEARCH10 pipeline [18] and the same processing as used in Chalifour & Li [13]. Reads were merged with a minimum overlap of 16 bp (usearch8 -fastq_mergepairs). Trimmed reads were quality-filtered with a max error rate of 1.0 (usearch10 -fastq_filter; 96.2% passed). Unique sequences were identified using usearch10 -fastx_uniques which clustered as 99% 16S rRNA gene operational taxonomic units (OTUs) with usearch10 -cluster_otus uniques.fa. OTUs were classified taxonomically using the GreenGenes 13_8 database [19]. We removed OTUs that were classified as mitochondria or chloroplasts, and we did not use any samples that yielded fewer than 2000 reads per sample. Samples were not rarefied after exclusion. Six of the 112 snail gut samples (four 2018 samples, two 2004 samples) failed to meet this threshold for sequencing depth and were excluded from downstream analyses, as were extraction and PCR blanks. Available data may be found at FigShare using (links to be added upon acceptance).

Data analysis was completed with R statistical software [20]. In sum, we examined community composition differences between our major treatment groups (i.e., explanatory variables), including the year collected, short-term preservation treatments, and location, as well as how several other ecological factors impact the community compositions. Once we determined how different the community compositions were, we identified which specific microbial taxa were driving the differences, using indicator species analyses. We then examined how microbial richness was affected by several explanatory variables, including year, short-term preservation treatment, and location. We also investigated species evenness and Shannon index as factors of microbial richness.

Along with microbial richness, we also looked at evenness and Shannon index. We used Kruskal–Wallis tests to examine how evenness and Shannon indices changed based on year and short-term preservation treatment.

The microbiome composition of Oreohelix strigosa historical museum samples proved to be highly diverse. In total, there were 5,233,457 reads across all non-filtered out samples. The average number of reads per snail gut was 42,548.43 ± standard deviation (SD) 19,689.78, with a maximum number of reads of 81,789 and a minimum number of 2948 reads. The identified OTUs belonged to 37 unique phyla, 233 families, and 446 genera.

Short-term treatments also showed significant differences between relative abundances of bacterial families (Fig. 3B). Snails from the fresh treatment had significantly lower levels of Enterobacteriaceae and higher levels of Chitinophagaeceae than the other treatments. Starved snails had significantly lower levels of Sphingobacteriaceae than the other treatments.

Across the entire dataset, the location explained more variation in microbial communities than year. When controlling for location, the year O. strigosa samples were collected was a significant predictor of microbiome composition, but only explained 2.25% of variability between samples (Fig. 4A). In contrast, when controlling for year, the location was again a significant predictor and explained 12.38% of variability between samples (Fig. 4B).

A Mantel test comparing geographic distance and species abundance dissimilarity showed that the physical distances between all samples was significantly correlated with Bray–Curtis dissimilarity (Mantel statistic R = 0.24, p-value < 0.001). As samples became more dissimilar in geographic location, they also became more dissimilar in microbial community composition. This result holds true when analyzing microbial community composition from only 2018 samples, again, the geographic distance matrix has a moderate, but highly significant relationship with the species Bray–Curtis dissimilarity matrix (Mantel statistic R = 0.27, p-value < 0.001).

The top five taxa that contributed to differences between snails collected in 1920 and snails collected in 2018 were OTU_9 and OTU_10 (both members of family Enterobacteriaceae), OTU_1 (Sphingobacterium faecium), OTU_27 (Pseudomonas sp.), and OTU_64 (Delftia sp.). The Enterobacteriaceae members and S. faecium dominated the 2018 samples over the 1920 samples, while the opposite was true for the Pseudomonas sp. and Delftia sp.

The multilevel pattern analysis for short-term treatment groups showed that no species were specifically associated with snails kept in preservation for 9 months. Starved snails had the highest number of associated taxa at 302, followed by fresh snails at 203, 6-month preservation has 9 associated taxa, and 1-month preservation had 6 associated taxa.

The average richness per gut sample was 434.55 ± SD 241.42 bacterial species, with a maximum of 1338 species and a minimum of 42 species.

Kruskal–Wallis tests showed that evenness changed non-significantly across most years, except for pairwise differences between 2004 and 1920 (p-value < 0.05), 2004 and 1974 (p-value < 0.05), and 2018 and 1974 (p-value < 0.05). Kruskal–Wallis tests showed that Shannon Indices changed non-significantly across most years, except for Shannon Indices in 2004 and 1974 which showed a significant pairwise difference (p-value < 0.001).

In this study, we targeted the gut microbiome of O. strigosa that were historically collected (between 1920 and 2004), preserved in ethanol, and stored in museum collections along with newly (2018) field collected O. strigosa used for short-term preservation treatments. Our results highlighted that long-term preservation does not significantly impact the makeup of the microbiome, in terms of alpha or beta diversity. Most variation occurs within the initial time frame of preservation, and then, microbiome structure appears stable throughout time. Significant variation in community composition is attributed to factors other than preservation period, including geographic location. Other factors not addressed in this study, such as whether the samples were first fixed in formalin and then moved into ethanol preservation, percentage of ethanol used (e.g., 70% versus 95% ethanol), and temperature-controlled storage, as well as fluctuations like freeze–thaw cycles, may have a greater impact on microbiome makeup than storage time [6, 14, 29].

The core microbiome of O. strigosa found in this study is consistent with that found in Chalifour & Li [13]. They consisted of two members of family Enterobacteriaceae and one unidentified Spingomonas species. These three OTUs made up nearly a third of all sequenced reads. Despite being collected across a broad temporal and geographic gradient within Colorado, our results suggest that there is a shared core microbiome across all these O. strigosa specimens. In addition, both historic and 2018 samples shared 3603 OTUs, or around half of all sequenced OTUs, showing that there is stability across the 98-year period of gut microbiome residents.

Members of Enterobacteriaceae, Sphingobacteriaceae, and Sphingomonadaceae have all been associated with other snail species’ gut microbiomes [10, 30, 31]. While associations between Oreohelix and their gut bacteria have barely been studied, their diet and habitats suggest that the microbiome may have important functional roles in cellulose breakdown. Among some of the representative O. strigosa microbiome species, Flacobacterium succinicans has been found in Daphnia guts [32], as well as soil and fresh water. Members of Roseomonas have been found in the gill and gastrointestinal microbiomes of Tilapia [33]. Stenotrophomonas maltophilia and other Stenotrophomonas species have been identified in bark beetle guts, and S. maltophilia in particular has shown cellulolytic activity [34].

Our results show that environmental factors are more likely to affect the microbiome composition than preservation factors. Long-term preservation seems to impact the makeup of the microbiome only marginally (Fig. 4A) compared with location which explained much more of the microbial composition variability (Fig. 4B) and does not significantly impact the richness of the microbiome (Fig. 5). Only 2.25% of variation in gut bacterial diversity was explained by the year the snail samples were collected (Fig. 4A, p-value < 0.001). In contrast, 12.38% of variation in microbiome composition was explained by the location the snail sample was collected (Fig. 4B, p-value < 0.001). So, samples from 50 years ago have just as much potential to answer biological questions as those from 10 years ago or less. Importantly, most samples, regardless of being historic or current, passed all quality control steps within the USEARCH pipeline [18], and those that did not meet the minimum read count were from later years (2004 and 2018). This preliminary, but vital step, shows that next-generation sequencing technology can characterize bacterial communities of historic specimens as well as contemporary specimens. In other studies, sequencing platform variability has a negligible effect of microbiome makeup differences across samples; rather, storage conditions are far more important in driving differences [35].

Differences between preserved and non-preserved samples could be due to the physiology of some microbes. There may be some microbial taxa that do not preserve well in 80% ethanol and are thus less represented in the preserved samples, also explaining why richness is lower in those short-term samples. However, multiple studies have shown that ethanol preservation is the ideal method for preserving microbiomes [36, 39]. Additionally, although we believe ethanol was the only preservative used in our samples, in some older museum specimens, formalin was initially used to preserve specimens, starting in 1891 and gaining popularity into the first quarter of the twentieth century [40]. Formalin can cause crosslinking among DNA molecules, even resulting in depolymerization of the DNA [6, 41, 42]. Unfortunately, the initial preservative is not always documented in museum records. To allow future researchers to use museum samples for microbiome study, detailed descriptions of sampling and preservation procedures should be kept to reduce variability from preservation practices in samples.

Significant results from this study substantiate the idea that snail gut microbiome changes are partially driven by geographic distances. When controlling for year, the location was a significant predictor of gut microbiome composition and explained 12.38% of variability between all samples and 16.91% of variability in just 2018 samples.

While not specifically investigated in this study, forms of anthropogenic disturbance can also drive changes in microbiome composition in other animal species [59, 60]. The Front Range of Colorado—where our snail samples originated from—has seen many striking changes in the past century, including expansion of residential and commercial land development marked by intensive land-use conversions, even in rural, mountainous areas [61]. As O. strigosa are typically ecologically specialized to small segments of montane ecosystems [62], disruptions in the form of quarrying, habitat fragmentation, and general human presence may contribute to biodiversity loss and greatly impact their microbiomes or cause dysbiosis.

The indicator species present in varying treatment groups of O. strigosa are all common across other gastropod microbiomes. Members of Verrucomicrobia are found in planorbid snails, including Bulinus africanus and Helisoma duryi [63]. Members of Spirosoma have been characterized in the Hawaiian tree snail Achatinella mustelina [64]. Enterobacteriaceae are present in the land snails Achatina fulica, Cornu aspersum, Helix pomatia, and Helix aspersa and are hypothesized to take part in food fermentation in the gut [10, 31, 65, 66].

In general, the later years sampled (from 2000 through 2018) showed Palmer drought indexes of extreme or severe drought, while most moister years occurred in the 1980s and before. In these later years, the family Enterobacteriaceae are more prevalent than in earlier years (Fig. 3A). Members of Enterobacteriaceae have been found to have a significant seed germination-promoting effect and stimulate seedling growth in plant species inoculated with these strains under severe drought stress [67]. As Enterobacter strains are drought tolerant and have a diverse growth range under stressful conditions, they may be more common in snail hosts that are also experiencing drought stress [68]. Snails may be feeding on plant matter that was assisted in growing by Enterobacteriaceae that are still present in the plant, thus being exogenously passed to the snail gut. Likewise, a member of family Cerasicoccaceae was associated to 2018 snails, which has also been associated with drastic environmental changes (such as changes in precipitation) in planktonic bacterial communities [31]. While there are shifts in indicator species for particular years, the overall microbial community compositions do not differ significantly among the years, explaining why drought index is not a significant driver. Similar results have been found in other systems. For example, thermally stressed barrel sponges show no significant community changes of the microbiome compared with non-stressed sponges [69]. There was however evidence of functional changes between these groups, with stressed sponges having lowered abundance of microbial photosynthetic proteins [69]. While the overall snail gut microbiome composition may stay similar throughout moist and drought years, there may be some key microbial players that do change in abundance in accordance with climate-induced shifts. Therefore, future studies should focus on understanding how ecological factors impact the abundance of different functional microbial groups, in addition to overall microbiome compositions.

Microbial richness shows a low amount of variation driven specifically by year. Consequently, community composition, rather than variation in richness, is responsible for the observed variation in the microbial communities across these snails. Elevation showed no significant effect on richness, and neither did Palmer drought index, apart from a significantly lowered richness in snails collected in moderately moist seasons. Overall, our findings support that long-term preservation allows for unbiased quantification of the microbial richness of the gut microbiome, as it remained stable over the 98-year temporal range of this study.

Nonsignificant differences between the richness of different communities could be due to host related factors. Varying diet composition, as discussed before, could explain the greater variation in richness seen when looking specifically at location. The stage of development of the host can also create variations in microbiome richness [13, 70]. As all the snails used in this study were adults, we do not think development stage was a factor here; however, it should be considered in future studies of this nature. Host gut length has been suggested as a factor in shaping the microbiome and could also be considered in future studies [70]. Additionally, in other studies, host genotype can be extremely important in shaping the gut microbiome and should be considered when using museum specimens from multiple species [11, 71].

The use of advanced molecular technology offers a novel method to study microbial communities of ethanol-preserved museum specimens. In this study, we used next-gen high-throughput sequencing technique to investigate the bacterial diversity of museum specimens of the snail species O. strigosa across nearly a century of preservation age. We have demonstrated that specimens from all ages generated high-quality sequencing data, and the snails’ core microbiomes were stable across all museum specimens. Both long- and short-term preservation time explained little variation in the data, with other factors like location explaining more of the variation between samples. Further research is required to better characterize other potential driving factors of microbiome variability in O. strigosa, which include initial preservation and storage methodologies, especially for museum samples.

In the future, similar studies need to be done on more diverse museum specimens and on various types of microbiomes (mucosal, fecal, whole body, etc.). Consistent methods of preservations are necessary to definitively reduce sources of variability across microbiome sample compositions. At least, consistent records of preservation techniques along with detailed locality notes are helpful for researchers conducting microbial ecology studies. It is similarly vital for ecologists to communicate closely with museum workers to create a coordinated approach for sample lending, destruction, and the return of usable DNA to the museum institution [72]. This study should encourage further use of museums as a resource for studying microbial ecology across time and space.



Publisher's Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

