Gut Microbiome as a Potential Factor for Modulating Resistance to Cancer Immunotherapy

Gut microbiota refers to the diverse community of more than 100 trillion microorganisms residing in our intestines. It is now known that any shift in the composition of gut microbiota from that present during the healthy state in an individual is associated with predisposition to multiple pathological conditions, such as diabetes, autoimmunity, and even cancer. Currently, therapies targeting programmed cell death protein 1/programmed cell death 1 ligand 1 or cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen-4 are the focus of cancer immunotherapy and are widely applied in clinical treatment of various tumors. Owing to relatively low overall response rate, however, it has been an ongoing research endeavor to identify the mechanisms or factors for improving the therapeutic efficacy of these immunotherapies. Other than causing mutations that affect gene expression, some gut bacteria may also activate or repress the host's response to immune checkpoint inhibitors. In this review, we have described recent advancements made in understanding the regulatory relationship between gut microbiome and cancer immunotherapy. We have also summarized the potential molecular mechanisms behind this interaction, which can serve as a basis for utilizing different kinds of gut bacteria as promising tools for reversing immunotherapy resistance in cancer.

More than 1,000 species of microorganisms inhabit the human intestines (1). Different types of microorganisms exist in different proportions in the intestines. They not only restrict but also depend on each other for growth and survival, and form an ecological balance of quality and quantity. Generally, there are three categories of gut bacteria based on their functions in the host: (1) symbionts, with mutual benefit to the host, account for nearly 90%; (2) conditioned pathobionts, normally harmless but produce disease due to fortuitous events that affect the host; and (3) pathobionts, disease-causing organisms (2–4). Gut microbiota is initially acquired from mothers during delivery and lactation and is followed by stable colonization of the host until 3 years of age. Subsequently, the microbial composition is shaped by external environmental factors (5–7). In other words, both host genetics and environmental factors are significant in determining the composition of intestinal microbial communities.

Tumor immunotherapy has become a hot topic for cancer treatment. Present tumor immune-targeted treatments are focused on toll-like receptor (TLR) agonists, vaccines, immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs), and adoptive T-cell therapy (ACT). ICIs play a pivotal role in the treatment of various advanced-stage cancers, as evidenced by monoclonal antibodies blocking the programmed cell death protein 1/programmed cell death 1 ligand 1 (PD-1/PD-L1) and the cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen-4 (CTLA-4) (24). However, only less than half the patients respond to ICIs initially, and another subgroup becomes resistant during continued treatment, suggesting the presence of natural-acquired or therapy-induced resistance (25). Because of the life-threatening side effects or decrease in the quality of life, it is important to accurately identify the subset of patients who benefit most from ICIs. PD-L1 overexpression (26) and gene analysis (mutational landscape or mismatch repair deficiency) (27) have proven to be instrumental in predicting potential clinical outcomes of PD-1/PD-L1 blockade therapy. Snyder et al. (28) have performed whole-exome sequencing on patients with melanoma treated with CTLA-4 blockade and showed that cancer genomics can help in determining patient response to immunotherapy. Over recent years, a growing number of studies have also emphasized that the gut microbiome could modulate response to cancer immunotherapy. Some of these studies, however, were conducted using innovative treatments without extensive application in patients and, therefore, require further work to unlock the mystery of microbial modulation of various anticancer immunotherapies.

The mucosal immune system is an independent immune system with a unique structure and functions. The mucus layer of the intestine is composed of mucus proteins secreted by goblet cells, mucins (rich in antimicrobial peptides) secreted by intestinal epithelial cells, and secretory immunoglobulin A produced by B cells. It can effectively inhibit the adhesion and colonization of bacteria in intestinal epithelium, a physical barrier mediated through tight junctions that helps in separating bacteria and harmful antigens from the internal environment. Mucosal immune system is also comprised of gut-associated lymphoid tissue that mainly includes histological lymphoid tissue and diffused lymphocytes. The former includes Peyer's patches, isolated lymphoid follicles, and mesenteric lymphoid nodes. The latter mainly refers to lymphocytes scattered in lamina propria and epithelial cell layer, such as dendritic cells (DCs), T cells, and B cells.

Epithelial ɤδ T cell subgroup is part of a larger group of residing lymphocytes known as intraepithelial lymphocytes (IEL). Although the microbiota has an immense effect on the composition and number of αβ T cells, the development and numbers of ɤδ IELs show no difference between GF and WT mice. Nonetheless, microbiota do restrict the function of gut ɤδ IEL. Transplantation of microbiota harvested from conventional mice into GF mice can induce production of several antimicrobial peptides, including regenerating islet-derived protein 3 gamma (RegIIIɤ) (37), a C-type lectin that recognizes and binds to Gram-positive bacteria and forms a hexameric membrane-penetrating pore leading to direct bacterial killing (38). In short, these studies illustrate that detection of invasive bacteria by ɤδ IELs balances intestinal microbiota through crosstalk with adjacent epithelial cells, thereby acting as a vital component of the immune system.

Intestinal flora is not only related to intestinal immune diseases but also has an important impact beyond the gut. The famous “microflora hypothesis” points out that other than specific limited infections, an overly clean western lifestyle limits universal microbial contact and, thus, changes the colonization of the intestinal microbiota of infants along with undermining the development of the immune system and triggering various immune diseases. For instance, symptoms of gut microbiota disorder usually appear within a course of 6 months in early arthritis patients (39). Intestinal flora is considered to affect systemic immune diseases through the following ways: (1) The small molecular substances generated by intestinal flora enter the blood circulation and affect the immune response of distal organs. A study showed that the microbial homeostasis was disturbed after treatment with antibiotics, as a result of which a specific fungus proliferated excessively. This was followed by increased concentration of prostaglandins in plasma that boosted the polarization of M2 macrophages in the lung and caused allergic inflammation (40). (2) Through the common mucosal immune system existing throughout the whole body. An emerging perspective described the mucosal immune system as a complete network of tissues that protects the host, prevents infection, and resists environmental interference. In this system, immune activation of one local site may result in altered immune microenvironment at another distal site. Consequently, it is easy to understand why exposure to mold spores or ovalbumin in the nose is more likely to cause allergic respiratory diseases under circumstances where the microbial homeostasis in the intestines is broken (41). (3) The signals produced by gut microbiota or recognized by TLR have an effect on extraintestinal diseases due to alteration of the immune response. (4) Gut microbiota can also manage the development of systemic immune cells. Hence, it seems that the more beneficial bacteria in the gut, the more complete the immune system, and the more conducive it is toward adapting to the external environment.

Earlier, multiple studies showed a correlation between gut microbiome and cancer therapy, such as the chemotherapy-elicited anticancer immune response of cyclophosphamide (42, 43). It was postulated that microbiota changes the tumor microenvironment (TME) to improve immunomodulatory effects. However, these results raise new questions, such as whether a causal link with gut microbiome and cancer immunotherapy exists or not. Here, we reviewed the data from recent advances to address such questions (Figure 1).

PD-1 and its ligands (PD-L1/PD-L2), along with CTLA-4 and its ligand B7, are a part of CD28 and B7 families that have a crucial role in T-cell exhaustion (44). ICIs aim to counteract T-cell inhibition to resurrect the antitumor activity of the immune system.

However, discrepancies exist between such a suppressed effect of CTLA-4 blockade on gut microbiota. According to Chaput et al. (68), the dominant bacterial phyla remained stable during ipilimumab treatment course. Thus, whether ipilimumab could induce a gut microbial dysbiosis deserves reliable proof by further detailed studies. Chaput et al. also addressed the question of whether microbiota composition at baseline was associated with a subsequent clinical response. Twenty-six melanoma patients treated with ipilimumab were enrolled in this study, and analysis of fecal microbiota composition of patients were in accordance with an earlier study: Bacteroides were present in majority of the patients with poor clinical benefit, but a higher proportion of Faecalibacterium existed in patients with longer survival (68) (Figure 3), who also had a smaller proportion of baseline Tregs and a lower frequency of effector T cells compared to those with shorter PFS.

Pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) are an important part of host innate immune system for sensing invading microorganisms (69). PRRs recognize pattern-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) and initiate a cascade of intracellular signaling pathways resulting in the activation of immune cells (70). The most-studied PRRs are TLRs; they detect PAMPs from various pathogens (71). TLRs connect the innate and adaptive immune system by recognizing pathogens via DCs and in turn boosting T and B cell responses, thereby supporting the use of synthetic TLR agonists for the benefit of cancer vaccines (72).

In a complementary study (77), tumor-bearing mice treated with an intratumor injection of CpG-oligodeoxynucleotides and anti-IL-10R were randomized into control and ABT-treated groups (vancomycin, imipenem, and neomycin). Based on the results, it was identified that ABT decreased the number of TNF-secreting cells and cytokines in major histocompatibility complex (MHC)-II monocytes, macrophages, and DCs (77). Gavage administration of bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) considerably increased Tnf expression and TNF-producing cells in tumors of ABT-treated wild-type mice but not Tlr4−/− mice (absence of the Tlr4 receptor for LPS) (77). The ability of ABT oral gavage to reduce gastrointestinal microbial load in the absence of bacterial DNA in tumors and the restorative effect of LPS suggested that gut microbiome could modulate the immune response in the TME. Taken together, the participation of commensal bacteria is found to be imperative for CpG/anti-IL10R immunotherapy (77).

Adoptive cell therapy (ACT) refers to the expansion and modification of cancer-cognate lymphocytes in vitro for infusion, with the goal of improving immune function and characteristics (78). TCR-engineered T cells or CAR-engineered T cells increase the efficacy of the antitumor immune response (79). Uribe-Herranz et al. (80) showed the correlation between the gut microbiome and the efficacy of ACT therapy. The researchers developed two mouse models (JAX/HAR) of cervical and lung cancer with E6/E7 human papillomavirus protein expression and different types of gut microbiome, and transferred CD3+ T cells, generated by vaccination of donor mice with human papillomavirus-associated cancers, to the lymph-depleted tumor-bearing animals. ACT was more effective in HAR mice receiving ACT and almost completely abrogated tumor growth. Examination of fecal bacteria revealed that HAR mice harbored a more diverse range of Bacteroidetes taxa than JAX mice (80). ACT efficacy increased when the bacterial composition was altered following depletion of Gram-positive taxa by antibiotics, but it was unchanged after depletion of Gram-negative bacteria. The ACT protocol was followed after FMT from JAX to HAR mice pretreated with antibiotics to compromise the resident gut microbiota. It was reasonable to hypothesize that the combination of vancomycin and ACT in HAR mice after FMT resulted in a similar response to ACT as in JAX mice. The above results showed that the gut microbiome plays an important role in the antitumor effectiveness of ACT.

Apart from the modulation of efficacy, the microbiome may also predict the susceptibility to immunotherapy-associated adverse events. The immune-mediated, new-onset colitis is the most frequently occurring adverse event during immunotherapy and is primarily controlled by dose decrement or application of corticosteroids. In a prospective study on immune-mediated colitis, bacteria of the Bacteroidetes phylum, which includes some of the most beneficial bacterial species, were enriched in colitis-resistant patients (81). Moreover, the absence of genetic pathways associated with polyamine transport and biosynthesis of vitamin B increased the susceptibility to colitis (81). The immunomodulatory molecule named polysaccharide A, generated by the human symbiont, can prevent or even cure colitis in animals (82). Bifidobacterium treatment reduces weight loss following CTLA-4 blocking therapy in a standard colitis mouse model (83). In addition, decreased secretion of inflammatory cytokines such as KC, IL-6, and CFS3 as observed with the same growth kinetics of the tumor, indicating that Bifidobacterium mitigates gut immunopathology without compromising on the effects of immunotherapy. Identification of microbial biomarkers may help in reducing the development of inflammatory complications caused by cancer immunotherapy.

Wang et al. (84) reported the first case of ICI-associated colitis successfully treated with FMT, with reconstitution of the gut microbiota and a relative increase in the proportion of Treg cells within the colonic mucosa. These preliminary data provided evidence that modulation of the gut microbiome may abrogate ICI-related colitis. However, a limitation of this study is the small number of samples that were used in the study. Therefore, additional studies are critically needed to assess the utility of this approach as well as to provide further mechanistic insights.

Genetic variation between different hosts is closely related to the architecture of individual gut microbiota. Classic twin studies, for example, have shown that the gut microbiota of identical twins is significantly more similar than that of fraternal twins (85). However, the main environmental factors, including diet lifestyle, evolutionary history, immune system, age, and antibiotics still influence the composition of the gut microbiota (86). The majority of studies have reported that there is a positive correlation between microbial diversity and the immune response. In Chinese patients with advanced non-small-cell lung carcinoma, the higher was the diversity of the gut microbiota, the better was the response observed to anti-PD-1 immunotherapy (58). However, some researchers believe that the gut microbiome could induce tumor progression. Sethi et al. (87) found that gut microbiota depletion in a mice model significantly increases IFN-ɤ-producing T cells and correspondingly decreases the IL 17A and IL 10-producing T cells, thereby reducing tumor growth. Uribe-Herranz et al. (80) have shown that, in a cervical cancer mice model treated with adoptive T cell therapy, the concurrent use of vancomycin can reduce tumor progression, mainly due to the opposite effect of the vancomycin-sensitive Gram-negative bacteria. These two contradictory results could not be easily reconciled based on our current knowledge on the topic.

As a microbial ecosystem, the composition and numbers of microbial community fluctuate in a dynamic equilibrium under the influence of external factors. At least for now, it is difficult to accurately identify the individual genres that specifically modulate the immune response among the thousands of bacteria populations. Moreover, it is likely that the effect of a single kind of microorganism is not enough to cause such a qualitative leap. Perhaps, the changing tendency of the microbiota architecture or dominant bacteria is the critical regulatory factor. Tanoue et al. (88) have isolated successfully IFNɤ+ CD8 T-cell-inducing bacteria strains from healthy human microbiota and indicated that they work as a consortium in which the four non-Bacteroidales species are effector elements and the seven Bacteroidales play a supporting role. Because of inductive accumulation of colonic IFNɤ+ CD8 T cell, colonization with the 11 strains exhibited enhanced clearance of tumor cells when combined with ICIs therapy.

Some of the above-mentioned studies showed that bacteria can differentially affect the T-cell immune response and potentially remold the “cold” or suppressive TME into a “hot” or responsive one. However, the possible mechanisms underlying this concept are still under investigation. To resolve this issue holistically, data collected from diverse microbial genera ought to be evaluated in consideration of the multidimensional view of tumors, taking into account the multiple influencing factors such as TME and the host characteristics involved in therapeutic efficacy (89). It is likely that metabolic changes induced by the microbiota could coordinate the TME, enabling the revival of T-cell functions to counteract tumor-induced immunotolerance (90).

Recent results have reported significantly higher levels of IFN-ɤ in the tumor-draining lymph node and spleen after introduction of beneficial bacteria (54). IFN-ɤ, an important cytokine involved in antitumor immunity, could upregulate MHC expression on tumor cells and M1 macrophages and facilitate the recognition and elimination of transformed cells (91, 92). IFN-ɤ is a dimer that combines with specific heterodimer receptors to activate JAK1/2 for subsequent regulation of the induction of STAT1 dimerization and genetic transcription (93). CTLA-4 blocking therapy of tumor-bearing mice also reportedly improves IFN-ɤ signaling in T cells (94). Loss of IFN-ɤ signaling could induce resistance to anti-CTLA-4 treatment (95). In line with these findings, microbes may reverse the resistance to immunotherapy through reactivation of IFN-ɤ signaling pathways.

All these cytokines display a synergistic trend in their biological actions. The gut bacteria that significantly prolong PFS show a preserved cytokine response to PD-1-target treatment, whereas antibiotics have been demonstrated to decrease the level of cytokines in TME (67). Therefore, the production of cytokines may be one of the mechanisms used by the gut microbiome to alter resistance to therapy.

Recent research in animal models and human patients with disseminated cancer has shown that the activation of tolerogenic macrophages and DCs is under the control of gut microbiome during immunotherapy. MHC-IIhi DCs was discovered in the tumors of Bifidobacterium-treated mice (40); orally feeding B. fragilis induced Th1 immune response in the tumor-draining lymph nodes and catalyzed the maturation of DCs in the TME, facilitating the restoration of the clinical response to CTLA-4 blockade (67).

Short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), such as acetate, butyrate, and propionate, produced by commensal bacteria during starch fermentation, strongly modulate gene expression in human monocyte-derived DCs, thus reducing the secretion of multiple proinflammatory chemokines and inhibiting the expression of LPS-induced cytokines with enhanced activity against inflammation (110). Propionates affect DC and macrophage biology in the bone marrow and regulate Th2 cell responses in the airway of the mouse model (111). The function of gut macrophages, the most abundant immune cell type, is modulated by n-butyrate (112). The SCFAs also control several signaling pathways in immune cells (82).

Specific species in the gut microbiota are associated with the production of Tregs. Patients with non-beneficial bacteria presented higher levels of Tregs in their systemic circulation, whereas patients with long-term benefit presented a low level of Tregs at the baseline (68). Smith et al. speculated that “fit bacteria” decrease peripherally derived Tregs, which is related to enhanced efficacy of PD-1-blocking therapy. Polysaccharide A, a microbial molecule produced by B. fragilis, promotes the development of an inducible population of CD4+Foxp3+ Tregs, a subset of Tregs, which inhibits the regulation of the immune system (113).

However, opinions regarding this are not consistent. In their study on PDAC microbiome, Pushalkar et al. (59) found that, although endogenous bacterial dysbiosis triggered immune suppression, Treg differentiation did not differ in PDAC-bearing and WT mice. Similar results were observed in another study (117), where the number of Foxp3+ T cells isolated from the spleen was not different between PBS- and Bifidobacterium-treated mice, but genes targeted to certain metabolic pathways of Tregs, such as cellular macromolecules and organic substances, were expressed differentially. It remains to be verified whether the involvement of Tregs is the main cause of differential response to immunotherapy.

Chemokines are a family of small cytokines or signaling proteins released by cells. Some chemokines can be induced during an immune response to recruit cells of the immune system to a tumor site, and their G protein-coupled receptors are found on the surface of leukocytes. Cremonesi et al. (117) found that exposing colorectal cancer (CRC) cells to Fusobacterium nucleatum, B. fragilis, and E. coli could upregulate the majority of chemokine genes both in vitro and in vivo. They evaluated the chemokine expression levels in tumor-bearing NSG mice by intraperitoneal (i.p.) or intracecal (i.c.) injection of human CRC cells. The i.c. models showed a striking 70-fold higher level of CCL5, 19-fold higher level of CCL20, and 12-fold higher level of CXCL10 levels than those in i.p. xenografts, suggesting that exposure to gut flora resulted in a strong induction of chemokine expression. In contrast, antibiotic use significantly reduced tumor-derived chemokine expression in i.c. xenografts. Moreover, the enhanced chemokine production correlated with the gut microbiome-derived microbial load. The migration of TILs into i.c. tumors enhanced the secretion of chemokines into the TME. To summarize, gut microbiota may play a role in enhancing T-cell recruitment into the tumor site, thereby promoting the cytotoxic effect of effector immune cells toward target tumor cells to improve the clinical treatment outcome in patients. An analysis of gut microbiota constituents in CRC samples to elucidate the relationship with specific bacteria and T-cell infiltration showed that Alloprevotella, Treponema, and Desulfovibrio were abundant in tumors infiltrated with CD3+ T cells, whereas the overexpression of Prevotella, Bacteroides, and Fretibacterium was more frequent in CD3low tumors.

In conclusion, in view of the metabolic function elicited by gut microbiota, we infer that their metabolic byproducts are perceived by cells and molecules of the immune system and modulate the equilibrium between pro- and antitumor functions. Some gut bacteria act as suppressors of inhibitory signal pathways, facilitate antigen presentation, and improve specific antitumor immunity (118). Because of the modulation of the immune system by gut microbiota, immune therapy could be tailored to focus on rejuvenating host immunity.

The quote of Hippocrates that “all diseases begin in the gut” is consistent with the ancient theory of traditional Chinese medicine, that is, “Disease enters through the mouth.” The functions of gut microbiota are not completely known in the modulation of the immune system, metabolic equilibrium, and tumor progression. With a gradual increase in knowledge in this area, our purpose is to transit the hypothesis to practice and apply the novel therapeutic weapon in the war against cancer or other refractory diseases.

Because of inaccuracies in predicting the response to immunotherapy, it is difficult to select patients for optimistic regimens in the clinical practice. Extensive research revealed the synergistic activity of bacteria genera including A. muciniphila, Alistipes indistinctus, Bacteroides, Bifidobacterium, Burkholderia cepacia, Collinsella aerofaciens, and Enterococcus, as well as Faecalibacterium and Gemmiger formicilis in immunotherapy. However, Blautia obeum, Roseburia intestinalis, and some combination of antibiotics (56, 59, 77) compromised the efficacy of immunotherapy (Table 1). It is essential to develop a candidate predictive biomarker from these aggregate data. Uniform results on the composition of the microbiota are lacking, suggesting that there may be other unidentified factors underlying this complicated process. Perhaps, a combination of commensal microbiota structure, tumor genomics, germline genetics, and other elements in a multiparameter model may likely predict clinical response to immunotherapies (55). For instance, some researchers calculated the proportion of “beneficial” and “non-beneficial” operational taxonomic units and their ratio for every patient and reached a limit conclusion—a ratio of over 1.5 indicated clinical benefit (55). Previous results have tried to utilize the gut microbiota as a potential biomarker for pancreatic cancer (123). Although the results showed a distinct response to immunotherapy in patients, it remains to be verified whether the effects will be reproduced in clinical trials.

Based on previous studies, we expect to develop a remedial or precautionary strategy for the discordance in relation to dysbiosis of the gut microbiota in the future. The most optimal management of the commensal microbial bacteria involves FMT from healthy donors to recipients (with an illness) to correct the dysbiosis allowing colonization by the pathobionts (124). FMT is a promising method to improve the microorganism composition in the gut and is currently in use in the clinic as an optimal treatment for recurrent Clostridium difficile infection (125). It also has the potential to manipulate gut microbiota by FMT in patients with IBD (126, 127).

Considering that most ATBs are highly effective and broad spectrum, they would trigger significant changes to the microenvironment due to a lack of precision to regulate specific bacterial populations. Another intervention to regulate the commensal entities include dietary changes, by which more specific essential nutrients are supplied to boost the expansion of beneficial bacteria, or conversely, unfavorable bacteria were starved to death due to scarce expected nutrients. Alternatively, immune-potentiating bacteria could be prepared as a probiotic and provided as an immunotherapy adjuvant. Instead of increasing good bacteria, selective depletion of harmful species from the community by the function of bacteriophages while maintaining the microbiota equilibrium intact could be further studied to perfect the composition of intestinal microbiota.

Although a series of investigations have verified the impact of gut microbiota on cancer immunotherapy, there still lies a great deal of ambiguity and insufficiency in these studies. The main challenge encountered is the incomplete understanding of the special microbial species involved in better immune response. Studies have proposed different types of bacteria as favorable or unfavorable in the response to immunotherapy, and a consensus has not been reached despite the studies being conducted in similar patient cohorts with the same treatments. One reason for the difference in results is that TME is unique for the type of cancer and is exclusively sensitive to the specific commensal microbiota. In addition, many studies have used FMT in experimental animals, and whether the cross-species microbiota transplantation reflects conditions in humans remains to be determined. Therefore, we anticipate that clinical syngraft trials will solve this problem.

Currently, the activity of the immune system is of interest in cancer diagnosis and treatment. Several immunotherapy protocols that involve acting on diverse molecules or pathways have emerged to dominate the current clinical therapeutic procedures. The immunological condition of the host and biology of the malignancy and tumor invasion status determine the host's response to individualized therapy. In future, we expect the use of the commensal microbiota to permeate almost every facet of clinical medical procedures. Analysis of the gut microbiome composition could potentially become a routine test for accurate evaluation of the health of cancer patients and help predict the response and adverse effects of cancer therapy. Diagnosis of dysbiosis and compensation of dysbiosis by appropriate immunogenic probiotics will increase our clinical understanding of diseases in the future.

All authors listed have made a substantial, direct and intellectual contribution to the work, and approved it for publication.

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

Funding. This research was supported by the Post-Doctor Research Project, West China Hospital, Sichuan University (No. 2018HXBH032) and Sichuan Science and Technology Program (No. 2019YFS0109).

