A Gut Feeling in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis: Microbiome of Mice and Men

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a severely debilitating disease characterized by progressive degeneration of motor neurons. ALS etiology and pathophysiology are not well understood. It could be the consequences of complex interactions among host factors, microbiome, and the environmental factors. Recent data suggest the novel roles of intestinal dysfunction and microbiota in ALS etiology and progression. Although microbiome may indeed play a critical role in ALS pathogenesis, studies implicating innate immunity and intestinal changes in early disease pathology are limited. The gastrointestinal symptoms in the ALS patients before their diagnosis are largely ignored in the current medical practice. This review aims to explore existing evidence of gastrointestinal symptoms and progress of microbiome in ALS pathogenesis from human and animal studies. We discuss dietary, metabolites, and possible therapeutic approaches by targeting intestinal function and microbiome. Finally, we evaluate existing evidence and identify gaps in the knowledge for future directions in ALS. It is essential to understanding the microbiome and intestinal pathogenesis that determine when, where, and whether microbiome and metabolites critical to ALS progression. These studies will help us to develop more accurate diagnosis and better treatment not only for this challenging disease, but also for other neurodegenerative diseases.

ALS is a highly fatal neuromuscular disease currently with no cure. ALS has a median incidence of about 2.8 cases per 100,000 persons per year and a median prevalence about 5.4 cases per 100,000 persons for a median age at 61.8 ± 3.8 years (Chio et al., 2013). Although relatively rare, this public health impact of ALS is significant due to its morbidity and mortality.

In the current review, we summarize the altered GI functions and roles of the gut microbiota in ALS, based on human data and experimental models. We discuss possible therapeutic approaches by targeting intestinal function and microbiome. Our goal is to evaluate existing evidence and identify gaps in the knowledge for future directions in ALS and other neurodegenerative diseases.

Pancreatic function was studied in ALS patients. In a 1967 study (Quick and Greer, 1967) that examined the pancreatic function of 5 ALS patients and 5 patients with non-ALS neurological diseases, they found that all 5 ALS patients displayed elevations in leucine aminopeptidase. 4 of the 5 ALS patients had abnormal results to tolbutamide testing. In the 4 ALS patients that underwent secretin testing, there were abnormalities in the response the secretin. The results of this study suggested that there is a disturbance of the function of the exocrine gland in patients with ALS, a finding that was consistent across patients. This is believed to be the first study that observed changes with this gland, as previous studies had only observed alterations of the endocrine gland. This study raised the question if there is a direct relationship between ALS and the pancreas or if alterations of the pancreas are due to secondary complications.

Clearly, there are GI disorders in patients with ALS. We summarized the current literature in Table 1 . These reports suggest that ALS patients show GI symptoms, maybe at the early stage of their disease or before their diagnoses. However, GI symptoms for pre-diagnosis of ALS are largely ignored. It is challenging to perform systemic studies before the diagnoses.

Transgenic animals are expected to imitate the key features of ALS. There are different ALS experimental models, with their advantages and disadvantages (Philips and Rothstein, 2015). In patients with ALS, there are spinal cord and muscle pathology. About 10% of familial ALS cases are attributed to mutations in Cu, Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD). Normal SOD catalyzes the dismutation of superoxide radicals into hydrogen peroxide and molecular oxygen. The ALS pathology can be modeled in hSOD1G93A mice, which carry the human point mutant SOD1 G93A.

Studies in the animal models have shown the GI petrophysical changes before the motor neuron degeneration was observed. We summarized these findings in Table 2 . Although the transgenic animal models cannot sufficiently represent the development of human ALS, especially the sALS, studies in these models still provide valuable data and mechanisms during the disease progression.

There are known active host-microbiome interactions in the GI tract. Our 2015 study has demonstrated the altered bacterial abundance, reduced levels of butyrate-producing bacteria in the ALS SOD1G93A animals (Wu et al., 2015). The intestinal microbiome was altered as butyrate producing bacteria (e.g., Butyrivibrio Fibrisolvens) were reduced in ALS mice at the age of 2 months before the onset of disease. The cellular and physiological changes mirror the population and function changes in the gut microbiome of the SOD1G93A mice. With an interventional study attempting to alleviate symptoms through treatment with sodium butyrate (Zhang et al., 2017). SOD1G93A mice chronically treated with sodium butyrate fared better than those not given the compound, showing improved intestinal barrier function and delays in both weight loss and death of 50 and 38 days respectively. Further longitudinal studies (Zhang et al., 2021) demonstrated the early stage microbial changes in the mice at 1-month old. The altered bacterial community is related to autoimmunity (e.g., Clostridium sp. ASF502, Lachnospiraceae bacterium A4), inflammation (e.g., Enterohabdus Muris), and metabolism (e.g., Desulfovibrio fairfieldensis) at 1- and 2-month-old SOD1G93A mice, suggesting the early microbial contribution to the ALS pathological changes (Zhang et al., 2021).

We summarized the existing studies on gut microbiome in ALS models in Table 3 . Different ALS experimental models show altered microbiome, and the pathophysiological changes could by modulated by bacterial metabolites or antibiotic treatment. These results suggested that gut microbiota and environment modify immunity, neuroinflammation, and motor deficits in the development of ALS.

When examining 6 ALS patients and 5 healthy people without ALS, a 2016 study (Fang et al., 2016) found microbiomes of ALS showed a significant difference in the global bacterial gene content compared to healthy controls. Phylum Bacteroidetes, class Bacteroidia), order Bacteriodales, and genus Dorea were significantly higher in ALS patients than in the healthy controls. Lachnospiraceae (at family level), Firmicutes (at phylum level) and Clostridia (at class level), Oscillibacter (at genus level), Family XII (at family level), Anaerostipes (at genus level), Lachnospiraceae (at genus level), and Clostridiales (at order level) were significantly higher in the healthy controls than in the ALS patients. In the healthy controls, the 3 dominant phyla in 80% of the fecal microbiomes was Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes, and Actinobacteria. There was a significant decrease of Oscillibacter, Anaerostipes, and Lachnospiraceae in ALS patients.

We summarized the studies on gut microbiome in ALS patients in Table 4 . These results suggested novel roles of intestinal microbiome in the development of ALS and the potential benefits of decreasing the number of pathogens and increasing probiotics. The challenge of early studies of microbiome in ALS lies in the following aspects: 1) limited sample size; 2) preliminary data analysis; and 3) reluctance from neurologists to pay attention the intestinal changes in the early stage of ALS. In the earlier time of microbiome research, a F/B ratio was used. Although it indicated the evidence of dysbiosis in patients with ALS. The F/B ratio only reflect the relative abundance of bacteria at the phylum level and may miss the changes at the species, thus, it is not a reliable readout for the in-depth analysis and advanced studies of microbiome data.

There is abundant evidence many substances involved in the promotion of inflammatory processes are present in the CNS of patients. Previous reviews have discussed the role of inflammation in ALS and the possibility of treating ALS by immune modulation (McCombe and Henderson, 2011; Kwon and Koh, 2020). Dysregulation of the peripheral immune system and reduced levels of regulatory T cells are associated with disease progression. Monocytes are activated in ALS and dendritic cells play a role in pathogenesis. In the brain and spinal cord of patients with ALS, microglia respond to injury in a beneficial way, but chronic microglial activation is thought to contribute to the pathogenesis of the neurodegenerative disease. There is activation of microglia (‘neuroinflammation’) in ALS. Microglia can have opposite roles at different times. However, the local inflammation in other organs, e.g GI, was less explored in the ALS research.

Neuroinflammation contributes to the pathogenesis of ALS through various mechanisms including enhanced reactive oxygen species (ROS), activation of innate immune systems, increased proinflammatory cytokines, and infiltration of immune cells. Dysbiosis leads to an inflammatory state and altered gut microbiota could influence the immune system in ALS. Moreover, the nutrition has a direct impact on gut microbiome, which shapes local intestinal immune responses and in turn affects even autoimmune responses. Conjugated linoleic acid (CLA), a naturally occurring fatty acid in meat and dairy products of ruminants. A recent study (Fleck et al., 2021) identified CLA as a potent modulator of the gut–CNS axis by targeting myeloid cells in the intestine, which in turn controlled encephalitogenic T-cell responses in mouse model of multiple sclerosis and a pilot human study. However, microbiome, nutrients, immune cells, and cytokines in early disease pathology of human ALS are still unclear. The precise role of inflammation in various organs, include GI, in ALS needs to be further investigated on larger samples and with more mechanistic studies.

Significant alterations in the levels of various metabolites were identified in the sera of ALS patients. Bacterial product butyrate is beneficial and slows down the progression of ALS, based on our studies in the SOD1G93A mice (Zhang et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2021). There is a trial (Paganoni et al., 2020; Turnbull, 2020) using sodium phenylbutyrate-taurursodiol in ALS patients. It reported Sodium phenylbutyrate-taurursodiol resulted in slower functional decline than placebo as measured by the ALSFRS-R score over a period of 24 weeks.

Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) could improve gastrointestinal and behavioral symptoms in neurological diseases (Kang et al., 2017; Kang et al., 2019). Parkinson’s disease patients after one-week treatment of FMT improved constipation and motor symptoms such as leg tremors. The tremors recurred 2 months after FMT, whereas constipation was relieved even after 3 months (Huang et al., 2019). Intestinal bacteria as an external trigger could explain the rare cases of ALS in spouses or in some clusters (Sabel et al., 2003). To reconstruct the intestinal microbiome, FMT has been used to transfer the gut microbiota from healthy individuals to ALS patients (Xu et al., 2021). ClinicalTrials.gov (https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03766321) has an ongoing FMT trial for a year with 42 ALS patients, at an early stage (28 FMT-treated patients vs. 14 controls). This will promote a further understanding of microbiota restoration and GI function.

Many factors are involved in the gut microbiota composition and function, including genetics, gender, age, geographic location, lifestyle, and diet (Ballan et al., 2020; de Vos et al., 2022). Also, the gut microbiota is responsible for metabolization of compounds from the diet producing several metabolites (Ballan et al., 2020; de Vos et al., 2022). As a consequence, different gut microbiota compositions will result in different metabolite profiles, that will interact with cell receptors, having a direct impact on different signaling pathways and on the host health (de Vos et al., 2022).

Emerging evidence support the roles of gut-neuron-microbiome in various human diseases (Ogbu et al., 2020; Fang et al., 2020). For examples, in a human pilot study in patients with multiple sclerosis, dietary conjugated linoleic acid-supplementation for 6 months significantly enhanced the anti-inflammatory profiles and functional signatures of circulating myeloid cells (Fleck et al., 2021). To move forward, we hypothesize that dietary interventions with functional foods (e.g., prebiotics, probiotics, polyphenols) or the administration of probiotic metabolites (e.g., butyrate) aiming the gut microbiota modulation may enhance intestinal barrier functions and autophagy regulation, restore healthy host-microbial interactions, and reduce toxic protein aggregation and inflammation, thus, delaying the progression of ALS.

ALS is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder involving brain and spinal cord motor neuron death resulting in weakness and wasting of musculature and leaning inexorably to death. There are GI abnormalities involved liver, intestine, and pancreas in ALS. Subclinical gastrointestinal motor dysfunction, delayed colonic transit time, delayed gastric emptying an increased prevalence of constipation and anal sphincter abnormalities have been noted, but the mechanism of these issues is unclear. In various mouse models of ALS, the altered microbiome and GI issues are also observed. However, factors such as changes of diet, GI issues, inflammation, and infection were not well considered for the ALS diagnosis.

Emerging evidence has demonstrated the novel roles of microbiome and metabolites in the early stage of disease development and progression, suggesting the potential biomarkers (Chatterjee et al., 2020; Donatti et al., 2020). SALS and fALS forms of ALS manifest similar pathological and clinical phenotypes, suggesting that different initiating causes lead to a mechanistically similar neurodegenerative pathway. ALS patients have abnormal GI systems, elevated intestinal inflammation and dysbiosis. The ENS and smooth muscle automatism are unable to modulate the motor functions of the digestive tract, which provide an anatomical explanation for these clinical manifestations. Studies on microbiome changes with pro-inflammatory serum cytokines and LPS in patients will help with the early diagnosis of the disease. To treat gut microbiota dysbiosis through microbiota restoration would have the potential to interfere and slow ALS progression (Mandrioli et al., 2019). The therapeutic methods to target microbiome and intestinal functions, e.g, FMT, prebiotics, and probiotics, will help both SALS and FALS patients. ALS studies should be performed by considering diet, microbiome, lifestyle, and gender difference. Studies that examine the microbiome together with intestinal pathogenesis will help to determine when, where, and whether microbiome and metabolites are critical to disease progression of ALS. Understanding the pathogenesis of ALS GI will provide innovative strategies for accurate diagnosis and better treatment for this challenging disease.

SM and JS performed literature search and detailed analyses and summary of related literature, prepared the draft text. CB contributed to literature search of ALS mouse models, nutrition, and the draft text. JS designed the study/project, obtained funds, summarize literature, and directed the project. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.

We would like to acknowledge the VA Merit Award 1 I01BX004824-01, the NIDDK/National Institutes of Health grant R01 DK105118, and R01DK114126 to JS. The study sponsors play no role in the study design, data collection, analysis, and interpretation of data. The contents do not represent the views of the United States Department of Veterans Affairs or the United States Government.

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

