Multi-omics gut microbiome signatures in obese women: role of diet and uncontrolled eating behavior

Obesity and related co-morbidities represent a major health challenge nowadays, with a rapidly increasing incidence worldwide. The gut microbiome has recently emerged as a key modifier of human health that can affect the development and progression of obesity, largely due to its involvement in the regulation of food intake and metabolism. However, there are still few studies that have in-depth explored the functionality of the human gut microbiome in obesity and even fewer that have examined its relationship to eating behaviors.

In an attempt to advance our knowledge of the gut-microbiome-brain axis in the obese phenotype, we thoroughly characterized the gut microbiome signatures of obesity in a well-phenotyped Italian female cohort from the NeuroFAST and MyNewGut EU FP7 projects. Fecal samples were collected from 63 overweight/obese and 37 normal-weight women and analyzed via a multi-omics approach combining 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing, metagenomics, metatranscriptomics, and lipidomics. Associations with anthropometric, clinical, biochemical, and nutritional data were then sought, with particular attention to cognitive and behavioral domains of eating.

We identified four compositional clusters of the gut microbiome in our cohort that, although not distinctly associated with weight status, correlated differently with eating habits and behaviors. These clusters also differed in functional features, i.e., transcriptional activity and fecal metabolites. In particular, obese women with uncontrolled eating behavior were mostly characterized by low-diversity microbial steady states, with few and poorly interconnected species (e.g., Ruminococcus torques and Bifidobacterium spp.), which exhibited low transcriptional activity, especially of genes involved in secondary bile acid biosynthesis and neuroendocrine signaling (i.e., production of neurotransmitters, indoles and ligands for cannabinoid receptors). Consistently, high amounts of primary bile acids as well as sterols were found in their feces.

By finding peculiar gut microbiome profiles associated with eating patterns, we laid the foundation for elucidating gut-brain axis communication in the obese phenotype. Subject to confirmation of the hypotheses herein generated, our work could help guide the design of microbiome-based precision interventions, aimed at rewiring microbial networks to support a healthy diet-microbiome-gut-brain axis, thus counteracting obesity and related complications.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12916-022-02689-3.

Over the last 4 decades, the worldwide prevalence of overweight and obesity has risen from 3.2 to 10.8% in men and from 6.4 to 14.9% in women [1]. In Italy, the predicted 2025 prevalence of obesity in adults has been estimated at 25.5% in men and 22.9% in women [2]. Obesity is recognized as a complex, multifactorial disease that represents a major risk factor for health, with important consequences on quality of life, life expectancy and healthcare costs [3]. In particular, obesity has been linked to increased risk of developing a wide range of non-communicable diseases, such as type 2 diabetes, fatty liver disease, hypertension, dyslipidemia, coronary heart disease, stroke, and cancer [3]. Despite steady progress in the management of obesity and its comorbidities, preventive and therapeutic strategies sometimes prove ineffective, and the long-term maintenance of weight loss is particularly challenging. In order to design tailored treatment strategies that are effective over time, the need to better stratify patients according to precise phenotyping criteria has recently been highlighted [4]. To this end, a systems biology-oriented approach that elucidates the different components of the obesity phenotype and their interactions is strongly advocated, for practical advancement in obesity research towards precision and personalized medicine [3, 5].

In an attempt to bridge this gap, providing some insight into the complex gut-microbiome-brain axis in obesity, here we applied an exploratory multi-omics approach to a cohort of 37 normal-weight and 63 overweight/obese premenopausal women, enrolled within the European FP7 NeuroFAST and MyNewGut projects, with different eating habits and behaviors. Specifically, we first characterized the compositional profiles of GM by 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing and shotgun metagenomics, for fine taxonomic resolution down to species level, and evaluated their association with eating behavior as assessed by several psychometric questionnaires. We then applied a shotgun metatranscriptomic approach to unravel transcriptionally active microbial pathways associated with eating behavior, as well as variations in specific microbial genes involved in the regulation of food intake, energy expenditure, and neuroendocrine signaling. Metabolic outputs of the GM, such as SCFAs, bile acids, and sterols, were finally assessed through fecal lipidomics. Our findings, albeit exploratory and associative, provide potential GM-based biomarkers to phenotype the patient with excess weight and FA/nutritional dysfunction to personalize future treatments.

The present study is based on a subgroup of 63 overweight/obese (OB) women enrolled in the project NeuroFAST (fully described in a previous publication) [20]. Study population included women aged > 18 years in a premenopausal state, with BMI ranging between 24.9 and 40.0 kg·m−2. Overweight and obesity were defined according to the World Health Organization criteria [21]. Exclusion criteria were the presence of acute/chronic diseases (i.e., type 2 diabetes, thyroid dysfunction, endogenous hypercortisolism or other endocrine or metabolic disorders, major cardiovascular events, renal, hepatic, and systemic diseases, central nervous system illness and cancer), previous and current neurological or psychiatric disease (explored by a direct psychological interview, the Mini-International Neuropsychiatric Interview—MINI [22]), and current use of psychotropic medication, corticosteroid therapy, post-menopausal state, pregnancy, or nursing. Additional exclusion criteria were as follows: alcohol and substance abuse and addiction, anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, ongoing or recent (i.e., the last 6 months) diet, and treatment with any medication in the past 6 months before clinical examination. The study cohort was implemented in the context of the project MyNewGut, by enrolling 37 healthy normal-weight (NW) women. The abovementioned exclusion criteria were maintained. Both OB and NW women were enrolled at the Unit of Endocrinology and Prevention and Care of Diabetes of S. Orsola Polyclinic—University Hospital (Bologna, Italy). In order to exclude country-related effects on the GM profile, all women were enrolled in the Emilia Romagna region and surroundings (Italy). Psychometric and nutritional questionnaires were administered as described below. Stool and blood were collected from all women for GM analysis and measurement of biochemical profile, metabolic and inflammatory biomarkers, and gut hormones, respectively. Moreover, all participants underwent an oral glucose tolerance test. Venous blood was drawn in the follicular phase of the ovarian cycle after an overnight fast using standardized procedures, to minimize the effect of hormonal fluctuations on the experimental results [23]. Routine biochemical parameters, serum hormones, and metabolites were measured at the Central Laboratory of S. Orsola Polyclinic University Hospital (Bologna, Italy); additional blood samples for gut hormones were collected and stored at – 80 °C up to the assay. Fecal samples were collected within 24–48 h prior to clinical and nutritional assessment, stored at – 20 °C on the day of collection and then transferred to – 80 °C upon arrival in the laboratory. The study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and approved by the local ethics committee (072/2010/U/Sper; 149/2015/U/Sper). A written informed consent was provided by each woman enrolled.

Examinations of the enrolled participants included anthropometric data (i.e., body weight, height, BMI, waist and hip circumferences, and waist-to-hip ratio), systolic and diastolic blood pressure, and physiological markers in blood. Insulin resistance and sensitivity were defined according to the Homeostasis Model Assessment of Insulin Resistance (HOMA-IR) [24] and the Matsuda-index [25] respectively. A HOMA-IR value > 2.5 was used to define insulin-resistant participants. All women underwent a visit with a fully trained psychologist from the Department of Experimental, Diagnostic and Specialty Medicine (University of Bologna), aimed at investigating the previous or current presence of psychopathological disorders, and use of psychotropic agents, through MINI [22]. In addition, participants filled out a battery of psychometric questionnaires:

Nutritional questionnaires were also administered to obtain information on the frequency of consumption (no. of portions per month) of every category of food (Food Frequency Questionnaire, FFQ) [33]. Fiber intake was normalized to 1000 kcal, following the same approach as Rampelli et al. [7]. Information about personal/familiar anamnesis, menstrual history and pregnancies, body weight curve (recall of body weight values since the age of 18 to the present, in order to identify the occurrence of “stress-related weight gain”), and prior and current medications was also collected.

Total microbial DNA was extracted from fecal samples by the repeated bead-beating plus column method [34], with only slight modifications as reported by Barone et al. [35]. Briefly, 250 mg of fecal samples were suspended in 1 ml of lysis buffer (500 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris–HCl pH 8, 50 mM EDTA, 4% (w/v) SDS), added with four 3-mm glass beads and 0.5 g of 0.1-mm zirconia beads (BioSpec Products) and homogenized using a FastPrep instrument (MP Biomedicals) with three bead-beating steps at 5.5 movements/sec for 1 min, and 5-min incubation in ice between treatments. After incubation at 95 °C for 15 min, stool particles were pelleted by centrifugation at 14,000 rpm for 5 min. Nucleic acids were precipitated by adding 260 μl of 10 M ammonium acetate and one volume of isopropanol. The pellets were then washed with 70% ethanol and suspended in TE buffer. RNA was removed by treatment with 2 μl of DNase-free Rnase (10 mg/ml) at 37 °C for 15 min. Protein removal and column-based DNA purification were performed following the manufacturer’s instructions (QIAGEN). DNA was quantified with the NanoDrop ND-1000 spectrophotometer (NanoDrop Technologies).

The V3-V4 hypervariable regions of the 16S rRNA gene were amplified using the 341F and 805R primers with added Illumina adapter overhang sequences as previously reported by Barone et al. [35]. PCR products of around 460 bp were purified using a magnetic bead-based system (Agencourt AMPure XP; Beckman Coulter). Each indexed library was prepared by limited-cycle PCR using Nextera technology and further purified as described above. The libraries were subsequently pooled at equimolar concentration, denatured with 0.2 N NaOH, and diluted to 6 pM with 20% PhiX control. Sequencing was performed on an Illumina MiSeq platform using a 2 × 250 bp paired-end protocol, according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Illumina). Raw sequence data are available for download from the NCBI Sequence Read Archive (BioProject ID: PRJNA832282).

Paired-end reads were processed combining PANDAseq [36] and QIIME [37]. High-quality sequences were clustered into OTUs at 97% sequence similarity by UCLUST [38] and taxonomy was assigned against the Greengenes database (May 2013 release). All singleton OTUs were discarded. Alpha diversity was evaluated using two different metrics: Shannon index and number of observed OTUs. Beta diversity was estimated by computing weighted and unweighted UniFrac distances, which were used as input for principal coordinates analysis (PCoA). PCoA, heatmap, and bar plots were built using the R packages made4 [39] and vegan (http://www.cran.r-project.org/package=vegan). The obtained OTUs were filtered for a prevalence in participants of at least 20%, and hierarchical Ward linkage clustering based on Spearman correlation coefficients of the proportion of OTUs was used to identify microbiome steady states. Multiple testing using the Benjamini–Hochberg method allowed verifying that each cluster showed significant Spearman correlations between samples within the group. Significant differences between clusters were evaluated with permutational MANOVA using the Spearman distance matrix as input (function adonis of the vegan package in R).

Co-abundance groups (CAGs) were identified as previously described [40]. Briefly, the dataset included the bacterial genera present in at least two samples with relative abundance > 0.1%. Kendall’s correlation test was used to evaluate associations between bacterial genera. The identified associations were visualized using hierarchical Ward linkage clustering with distance metrics based on Spearman’s correlation and used to determine the co-abundance of bacterial groups. Significant associations were checked for multiple tests using the q-value method (false discovery rate, FDR ≤ 0.05) [41] and plotted within the networks. Permutational MANOVA using the Kendall distance matrix as input was applied to assess whether the CAGs were significantly different from each other. Cytoscape software was used to create Wiggum plot networks (http://www.cytoscape.org), as previously reported [40]. In such graphs, the size of the circle represents the bacterial abundance, while the connections between the nodes represent positive and significant Kendall correlations between bacterial genera (FDR ≤ 0.05).

Metagenomic DNA libraries were prepared using the QIAseq FX DNA Library Kit, following the manufacturer’s instructions (QIAGEN). Briefly, for each sample, 100 ng of DNA were fragmented to 450-bp size, end-repaired, and A-tailed using FX Enzyme Mix with the following thermal cycle: 4 °C for 1 min, 32 °C for 8 min, and 65 °C for 30 min. Samples were then incubated at 20 °C for 15 min in the presence of DNA ligase and Illumina adapter barcodes for indexing and adapter ligation. After two purification steps with Agencourt AMPure XP magnetic beads (Beckman Coulter), 10-cycle PCR amplification, and a further step of purification as above, samples were pooled at equimolar concentration of 4 nM. Sequencing was performed on an Illumina NextSeq 500 platform using a 2 × 150 bp paired-end protocol, following the manufacturer’s instructions (Illumina). Raw sequence data are available for download from the NCBI Sequence Read Archive (BioProject ID: PRJNA832560). Species-level characterization of shotgun metagenomics data was conducted as previously described by Rampelli and colleagues [42]. In brief, shotgun reads were first filtered by quality and human sequences by means of the human sequence removal pipeline and the WGS read processing procedure of the HMP Consortium [43]. The obtained reads were taxonomically characterized at species level by MetaPhlAn2 [44].

RNA extraction was carried out using the RNeasy PowerMicrobiome kit (QIAGEN), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, 250 mg of stool samples were processed by adding the chemical lysis buffer (PM1/β-mercaptoethanol) and subsequent homogenization using a FastPrep instrument (MP Biomedicals) at 5.5 movements/sec for 1 min. DNA was removed by on-column DNase treatment, followed by a washing step to remove the enzyme and any digested nucleic acids. The purified RNA was eluted in RNase-free water. For each sample, rRNA was depleted using the Ribo-Zero Gold kit for bacteria (Illumina) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In short, total RNA was hybridized with rRNA Removal Beads (Illumina) and a subsequent clean-up was performed using the RNAClean XP beads (Illumina) following the RNA denaturation step. RNA libraries were prepared using the TruSeq Stranded Total RNA library kit (Illumina), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, after reverse transcription, the synthesis of the second strand was performed with a combination of enzymes and optimized buffer solutions to allow the degradation of the RNA strand, the generation of a second cDNA strand, and the generation of blunt DNA ends. Subsequent addition of the A-base ensured efficient ligation of Illumina-compatible adapters. The generated RNA-seq libraries were PCR-amplified, purified with magnetic bead-based clean-ups (Agencourt AMPure XP; Beckman Coulter), and pooled at equimolar concentration of 4 nM before being loaded onto the flow cell. Sequencing was performed on an Illumina NextSeq 500 platform using a 2 × 150 bp paired-end protocol, following the manufacturer’s instructions (Illumina). Raw sequence data are available for download from the NCBI Sequence Read Archive (BioProject ID: PRJNA832581).

Metatranscriptomic reads passed through the same pipeline used in the metagenomic dataset in order to remove low-quality bases, reads of human origin, and reads encoding for rRNA. Metatranscriptomes were functionally profiled using HUMAnN2 [45] to quantify expression levels of genes and pathways. Reads were aligned to sample-specific pangenomes, i.e., all gene families in any microorganism detected in a given sample, using Bowtie and the UniRef90, MinPath, and KEGG databases [46–49]. Hits were counted per KEGG pathway and normalized for length, alignment quality score, and sequencing depth. HUMAnN2 RNA-level outputs (transcript abundances) were then normalized by the corresponding DNA-level outputs from metagenomic results to quantify microbial expression regardless of gene copy number. To this aim, the shotgun metagenomics data were analyzed with HUMAnN2 using the same parameters reported above for the metatranscriptomic data.

The targeted lipidomics analysis included in our work was originally conducted by Matysik and colleagues [50]. Briefly, 2.5 ml of 70% isopropanol was added to each stool sample and homogenized in a gentleMACS dissociator (Miltenyi Biotec GmbH). Samples were kept on ice between each preparation step. Overnight drying of 1.0 ml of raw stool homogenate in a vacuum centrifuge was performed to determine stool dry weight. Samples were then diluted to a final concentration of 2.0-mg dry weight/ml and used for sterol extraction and bile acid analysis. For SCFA analysis, an aliquot of the diluted stool homogenate was centrifuged, and 50 μl of the supernatant was subjected to derivatization to 3-nitrophenylhydrazones, prior to measurement by liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS). Sterols and stanols (coprostanol, 5α-cholestanol, sitosterol, 5α-sitostanol, 5β-sitostanol, campesterol, and 5α-campestanol) were quantified by LC–MS/MS after derivatization to N,N-dimethylglycine esters. Bile acids were quantified by LC–MS/MS using a stable isotope dilution assay with a modified method for serum. Free bile acids ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA), chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA), cholic acid (CA), deoxycholic acid (DCA), and lithocholic acid (LCA), as well as their glycine (G)- and taurine (T)-conjugated species were also quantified.

The median along with the 25th and 75th percentile was used as descriptive statistics for anthropometric and biochemical/hormonal parameters; for psychometric parameters, mean and standard deviation were used. Kruskal–Wallis and post-hoc Wilcoxon rank-sum pairwise tests were applied for inter-group comparisons. Clinical data were analyzed by SPSS version 22.0 (SPSS Inc.). Two-tailed p ≤ 0.05 was considered statistically significant, while 0.05 < p ≤ 0.1 a tendency.

As for -omics data, the statistical analysis was performed by means of R Studio 1.2.1335 on R software v4.2.0 (https://www.r-project.org, last accessed on 8 June 2022) and the packages stats [51], vegan [52], and quantreg [53]. In particular, GM clusters were identified through hierarchical Ward linkage clustering based on the Spearman correlation coefficients of the proportion of OTUs, filtered by subject prevalence of at least 20%. Multiple testing using the Benjamini–Hochberg method was used to verify that each cluster showed significant correlations between samples within the group. Permutational MANOVA using the Spearman distance matrix as input, performed using the function adonis of the vegan package in R [52], was used to verify that the clusters were statistically significantly different from each other. The distribution of women by weight status within the four GM clusters was tested using Fisher’s exact test. Significant differences among the GM clusters in relative taxon abundance, alpha diversity, dietary data, and fecal lipid amounts, as well as among dietary groups (identified by application of Ward linkage clustering and Euclidean distance metrics to the first axis of a Correspondence Analysis—see the paragraph “Diet impact on the gut microbiota of normal-weight and overweight/obese women” of the “Results” section) in the healthy food diversity (HFD) index [54], were assessed using the Kruskal–Wallis test. Wilcoxon rank-sum test was adopted as a post-hoc test to check for differences between each pair of groups, adjusting p values for multiple testing via Benjamini–Hochberg method. Wilcoxon test with FDR correction was also used to compare alpha diversity and relative taxon abundance of the GM profiles of NW and OB women. The permutation test with pseudo-F ratio (function adonis in vegan) was used to assess the significance of data separation in the PCoA. The envfit function of the vegan package of R was used to perform the superimposition of FFQ data on the PCoA space, in order to identify the food items most contributing to the ordination space. For CAG assignment and analysis, see the dedicated paragraph “Co-abundance analysis” in the “Methods” section. To find associations between -omics datasets, we performed a multi-omics analysis across the entire dataset without stratifying by GM cluster. In particular, according to Chun and Keleş [55], we adopted the sparse partial least square (sPLS) regression analysis as implemented in the mixOmics package in R [56], modeling the dataset generated by metatranscriptomics (meaning transcriptionally active pathways and species) to lipidomics measures via multiple regression. sPLS is indeed a good option for sample sizes smaller than the total number of variables [55], as in our study. All lipid variables were retained in the model along with the metatranscriptomic features present in at least 50% of the samples. Hierarchical clustering on the sPLS regression model was plotted with Pearson correlation as distance and complete linkage method. Host behavioral data and other health parameters were used for correlation analysis with GM compositional data by using quantile (median) age-adjusted regression tests through the R package quantreg, as already performed by Claesson et al. [40]. P values were corrected for multiple comparisons using the Benjamini–Hochberg method. FDR and p ≤ 0.05 were considered as statistically significant.

Across two EU FP7 projects (i.e., NeuroFAST and MyNewGut), a total of 100 premenopausal women were recruited at the Unit of Endocrinology and Prevention and Care of Diabetes of the S. Orsola Polyclinic University Hospital in Bologna, Italy. Anthropometric and laboratory parameters as well as psychometric results of all recruited participants are reported in Table
1. The whole study cohort included 63 OB (with BMI from 25.6 to 39.8 kg/m2) and 37 NW (with BMI from 18.5 to 24.6 kg/m2) women. OB women showed significantly higher body weight, BMI, waist and hip circumference, and waist-to-hip ratio compared to NW (p < 0.001, Wilcoxon rank-sum test). Systolic and diastolic blood pressure was higher in OB compared to NW (p ≤ 0.001), and three OB women were under antihypertensive treatment. OB women exhibited higher total cholesterol and triglycerides levels compared to NW (p ≤ 0.04), while HDL-cholesterol was higher in NW group (p = 0.003). Glucose metabolism indices (i.e., blood glucose, insulin, glycated hemoglobin and the area under the curve (AUC) of glucose and insulin during oral glucose tolerance test) were higher in OB compared to NW women (p < 0.001). Five OB and one NW women had fasting glycaemia (≥ 100 mg/dl) but no one had a diagnosis of type 2 diabetes according to American Diabetes Association diagnostic criteria [54]. Finally, the OB group showed a significantly higher rate of insulin-resistant participants than NW (44.4% in OB group vs 0% in NW group, p < 0.001), consistent with a dependent relationship between insulin resistant/sensitive phenotype and BMI status. Correction for effect size indicated good correlation (Cramer’s correlation coefficient = 0.478, p < 0.0001). As for the psychometric questionnaires, some of them were discarded for incomplete data: 12 BITE (Bulimic Investigatory Test Edinburgh), 10 TFEQ (three-factors eating questionnaire), and 4 PSS (perceived stress scale) were incompletely filled in by the participants. One OB participant exhibited high scores in the two BITE subscales, indicating a high probability of fulfilling the criteria for a diagnosis of eating disorder. The mean scores obtained in the TFEQ subscales were as follows: TFEQ UE (uncontrolled eating), 16.91 ± 5.37; TFEQ CR (cognitive restraint), 14.35 ± 4.27; TFEQ EE (emotional eating), 7.59 ± 2.98. Among the 100 participants who completed YFAS, 14 (all belonging to the OB group) received a diagnosis of FA, while the mean FA symptom score of the whole cohort was 2.28 ± 1.55. None of the NW women showed high FA scores. The mean PSS score was 16.03 ± 5.91; two OB patients exhibited high PSS scores. Compared to NW, OB participants exhibited significantly higher scores in BITE severity (p < 0.001), TFEQ CR (p < 0.001), TFEQ EE (p < 0.001), and FA symptom score (p < 0.001), as well as in FA diagnosis (p < 0.01).

16S rRNA gene sequencing yielded a total of 6.5 million sequence reads, with an average of 73,152 (± 38,578, sd) paired-end reads per sample, for 11,874 operational taxonomic units (OTUs) grouped at 97% of sequence identity. Considerable differences were identified in the GM diversity and structure of OB and NW women (Fig. 1).

Hierarchical Ward linkage clustering based on the Spearman correlation coefficient of the proportion of OTUs allowed the identification of four participant clusters (named C1 to C4) (Fig. 2). Albeit in the absence of statistical significance (p = 0.38, Fisher’s exact test), one cluster included 48% of NW women (C1) while the remaining three clusters (C2-C4) comprised mostly OB women (72%, C2; 64%, C3 and C4). Interestingly, the four clusters also differed in biodiversity, with C1 and C3 showing the highest values, while C2 and C4 the lowest (p < 8 × 10−4, Kruskal–Wallis test). More precisely, the biodiversity in C2 was lower with respect to C1 and C3 (p < 3 × 10−4, Wilcoxon rank-sum test), while the cluster C4 showed lower levels compared to C1 (p = 0.05) (Fig. 2). To identify trends in the GM structure across the whole dataset, co-abundance associations of genera were first established, and correlated bacterial taxa were subsequently clustered into five co-abundance groups (CAGs) (Additional file 1: Fig. S1), named according to the dominant (i.e., the most abundant) genus in each group: Bifidobacterium (violet), Ruminococcus (blue), Dorea (green), Prevotella (light blue), and Bacteroides (pink). Wiggum plots were then generated to depict the GM compositional relationships for each of the four participant divisions—identified by OTU clustering—showing a peculiar abundance pattern of the five CAGs (Fig. 3). Each cluster (C1 to C4) constitutes a steady state, representing a group of individuals characterized by a GM layout significantly different from the other groups (p < 0.001, permutational MANOVA test on unweighted UniFrac data). However, it should be noted that the clusters did not significantly segregate in the weighted UniFrac-based PCoA (p > 0.05; data not shown), suggesting that the differences were not related to abundant GM components. These results were confirmed by comparisons of the relative abundances of the main genera (see Additional file 1: Table S1 for further details). The microbiota variation from the group comprising most of the NW women (i.e., C1) to the groups including predominantly OB women (C2-C4) was accompanied by distinctive CAGs dominance. Specifically, the cluster C1 was characterized by the co-presence of all 5 CAGs and a higher relative abundance of Prevotella, while in clusters C2-C4, the lack of at least one of the 5 CAGs identified was observed. In cluster C2, despite the absence of the Bifidobacterium CAG, a representation of the other four CAGs was preserved. On the other hand, cluster C3 lost the Bifidobacterium CAG but showed an over-representation of Prevotella and Ruminococcus CAGs. Finally, cluster C4 was characterized by a loss of Bacteroides while being enriched in Bifidobacterium CAG.

Associations of demographic and clinical variables and eating behavior with the major axes of unweighted uniFrac PCoA analysis are shown in Fig. 3 and listed in Table
2 (see also Additional file 1: Fig. S2). In particular, based on a quantile (median) age-adjusted regression analysis when considering the whole cohort, a shift of the GM structure towards negative PCo2 values (as the low-diversity cluster C4) was associated with higher BITE symptom score—indicative of binge eating behavior—and TFEQ UE score—indicative of uncontrolled eating.

To further explore the relationship between GM clusters and eating behavior, OB women were next stratified according to the diagnosis of uncontrolled eating behavior, based on the YFAS questionnaire and taking into account the contribution of stress symptoms induced by eating behavior (see the “Methods” section for further details), in the following three groups: low addictive eating behavior (i.e., with 2 or fewer symptoms, O_LA) and high addictive eating behavior (i.e., with 3 or more symptoms) with (O_DHA) or without (O_HA) FA diagnosis (Additional file 1: Fig. S3). C1 showed the lowest proportion of O_DHA women (7%), while C2 the highest (36%). On the other hand, C1 shared similar proportions of O_HA women with cluster C2 (C1, 19% vs C2, 18%). C4 showed the highest percentage of O_HA women (36%), followed by C3 (27%). The proportion of O_LA women was the highest in C1 (26%), while similar in the other clusters (C2, 18% vs C3, 18% vs C4, 14%). None of the NW women showed uncontrolled eating behavior.

In order to identify the food types that contributed (p < 0.05, permutational correlation test) to the GM ordination, the food data from FFQs were superimposed on the unweighted UniFrac PCoA plot of Fig. 3 (Fig. 4a). A greater consumption of seasonings and condiments, olive oil, fried potatoes, and sausages, as well as sweetened drinks, milk, and yoghurt was associated with the GM configuration of cluster C2. On the other hand, the cluster C4 was characterized by higher consumption of cheese, while C1 and C3 by lower consumption of all the above-mentioned foods. The fiber intake (grams/1000 kcal) showed a positive correlation with the first PCoA axis and appeared to be higher in women with C1 cluster (Fig. 4b). The other three clusters showed comparable fiber intake values, with C2 being lower than C1 (p = 0.03, Wilcoxon rank-sum test). An opposite trend was observed for total energy intake (kcal/day), being negatively correlated to PCo1, and higher in clusters C2, C3, and C4 (Fig. 4b). Consistent with a greater propensity to uncontrolled eating (TFEQ UE) and exacerbated BITE symptom score, cluster C4 showed a higher energy intake than C1 (p = 0.04). The average frequency values of daily food consumption for each of the four GM groups are shown in Additional file 1: Table S2, together with additional information on each food category. When focusing on the intake of macronutrients (Fig. 4c), increased carbohydrate intake and reduced fat intake were observed in C4 compared with C1 (p = 0.05 and 0.04, respectively). A lower fat intake was also observed in C3 than in C1 (p = 0.01).

By matching the stratifications of women in dietary and microbiota groups, redundant combinations associated with the OB phenotype were sought (Additional file 1: Table S3). In particular, the combination of the less diversified D1 diet and C2 microbiota was the most prevalent among OB women (25% of the OB dataset), especially in O_LA (14%) and O_DHA (6%) women, followed by the combinations D1-C4 (6%) in O_HA women. Interestingly, none of the OB women possessed the combination D2-C4. As for the NW sub-cohort, the three dietary groups were found to be equally distributed within the C1 microbiota configuration, with the combination D1-C1 being the most prevalent (19% of the NW dataset). Three out of five NW women with the C4 microbiota configuration (8%) were associated with the less diversified D1 diet, while the remaining two (5%) with the D2 diet.

A subset of 45 DNA samples (31 from OB and 14 from NW women) was subjected to shotgun metagenomic sequencing, for a total of 15 Gb of paired-end reads. The metagenomics dataset was dominated by 8 bacterial species, which contributed 52.5–56.6% to ecosystem variability and were variously distributed among the four clusters (C1-C4): Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, Bifidobacterium adolescentis, Bifidobacterium longum, Ruminococcus bromii, Eubacterium rectale, Akkermansia muciniphila, Bacteroides vulgatus, and Subdoligranulum spp. (Fig. 6a). In particular, the cluster C1 was found to be enriched in R. bromii when compared to C2 (p = 0.03, Wilcoxon rank-sum test), as well as in F. prausnitzii compared to C3 and C4 (p < 0.03) (Fig. 6b). On the other hand, with respect to C1, the configuration C2 was enriched in Ruminococcus torques (p = 0.05), a mucolytic bacterial species known to compromise gut barrier integrity [57]. Moreover, C2 showed the lowest levels of the mucin degrader A. muciniphila with respect to C1 and C3 (p < 0.02) as well as R. bromii compared to C1 and C4 (p < 0.03). As for the other GM configurations predominantly characterizing OB women with uncontrolled eating behavior (i.e., C3 and C4), C3 showed higher values of A. muciniphila and Subdoligranulum spp. compared to C2 (p < 0.02), while C4 was enriched in E. rectale with respect to C3 (p = 0.008), as well as in B. adolescentis and Bifidobacterium bifidum compared to the other three clusters (p < 0.05), probably due to the greater consumption of cheese (as revealed by the analysis of FFQs).

RNA sequencing was performed on the same samples subjected to metagenomics to investigate the active species-level fraction of the GM clusters and their transcriptional activity.

When seeking for correlations between lipidomics measures and the transcriptionally active fraction of GM (meaning both pathways and species) by means of sPLS regression (Additional file 1: Table S4 and Fig. S8), we found the strongest correlations between features of GM clusters that included predominantly OB women (especially C4). In particular, 5β-sitostanol (enriched in C3 and C4) positively correlated with the secondary bile acid biosynthesis by F. prausnitzii (which showed transcriptional activity for a specific gene involved in this pathway in C4—see next paragraph), as well as with B. longum pathways (related to galactose metabolism, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, and cysteine and methionine metabolism, and actively transcribed across the entire dataset) and glyceroplipid metabolism by R. bromii (abundantly transcribed in C4 as discussed above). The latter, together with galactose metabolism by B. longum, also showed the strongest inverse correlations with the SCFAs acetate and propionate, consistent with their lower levels in C3 and C4.

Several GM-derived metabolites and bacterial proteins have been suggested to dialogue with the brain and regulate energy intake. Among them, the chaperon protein ClpB (caseinolytic peptidase B) has been proved to mimic the anorexigenic POMC (pro-opiomelanocortin)-derived alpha-MSH (alpha-melanocyte-stimulating) hormone, well known for its ability to influence host appetite [59]. On the other hand, bile acids contribute to the regulation of host energetic homeostasis due to their role in lipid absorption, as well as by activating host receptors involved in thermogenesis [60]. We therefore specifically assessed the transcriptional levels of ClpB and enzymes involved in the microbial metabolism of bile acids across the four GM clusters (Additional file 1: Fig. S9). ClpB was actively transcribed by A. muciniphila only in C1 configuration (mainly including NW women), by L. ruminis in C2 (i.e., mainly in O_DHA women), and by A. equolifaciens in C1, C3 and C4 clusters. As for bile acid metabolism, we found a cluster-specific transcriptional layout for three enzymes, i.e., choloylglycine hydrolase (K01442), 7-alpha-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (K00076), and 3-dehydro-bile acid delta 4,6-reductase (K07007). The microbial gene coding for K01442, the primary bile acid-deconjugating enzyme, was found to be actively transcribed by several microbial components of the clusters C1 and C3, namely R. intestinalis, C. catus, B. animalis, Coprococcus comes, Eubacterium ventriosum, Dorea longicatena, and A. shahii for C1 and R. obeum, M. smithii, A. finegoldii, P. distasonis, Eubacterium hallii, A. onderdonkii, and A. equolifaciens for C3. In contrast, K01442 was exclusively transcribed by A. hadrus and L. casei/paracasei in clusters C2 and C4, respectively. As for K00076, involved in secondary bile acid biosynthesis, it was found to be exclusively transcribed by E. coli in C1 cluster, while no transcriptional activity was observed for the configurations that included proportionately more OB women (clusters C2-C4), regardless of eating behavior. Finally, K07007, another enzyme involved in secondary bile acid biosynthesis, was exclusively transcribed by C. catus and M. smithii in C1, by R. obeum, A. shahii and E. rectale in C2, and by R. bromii, Coprococcus sp. ART55_1 and M. hypermegale in C3. As for C4, only a weak transcriptional activity by F. prausnitzii and R. hominis was observed.

Patterns of microbial transcriptional activity specifically involved in the metabolism of tryptophan (Trp), endocannabinoids (eCBs), and opioids, as well as in the biosynthesis of GABA, bioactive molecules able to interact with the central nervous system and influence ingestive behavior [61, 62], were subsequently investigated (Additional file 1: Fig. S9).

Finally, the glutamate decarboxylase gene involved in GABA production (K01580) was actively transcribed in C1 by B. faecis, B. cellulolyticus, B. uniformis, and B. finegoldii. On the other hand, for the GM configurations that included predominantly OB women, the major contribution to K01580 transcription was provided by B. dentium and B. fragilis in C2, while Bacteroides egghertii, B. nordii, B. caccae, B. ovatus and A. finegoldii in C3. Interestingly, low to zero transcriptional activity was observed within C4.

To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to use a multi-omics approach to explore associations between GM configurations, diet, and uncontrolled eating behavior in obesity, by evaluating GM composition down to the species level (including co-abundance groups—CAGs), GM transcriptional activity with particular regard to genes related to food intake, energy expenditure and neuroendocrine signaling, and fecal lipid levels. All these data were integrated with dietary intake information and various clinical and psychometric measures to provide glimpses into the gut-brain axis communication in the obese phenotype characterization.

In summary, through an exploratory multi-omics approach, merging data regarding GM layouts, ecological networks, transcriptional activity and lipidomic profiles with dietary intake information, and clinical and psychometric results, we showed that GM can assume a series of configurations, featured by different biodiversity, microbial actors, and functionalities, which may reflect as many aspects of the host's physiology, variously correlating with host factors, including eating habits and behaviors (Additional file 1: Table S5). In particular, OB women with high uncontrolled behavior possessed overall low-diversity GM profiles (clusters C2 and C4), dominated by a few species (R. torques and Bifidobacterium spp.), with limited transcriptional activity, especially in relation to metabolites that are known to play a crucial role in healthy gut-brain communication (e.g., secondary bile acids and GABA). Consistently, high amounts of primary bile acids as well as sterols, including cholesterol, were present in their feces. These GM clusters were also associated with increased energy intake. Nonetheless, clusters C2 and C4 showed distinctive features, such as higher uric acid, cholesterol and SCFA levels associated with the former, and higher fiber and carbohydrate intake associated with the latter, which deserve further attention for potential differential implications on human health. In contrast, NW women were characterized by a highly diverse GM layout (cluster C1), enriched in health-associated taxa, such as R. bromii and F. prausnitzii, which were overall well interconnected and transcriptionally active, covering major bacterial metabolic pathways. Cluster C1 was also characterized by high fiber consumption and high levels of SCFAs. It must be said that, although including predominantly OB women and being associated with reduced levels of SCFAs and a higher rate of converted sterols, cluster C3 shared numerous characteristics with cluster C1, suggesting a configuration that is not irreparably altered and therefore perhaps more easily redirected. Despite the considerable amount of information gathered and the interesting results emerged, some limitations should be mentioned: the participants had a screening visit for psychiatric disorders based on the MINI interview and completed a battery of psychometric questionnaires, but nevertheless, the presence of symptoms of psychological distress could be completely ruled out; the small sample size (especially of OB women in the O-HA group); the potential inaccuracy related to self-reported FFQs; the lack of significance of the distribution of NW/OB women across GM clusters; the lack of availability of clinical data for all women enrolled, which likely contributed to the failure to identify cluster-specific clinical features; the exploratory association analysis approach and the high probability of false positives for multiple inference tests; the lack of use of a more exhaustive metabolomics approach to assess other molecules possibly contributed by GM in multiple biological samples; and the lack of mechanistic validation.

Our exploratory study allowed us to generate compelling hypotheses on the system biology related to OB and uncontrolled eating behavior, by showing that peculiar compositional and functional structures of GM are strongly associated with eating habits and behaviors. In particular, the potential GM signatures found in OB women with high uncontrolled behavior suggest the involvement of a low-diversity ecosystem, dominated by few microorganisms, and characterized by a poor transcriptional and lipidomic landscape, which could negatively affect gut-brain communication. Our findings should be verified in larger patient cohorts and integrated with animal experiments to elucidate the underlying mechanisms. Once confirmed, these findings could pave the way for the implementation of precision microbiome-tailored intervention strategies, mainly aimed at recovering diversity, understood as microbial components, ecological interactions, and functions, for a diet-GM-gut-brain axis that promotes healthy behaviors and prevents OB-related complications. 



Publisher’s Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Monica Barone and Silvia Garelli contributed equally to this work.

