Dietary Fat Effect on the Gut Microbiome, and Its Role in the Modulation of Gastrointestinal Disorders in Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder

Children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) report a higher frequency and severity of gastrointestinal disorders (GID) than typically developing (TD) children. GID-associated discomfort increases feelings of anxiety and frustration, contributing to the severity of ASD. Emerging evidence supports the biological intersection of neurodevelopment and microbiome, indicating the integral contribution of GM in the development and function of the nervous system, and mental health, and disease balance. Dysbiotic GM could be a contributing factor in the pathogenesis of GID in children with ASD. High-fat diets may modulate GM through accelerated growth of bile-tolerant bacteria, altered bacterial ratios, and reduced bacterial diversity, which may increase the risk of GID. Notably, saturated fatty acids are considered to have a pronounced effect on the increase of bile-tolerant bacteria and reduction in microbial diversity. Additionally, omega-3 exerts a favorable impact on GM and gut health due to its anti-inflammatory properties. Despite inconsistencies in the data elaborated in the review, the dietary fat composition, as part of an overall dietary intervention, plays a role in modulating GID, specifically in ASD, due to the altered microbiome profile. This review emphasizes the need to conduct future experimental studies investigating the effect of diets with varying fatty acid compositions on GID-specific microbiome profiles in children with ASD.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental condition that is characterized by challenges in social skills and communication, along with the presence of restricted and repetitive behaviors [1]. A high rate of both mental and physical conditions is reported in individuals with ASD [2], including epilepsy, sleep disorders, anxiety, bipolar disorder, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, and gastrointestinal disorders (GID) [3]. Moreover, the increasing worldwide prevalence of ASD [4], along with unmet health needs, contributes to a high disease burden in individuals with ASD [2]. Children with ASD commonly develop several gut-related comorbidities with gastrointestinal symptoms associated with increased gut epithelial barrier permeability, the decreased expression of brush border disaccharidases in the gut epithelium, and altered gut microbiome (GM) composition [5]. When untreated, GID can contribute to increased medical costs, trigger sleep disturbances, and increase social withdrawal and anxiety [6,7,8]. Additionally, GI symptoms may appear and manifest as behavioral changes [9]. The unpleasant feeling associated with GID, such as pain and discomfort, may lead to feelings of anxiety, frustration, and irritability [6,10], which may increase the risk of aggression and self-abuse [10], especially if children are unable to express this discomfort verbally, thus increasing the severity of ASD itself.

Interestingly, significant differences are reported in the GM of children with ASD and TD [10], some of which are correlated with gastrointestinal health, ASD severity, or both [10,29]. Defining a specific microbiome profile in children with ASD and exploring whether it is related to GID would provide more of an insight on the etiology of GID and present new therapeutic alternatives for ASD. The aim of this review is to investigate the role of dietary fat in modulating GID, mainly through its effects on the GM balance and their byproducts. The article is divided into two main sections. The first section reviews the literature on GM composition and the association with behavior and GID, and the second section summarizes the evidence on the effect of dietary fat on GM composition and gut health. The evidence available in context to individuals/children with ASD is included.

A title/abstract-specific search was performed on PubMed. Google scholar was used as a secondary strategy for retrieving more articles, in addition to the reference list of the identified trials and reviews. The search included publications from any date up to August 2021. Two search strategies were employed: The first used autism-related terms (e.g., ‘Autism’, ‘Autism, infantile’, ‘Autistics disorder’) and keywords related to gut microbiome (e.g., gut microbiome, microbiota, or flora). The second used dietary-fats related terms (e.g., saturated fatty acids, monounsaturated fatty acids, polyunsaturated fatty acids, and omega-3 fatty acids (including EPA and DHA)) in addition to gut-microbiome related terms. All study designs, including review articles, were included in this review. Due to the lack of published articles on the effect of dietary fats in children/individuals with ASD, articles exploring its effect in different population groups and animal models were included to establish its association with GM. With that, it was compared to the altered GM composition in ASD.

The human microbiome consists of the 10–100 trillion symbiotic microbial cells, the majority of which reside in the gut, making GM the largest microbiome in the human body [34]. Various techniques have been used to study GM, including culture, polymerase chain reaction (PCR), real-time PCR, and microarray [35]. Given the advancements in genomic techniques, next generation sequencing (NGS) by targeted 16s rRNA sequencing, or even shotgun metagenomic sequencing, were employed to determine the composition of GM; however, differences may arise due to sample handling; DNA extraction; sequencing of different regions of DNA; varying coverage achieved by PCR primers; sequencing depth; and bioinformatic and statistical methods used for analysis [36]. Nevertheless, NGS expands our ability to understand the human microbiome and its association with various diseases, including ASD.

Dietary interventions are poised to play a key role in the brain-gut-microbiome axis in order to maintain both the brain health and gut health by preserving a healthy balance of the GM. In children with ASD, who already have an altered GM profile, translating the effects of external factors such as diet into clinical practice can lead to the potential treatment or management of ASD symptom severity and GID.

The term fat usually refers to all “fatty” substances found in food and the body [115]. In dietary terms, “lipids” is a broader term which encompasses fats, usually in the form of triglycerides (TG), cholesterol, and phospholipids, all of which are found in varying concentrations in different foods [115]. TG make up about 95% of all lipids in the diet [116], and are composed of one glycerol molecule and three attached fatty acids. The fatty acids are mainly what define the health and metabolic effect of the fat. They can either be saturated, monounsaturated, or polyunsaturated fatty acids based on the number of double bonds that exist in the carbon–carbon skeleton of the fatty acid [115].

Theoretically, fatty acids are not thought of as a diet source for gut bacteria, due to the need of oxygen for the metabolism of fat, and the gut is inhabited mostly by anaerobes [117]. Nonetheless, bacteria has been found to interact with fat, as fatty acid intermediates have been detected in the intestine [117]. Some fatty acids exert antimicrobial activity that affects the survival of certain bacterial species [117,118]. For instance, bacterial growth hindrance or cell death may result from the toxic compounds generated by the action of free fatty acids (FFAs) on the cell membrane, causing disruption of enzymatic activities, leading to interferences with energy production, and impairment in nutrient absorption [43]. The presence of fat in the distal intestines may induce a loss of diversity in the microbiome community due to this antimicrobial activity [119]. Due to this effect of fat on the microbiome, the composition of fat, and its effects on the GM, are interesting areas of investigation; being easily manipulated through diet can be a target for non-invasive preventive and therapeutic interventions.

Saturated fatty acids (SFAs) are composed only of carbon –carbon single bonds, and are usually solid at room temperature [115]. While they are primarily found in animal products, such as meat, butter, and dairy products [120], they are also found in large concentrations in tropical plant oils, such as palm and coconut oils [115].

The reviewed literature suggests that high intakes of SFA exert unfavorable effects on the GM composition, leading to the overgrowth of specific species and reduced GM diversity that have been correlated with GID. Dietary patterns with high SFA levels such as the Western diet should be discouraged. Furthermore, these GM changes can translate into other metabolic disorders such as insulin resistance and inflammation [114].

Unsaturated fatty acids (UFAs) contain one or more double bonds in the carbon–carbon skeleton of the fatty acids, are predominantly found in plant products, and are usually liquid at room temperature [115]. Those with only one double bond, referred to as monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFA), are found in highest concentration in olive, peanut, and canola oils, avocado, and some nuts and seeds; those with two or more double bonds are referred to as polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA), and are found in other oils (sunflower, corn, and soybean), walnuts, flaxseeds, and fish [115].

UFA is suggested to have a beneficial impact on GM and gut health. While it could be postulated that replacing SFA with UFA would lead to a more favorable impact on GM, mainly because of the beneficial effect in the limited availability of SFAs, the results are inconsistent and inconclusive. Omega-3 is hypothesized to play a positive effect on GM; still, experimental evidence to support this association, specifically in children with ASD, is lacking.

Various dietary interventions are proposed for children with ASD, the ketogenic diet is one of them [166]. The ketogenic diet is a dietary pattern that is high-fat, moderate-protein, and low-carbohydrate, used traditionally for controlling seizures in patients with epilepsy [167]. A systematic review summarized that such a diet was promising in attenuating ASD-related behaviors in mice and humans [168]. However, ketogenic dieting should be recommended with caution, as the high-fat percentage (65–90%) can be associated with GID and may lead to nutritional deficiencies, due to low tolerability and the high food selectivity in children with ASD [150]. Gastrointestinal side effects of ketogenic diets in children with ASD included constipation, diarrhea, and vomiting, which occurred within 2–4 weeks of the ketogenic diet onset [169].

Mediated through the effects of high concentrations of BAs and LPS, it is possible that high-fat diets increase the risk of GID, especially in children with ASD for whom ketogenic diets are considered. Further research with long-term trials is warranted to develop appropriate dietary fat recommendations, particularly in the context of children with ASD.

There are some limitations in this review. Most of the evidence presented is extracted from either animal studies or from human studies that present several limitations, such as the inclusion of observational study designs and small sample sizes, thus introducing a risk of bias. Lang et al. (2018) concluded that demographic and anthropometric traits overpower the effect of diet in influencing GM. Heterogeneity in the results regarding GM composition may also be due to methodological variations [74]. Therefore, robust study designs with large samples can help in controlling the confounding factors and present more conclusive evidence. The lack of studies exploring dietary fat specifically in children with ASD is the major limitation. Nevertheless, this review highlights a gap in the literature, creating the need for future studies utilizing an experimental approach to explore the effect of dietary interventions with varying quantities of total fat, fatty acid composition in GM, and the presence of GID, as it can be employed as a promising therapeutic approach. Furthermore, the relation between the severity of behavioral ASD symptoms with GM composition and GID must be explored in future studies. This will help in designing interventional protocols through appropriate dietary regimes, particularly in regard to dietary fats, to reduce the severity of the disease in children with ASD.

Data from the literature suggests that children with ASD have different microbiome profiles than TD children, which contribute to both behavioral disorders and GID. Some of these bacteria are increased or decreased by modulating dietary fat. This review proposes that dietary fat intake, as part of the overall diet, may influence the presence and severity of GID through various mechanisms, although experimental data is too scarce to reach affirmations. SFAs were consistently shown to be associated with a negative impact on GM, which could be translated into GID based on the available evidence. Evidence regarding UFAs is inconclusive due to the inconsistent reporting of results; however, omega-3 is hypothesized to reduce GID due to its anti-inflammatory effect and its favorable impact on the GM. High-fat diets exhibited a negative influence on GM, mainly through increased LPS and BA levels, however data is insufficient to suggest specific recommendations. As GID are related to gut dysbiosis, dietary interventions based on GM modulation can serve as an effective therapeutic tool to treat the GID-associated symptoms and severity in children with ASD by restoring the normal GM, limiting inflammation, and restoring epithelial barrier function.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

