Gut Microbiome: Profound Implications for Diet and Disease

The gut microbiome plays an important role in human health and influences the development of chronic diseases ranging from metabolic disease to gastrointestinal disorders and colorectal cancer. Of increasing prevalence in Western societies, these conditions carry a high burden of care. Dietary patterns and environmental factors have a profound effect on shaping gut microbiota in real time. Diverse populations of intestinal bacteria mediate their beneficial effects through the fermentation of dietary fiber to produce short-chain fatty acids, endogenous signals with important roles in lipid homeostasis and reducing inflammation. Recent progress shows that an individual’s starting microbial profile is a key determinant in predicting their response to intervention with live probiotics. The gut microbiota is complex and challenging to characterize. Enterotypes have been proposed using metrics such as alpha species diversity, the ratio of Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes phyla, and the relative abundance of beneficial genera (e.g., Bifidobacterium, Akkermansia) versus facultative anaerobes (E. coli), pro-inflammatory Ruminococcus, or nonbacterial microbes. Microbiota composition and relative populations of bacterial species are linked to physiologic health along different axes. We review the role of diet quality, carbohydrate intake, fermentable FODMAPs, and prebiotic fiber in maintaining healthy gut flora. The implications are discussed for various conditions including obesity, diabetes, irritable bowel syndrome, inflammatory bowel disease, depression, and cardiovascular disease.

The intestinal microbiome has recently been implicated in a host of chronic diseases ranging from inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), type 2 diabetes (T2D), and cardiovascular disease (CVD) to colorectal cancer [1,2,3]. The community of ~200 prevalent bacteria, virus, and fungi inhabiting the human gastrointestinal (GI) tract provide unique metabolic functions to the host and are fundamentally important in health and disease [4,5]. Microbiome refers to the collective genomes of all microorganisms inhabiting an environment. While isolating and culturing each individual species is an intractable task, a cutting-edge method of sequence analysis, metagenomics, has enabled the reconstruction of microbial species and their function from the collective nucleotide contents contained in a stool sample. Shotgun metagenomic sequencing analysis discovered 1952 unclassified bacteria species in the human gut microbiome in addition to the 553 bacteria previously cultured from the gut [6]. A central question in medicine concerns the nature of the relationship between human health and the gut microbiota, which refers to the community of microorganisms themselves, the relative abundance of individual species populations, and their function.

The Western diet has profound effects on the diversity and populations of microbial species that make up gut flora [10]. The U.S. is home to the largest number of immigrants in the world, many of whom develop metabolic diseases post immigration. Earlier epidemiological evidence revealed a fourfold increase in obesity risk is possible within 15 years of emigrating to the U.S. compared to populations remaining in their birth country [11]. In a recent cross-sectional and longitudinal study of a multi-generational Asian American cohort, emigrating to the U.S. was shown to reduce gut microbial diversity and function [12]. Alpha diversity was measured using the Shannon entropy, a quantitative index that accounts for the abundance and evenness of species residing in the host, as opposed to species richness, which is the number of species present. Within the gram-negative Bacteroidetes phylum, bacterial strains from the genus Prevotella, whose enzymes degrade plant fiber, became displaced by dominant strains from the genus Bacteroides according to an individual’s time spent in the U.S. The ratio of Bacteroides to Prevotella increased by factors of 10, correlating with the time in decades spent in the U.S. Prior to this study, metagenomics had identified three clusters of variation in the human gut, referred to as enterotypes [13]. The first enterotype, high in Bacteroides and low in Prevotella, is found in individuals on a long-term Western diet high in animal protein, the nutrient choline, and saturated fat [14]. The second enterotype is high in Prevotella, low in Bacteroides, and associated with a plant-based diet rich in fiber, simple sugars, and plant-derived compounds. While less distinct, a third potential enterotype was found with a slightly higher population of genus Ruminococcus within the phylum Firmicutes. Enriched Ruminococcus is associated with irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) [15], and transient blooms of pro-inflammatory Ruminococcus have been associated with active flare-ups in IBD [16]. R. gnavus, a prevalent gut microbe that proliferates in IBD, has been found to secrete a unique L-rhamnose oligosaccharide that induces tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFα), a major pro-inflammatory cytokine [17].

IBD is a chronic GI disorder characterized by an overactive immune response to the gut microbiome. A serious, debilitating condition, IBD affects growth and development in children, increases the risk of colorectal cancer, and can lead to life-threatening complications [18]. There are two forms of IBD, Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis, that differ in the inflamed areas of the intestine. Normally, anaerobic microbes in the gut derive their nutrients from fermentation of indigestible oligosaccharides and other carbohydrates escaping proximal digestion [19]. In IBD, respiratory electron acceptors generated as a byproduct of the inflammatory host response become environmental stressors that support bacterial growth [20]. The disorder results in oxidative stress for the host and the microbiome, leading to gut dysbiosis in the form of decreased community richness and proliferation of facultative anaerobic Enterobacteriaceae and adherent invasive strains of Escherichia coli [16,20,21]. Drug therapies for IBD have traditionally included immunosuppressants in the form of corticosteroids, antimetabolite agents, or anti-TNF antibodies, often with ancillary administration of antibiotics [22]. An alternative treatment, given predominantly to children, is a defined enteral nutrition formula. Dietary therapy has the advantage of obviating the need for immunosuppression and is thought to work by altering the composition of gut microbiota.

A longitudinal study involving metagenomic analysis was conducted of 90 children initiating treatment for Crohn’s disease [22]. GI symptoms, mucosal inflammation, and microbial communities were compared for dietary and anti-TNF therapy and antibiotic use relative to healthy children. Microbial communities separated into two clusters based on composition. The dysbiotic community associated with active disease was characterized by increased fungal representation, increased lactose-fermenting bacteria (Streptococcus, Lactobacillus, Klebsiella), and the presence of human DNA in the stool (from epithelial cells and white blood cells). Crohn’s patients also had reduced relative abundance of Prevotella and increased Escherichia compared to healthy children. Treatment with antibiotics in the last six months was strongly associated with microbial dysbiosis [22], consistent with earlier findings that oral antibiotics for acne are a risk factor for new onset Crohn’s disease [23]. Antibiotic-treatment was observed to enrich fungi such as Candida and Saccharomyces [22]. Treatment with the enteral nutrition [24] or antibody therapies, on the other hand, reduced inflammation and markedly improved gut microbiota. The relative populations of fungi were reduced within one week of receiving the defined dietary formula, which lacked fiber [22]. Since a defined formula was effective for restoring healthy microbiota, it is conceivable that a more general oral diet with the proper nutrition can restore the intraluminal environment [25,26,27].

Short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) have attracted considerable attention for their role in human health [28]. Obligate anaerobic bacteria (phyla Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes) encode a variety of enzymes for hydrolyzing complex carbohydrates (chains of sugar molecules) not digestible by the host such as resistant starch and fiber. Certain genera such as Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium specialize in oligosaccharide fermentation, utilizing galactooligosaccharides (GOS), fructooligosaccharides (FOS), and polysaccharide inulin [29]. Carbohydrate fermentation by anaerobes provides the host with important SCFAs such as acetate, propionate, and butyrate [30]. Several receptors have been identified for SCFAs such as free fatty acid receptor 3 (FFAR3 or GPR41) and niacin receptor 1 (GPR109A) [31]. GPR41 and GPR109A are G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) found on intestinal epithelial cells, immune cells, and adipocytes. As endogenous agonists in GPCR signal transduction, SCFAs have a profound effect on physiological processes [32,33] independent of delivering calories to the host as carbon molecules [34]. GPR41 is associated with increased energy expenditure, leptin hormone expression, and decreased food intake [31,35]. Analogous to the activity of niacin, butyrate activates GPR109A to suppress colonic inflammation and colon cancer development [36]. Niacin is a known lipid-lowering agent: GPR109A inhibits triglyceride hydrolysis (lipolysis) in adipocytes, lowering blood levels of triglyceride and low-density lipoprotein (LDL) to reduce atherogenic activity. Acetate and propionate activate cell surface receptor GPR43 to induce neutrophil chemotaxis. GPR43 is anti-lipolysis and implicated in IBD, but contradictory results in mouse models leave doubt as to whether an agonist or antagonist will best treat colitis [35]. There is a growing interest in pursuing GPR41 and GPR43 as drug targets for the chronic inflammatory disorders asthma, arthritis, and obesity [37]. Much work remains to be done to establish the appropriate disease models needed to study these conditions.

Colonic epithelial cells (colonocytes) are the control switch separating microbial homeostasis from gut dysbiosis [38]. It is known that antibiotics deplete microbes that ferment essential SCFAs such as butyrate, which are normally responsible for maintaining microbial homeostasis [24,39]. The lack of butyrate silences metabolic signaling in the gut. Mitochondrial beta-oxidation in colonocytes becomes disabled, resulting in a transfer of oxygen, which freely diffuses across cell membranes from the blood to the GI lumen. Oxygen in the colon then allows for pathogenic facultative anaerobes such as E. coli [40] to outcompete the benign obligate anaerobes that characterize a healthy gut [41,42]. Microbial homeostasis is normally maintained by peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR-γ). PPAR-γ is a nuclear receptor activated by butyrate and other ligands, is found in adipocytes and colonocytes, and is responsible for activating genes involved in glucose and lipid metabolism. Lack of butyrate signaling results in nitrate electron acceptors being released into the colon, which facultative anaerobes can also use for cell respiration, breaking down carbohydrates into carbon dioxide rather than fermenting them [20]. Facultative anaerobes, including Proteobacteria, could further affect nutrition by catabolizing SCFAs present in the lumen [38]. The metabolic reprogramming of colonocytes is analogous to that of macrophages, which become polarized toward anaerobic glycolysis in response to proinflammatory signals. In ulcerative colitis, excessive epithelial repair results in lower PPAR-γ synthesis, which reduces beta-oxidation and increases oxygenation of colonocytes. Inflamed mucosae in colitis patients are increased in Proteobacteria, a major phylum of gram-negative bacteria, but decreased in gram-positive Firmicutes. Treatment with PPAR-γ agonist, however, can improve the microbial balance [43].

Fecal biomarkers such as inflammatory proteins, antimicrobial peptides, and SCFA levels are emerging as a non-invasive screening tool for assessing and diagnosing various health conditions [44]. Patients with IBD have lower fecal levels of acetate, propionate and butyrate, and higher levels of lactic and pyruvic acids than healthy individuals [45]. Given the relationship between bacterial fermentation products and atherosclerosis, ongoing research aims to characterize the fecal microbiota and SCFA signatures of individuals with high blood lipid levels [46]. High levels of isobutyric acid could be one such biomarker for hypercholesterolemia. Colonoscopy is an invasive exam relied on in the United States as a periodic screen for colorectal cancer [18], but annual screening is performed in many countries using a non-invasive fecal immunochemical test, which looks for microscopic blood in the stool [47]. Current efforts are underway to identify novel microbial biomarkers for colorectal cancer given that it is associated with increased fecal levels of F. nucleatum, a promoter of tumorigenesis [3].

Unlike structural disorders such as IBD, IBS is a functional disorder and collection of GI symptoms observed in the absence of macroscopic signs of inflammation. Despite affecting 10–15% of the population and the potential for low quality of life, its etiology is unclear and current drug treatments are largely ineffective [48]. Diagnosis has traditionally relied on symptom criteria, stool characteristics, and questionnaires, once all other pathologies are ruled out [49]. The Rome criteria sets classifications for four subtypes: IBS with predominant diarrhea (IBS-D), IBS with predominant constipation (IBS-C), and IBS with mixed or alternating-type bowel habits (IBS-M) depending on whether >25% of bowel movements belong to soft or hard type stool categories or both, respectively, followed by IBS unclassified (IBS-U) [50]. It has been known for some time that IBS patients have reduced microbial diversity compared to healthy subjects [51], see also References 6–9 in [51]. Inflammatory proteins such as human β-defensin 2, a bactericide, have been identified as a useful fecal biomarker in IBS and IBD [48,51,52]. Lastly, the concentration difference in two SCFAs, propionic minus butyric acid, has been shown to be positive for all four IBS subtypes but negative in healthy subjects [53].

Elevated levels of interleukin 6, a pro-inflammatory peptide cytokine, and plasma levels of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) endotoxin, a marker of gram-negative bacterial translocation, were found to be elevated in a subpopulation of IBS-D patients with small intestinal permeability, analogous to that observed in celiac disease [54]. It is hypothesized that psychological stress can exacerbate the inflammatory condition by allowing translocation of harmful bacterial products across the intestinal epithelium. Known as “leaky gut”, a compromised epithelial barrier allows toxins and antigens in the GI lumen to enter the bloodstream. A healthy gut flora is important in maintaining the intestinal barrier. By increasing the expression of tight cell junction proteins, beneficial probiotics such as Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium can limit the development of autoimmune diseases in genetically susceptible individuals [55] and fatty liver disease in obese individuals [56]. In alcoholic liver disease, alcohol consumption causes gut permeability by reducing the expression of REG3, a bactericidal protein normally responsible for restricting the mucosal colonization of luminal bacteria [57].

In the last decade, it has been discovered that the enteric and central nervous systems are linked via a bidirectional communication network termed the gut-brain axis. Gut-brain communication is disrupted in the cases of IBS and microbial dysbiosis [58], in the former leading to changes in intestinal motility and secretion and causing visceral hypersensitivity (hyperalgesia) [59]. Recurrent abdominal pain is a hallmark characteristic of IBS. Autism spectrum disorder, which is often associated with constipation, has been connected to gut dysbiosis in the form of an increased Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio and high levels of facultative anaerobes Escherichia/Shigella and the fungal genus Candida [60,61]. It is suggested that leaky gut contributes to the pathogenesis of autism by increasing systemic metabolites that alter the neuroimmune and neuroendocrine systems, thus affecting the brain and neurodevelopment [61,62,63].

Other lines of clinical evidence on the gut-brain interaction show that gut microbiota influences the central nervous system by alterations in the release of neuroendocrine hormones and neurotransmitter activity. Dysfunctions in GABA receptor signaling are implicated in anxiety and depression, and beneficial bacteria Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium convert the amino acid glutamate into GABA [78,79]. Metagenomic analysis of a 1054-person Flemish cohort revealed that butyrate-producing Faecalibacterium and Coprococcus associate with higher quality of life and improved mental health, while Dialister and Coprococcus are depleted in cases of depression [79]. To improve cognitive symptoms associated with clinical depression and anxiety, beneficial probiotic strains of B. longum and L. helveticus have been administered clinically with promising results [72,80]. In a study comparing young and middle-aged mice, dietary supplementation with prebiotic inulin was observed to increase Bifidobacterium and Akkermansia, reduce neuroinflammation and anxiety, and improve cognition in middle-aged mice [81]. The fact that alterations in gut microbiota can provide cognitive symptom relief could offer one basis for the relationship observed between quality of diet and one’s mental health status [82].

Clear links are emerging between the microbiome and its effects on host metabolism, with profound implications for human health given the rise of obesity and metabolic syndrome in Western society [83]. A study of four twin pairs discordant for obesity by Ridaura et al. revealed differences in their microbiota [84], with the lean individuals exhibiting an increase in bacterial SCFA fermentation and transformation of bile acids. To show that SCFA production was transmissible, the human fecal microbiota was transplanted into lean and obese mice. Obese mice were also cohoused with lean mice for 10 days, which countered weight gain due to an invasion of their microbiome by specific members of Bacteroidetes when a low-fat diet was administered. Such findings highlight the role of environmental factors in shaping gut microbiota and the development of obesity.

The metabolic effects of butyrate were measured in a study of mice fed a high-fat diet (60% of calories from lard) [103]. Oral but not intravenous administration of butyrate was shown to act on the gut-brain circuitry via the vagus nerve, decreasing food intake and preventing diet-induced obesity, hyperinsulinemia, hypertriglyceridemia, and fatty liver disease. Interestingly, butyrate also promoted fat oxidation and activated brown adipose tissue. The finding that butyrate improves energy metabolism without eliciting any ill effects suggests that oral supplementation might be a promising strategy for combatting cardiometabolic disease [104]. Butyrate was further shown to alter the gut microbiota independent of the vagus nerve [103]. Specific genera within the subclass Erysipelotrichia were significantly increased, bringing the relative abundance of the Firmicutes phylum from 26% to 32% relative to controls, while the Bacteroidetes phylum decreased from 71% to 66%. The ratio of Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes increased by 21% upon butyrate administration. Given that Firmicutes generally correlate with a less beneficial metabolic profile [105], it appears that specific species of Erysipelotrichia are beneficial to host energy metabolism.

Both obesity and diabetes are characterized by insulin resistance and low-grade inflammation. A mouse study by Cani et al. points to bacterial LPS as a causative factor of insulin resistance, obesity, and diabetes [106]. Feeding and fasting cycles increased or decreased plasma levels of LPS, respectively, and metabolic endotoxemia was observed in mice fed a four-week high-fat diet that increased the proportion of gram-negative bacteria in the gut, raising plasma LPS concentration by a factor of two to three. Endotoxemia could also be induced via subcutaneous infusion of LPS for four weeks, resulting in weight gain and increased fasting hyperglycemia and hyperinsulinemia. LPS produces inflammation in adipocytes through the activation of toll-like receptor 4 signaling [107]. Thus, prebiotics that improve intestinal microbiota and reduce intestinal permeability are of potential clinical use for the treatment of diabetes [108,109]. Randomized controlled trials have reported improvements in glycemia and cardiovascular markers in T2D patients taking resistant starch, resistant dextrin, or inulin [110].

A subset of patients cannot tolerate metformin due to adverse GI effects including abdominal pain, bloating, nausea, and diarrhea. A small clinical trial was recently conducted in nondiabetic individuals, confirming that metformin alters gut microbiota independent of glycemic status [130]. Interestingly, the bacterial abundance of 12 genera at baseline predicted whether healthy individuals would experience adverse GI effects upon treatment with metformin. This observation provides a glimpse at how gut microbiota, which are shaped by diet, can mediate individualized therapeutic responses to a medication. Lastly, diabetes medication acarbose is a minimally absorbed glucoamylase inhibitor that prevents starch digestion by humans. A mouse study monitored acarbose-treated mice fed either a Western-style high-starch diet or a high-fiber diet rich in plant polysaccharides [131]. Analogous to metformin treatment, high doses of acarbose were sufficient to alter gut bacterial taxa and increase butyrate production even in those consuming a high-starch diet, but the bacterial composition quickly reverted upon cessation of acarbose treatment. Altogether, these studies suggest that alterations in the gut microbial community are prominent contributors to the mechanism of action in antihyperglycemic agents.

Metabolomic analysis was used to monitor 2000 metabolites present in the blood plasma of patients undergoing cardiac evaluation in order to identify potential predictors of CVD events [132]. Three small molecules were found to predict CVD risk: choline, trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO), and betaine. Each are metabolites of phosphatidylcholine, a dietary lipid found in high quantities in egg yolk, liver, and other high-fat animal products. Choline, also called lecithin, is an essential nutrient that is marketed as a dietary supplement. Hydrolysis of phosphatidylcholine liberates choline, which is metabolized by gut microbes into trimethylamine (TMA) gas, which the liver in turn converts into TMAO. In mice fed radiolabeled phosphatidylcholine, increased blood levels of TMAO were revealed to contribute to greater arterial plaque development [132]. In another study, atherosclerosis susceptibility could be transmitted from atherogenic-prone mouse strains to atherogenic-resistant strains via cecal microbial transplantation [133].

The scientific community has also debated the extent to which red meat elevates the risk of colorectal cancer, another condition prominent in Western society [154,155]. Gut microbiota associated with colorectal cancer were recently shown to have an increase in genes associated with TMA lyase and protein catabolism, while microbe carbohydrate degradation pathways were depleted [156,157]. Dietary choline is not observed to correlate with cancer incidence, while betaine, a methyl group donor, is associated with reduced colorectal cancer risk [158]. Again, overall diet quality is likely a significant factor. A study using a polyposis cancer model in mice showed that a high-fiber diet increases SCFA-producing bacteria as well as the expression of butyrate receptor GPR109A, serving to suppress colon carcinogenesis [159]. A case-control study conducted in China found an inverse association between vegetable fiber intake and colorectal cancer (Q4 versus Q1 odds ratio: 0.51; 95% confidence interval: 0.31–0.85) [160]. Strong associations were also observed for total, soluble, and insoluble fiber intakes, but not fruit, soy, or grain fiber. A comparative risk assessment estimated that suboptimal food group intake levels account for 38% of new colorectal cancer cases [161]. Microbial overgrowth was recently shown to fulfill the ecological Koch’s postulates [162] of disease causation in colorectal cancer. Rather than a specific pathogen, a matrix-enclosed ecosystem of bacteria, or biofilm, extracted from tumor patients was found to induce tumorigenesis in mice [163].

Probiotics are defined as “live microorganisms that, when administered in adequate amounts, confer a health benefit on the host” [164]. Probiotics are available over-the-counter or by prescription containing microorganisms similar to the commensal bacteria found in the gut, most commonly lactic acid-producing Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus spp. As a whole, there is clinical evidence to support the use of probiotics for treating acute infectious diarrhea, antibiotic-associated diarrhea, C. difficile-associated diarrhea, ulcerative colitis, and irritable bowel syndrome, but not for acute pancreatitis or Crohn’s disease [165,166,167,168,169,170]. Commonly prescribed antibiotics carry a risk of C. difficile infection, which can cause severe complications and has an estimated treatment cost of $24,205 USD per patient. Co-administration of probiotics, which lower the risk of C. difficile infection, has therefore been proposed as a prophylactic whenever antibiotics are prescribed [171]. Clinical research into probiotics is species- and often strain-specific, with particular bacteria investigated for separate disease states [172]. Probiotic bacteria can potentially provide various health benefits through normalizing perturbed microbiota and intestinal motility, competitively excluding pathogens, and increasing SCFA production [173,174,175].

A clinical study of healthy adults given the probiotic L. paracasei DG revealed that the changes observed in the underlying gut microbiota can depend on an individual’s starting microbial profile [199]. Study participants with low initial fecal butyrate levels experienced a four-fold increase in butyrate production and a 55% decrease in Ruminococcus, a member of the Clostridia class responsible for degrading resistant starch. On the other hand, individuals with high starting butyrate levels experienced a 49% decrease in butyrate production and a decrease in six Clostridia genera including Faecalibacterium, an anti-inflammatory butyrate producer beneficial to mental health [79]. Other studies corroborate that a patient’s initial fecal microbial pattern can help predict their response to a probiotic intervention [189], suggesting it will one day be possible to optimize the dose of bacterial strains administered for an individual [200]. An individual’s microbiome has also been shown to influence the production of butyrate upon dietary supplementation with fermentable resistant starch according to which bacterial taxa become amplified [201]. Given the relation between the microbiome and metabolic disease, current research is now exploring probiotic interventions as an adjuvant therapy for improving cardiometabolic profiles [202,203]. Positive results have been obtained using the multi-strain formulation Ecologic® Barrier for T2D [204]. In rats, Ecologic® Barrier was previously shown to improve depression-related behavior independent of consumption of a high-fat Western-style diet [205]. Ecologic® Barrier contains the following strains: Bifidobacterium bifidum W23, B. lactis W52, Lactobacillus acidophilus W37, L. brevis W63, L. casei W56, L. salivarius W24, Lactococcus lactis W19, and Lc. lactis W58. Lastly, two strains of L. gasseri isolated from human intestine and breast milk were found to reduce visceral fat mass in obese adults, but the effects diminished once treatment with SBT2055 was ceased, indicating that the probiotic needs to be continually supplied [206,207].

In some clinical studies, a probiotic is administered in combination with a prebiotic compound that promotes bacterial growth, together termed a synbiotic. The requirements of a prebiotic are that it is not digested in the upper GI tract, can be fermented by intestinal microbiota, selectively stimulates beneficial bacteria growth and diversity, and has a positive effect on host health [208,209]. Prebiotics include FOS, GOS, and polyol sugar alcohols used as nutritive sweeteners [193,210]. Inulin is a soluble fiber and fructan, or variable length polymer of fructose, that is indigestible to humans and has minimal impact on blood glucose levels [211]. Believed to be most effective in nurturing the growth of many species of probiotic [193], inulin has been tested in successful synbiotic treatments for ulcerative colitis [191,211]. More recently, supplementation with butyrate and inulin was found to lower diastolic blood pressure, fasting blood sugar, and waist-to-hip ratio in T2D patients [104].

Given the relationship between gut microbiota and inflammation, research is underway to examine the effects of anti-inflammatory omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) on microbial diversity. Consuming a Western diet high in animal protein is known to elevate the ratio of omega-6 to omega-3 PUFAs by up to a factor of 10, producing an inflammatory response mediated by hormone-like eicosanoids in the body [149,216]. The omega-3 PUFAs docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), however, are inflammation-resolving and have anti-colorectal cancer activity, see References 4–6 in [217]. Human studies show that dietary supplementation with EPA and DHA increases the intestinal abundance of Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus, while decreasing Faecalibacterium [217,218]. Conflicting results were reported for the effect of omega-3 fatty acids on the ratio of Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes phyla. Lastly, a metabolomic analysis was recently conducted of 876 adult female twins. After adjusting for dietary fiber intake, the consumption and circulating levels of omega-3 fatty acids were found to be significantly correlated with microbial alpha diversity as measured by the Shannon index [219].

A metagenomic analysis was conducted of 1135 participants from a Dutch population using deep sequencing [120]. The sequencing data enabled the detection of associations in microbiota with 126 different environmental factors including diet, disease, and medication use. Higher intakes of total carbohydrates were most strongly associated with decreased microbiome diversity: bifidobacteria increased while Lactobacillus, Streptococcus, and Roseburia genera decreased. The Shannon diversity index decreased according to intake levels of total carbohydrates, followed by sugar-sweetened beverages, bread, beer, savory snacks, and, to a lesser extent, total fats, pulses, and legumes. Diversity was also reduced in individuals self-reporting IBS, and antibiotic use was associated with decreases in two species of Bifidobacterium. On the other hand, microbial diversity increased with fruit, coffee, vegetable, and red wine intake and to a smaller extent eating breakfast and drinking tea. Red wine consumption was associated with an increased abundance of F. prausnitzii [120], an anti-inflammatory species implicated in lean-type, high-richness microbiota [87]. Coffee, tea, and red wine are high in polyphenols, compounds associated with prebiotic and bifidogenic activity, see References 19–21 in Reference [120]. In a recent meta-analysis, consuming up to three cups/day in coffee was found to decrease all-cause and CVD mortality in a dose-dependent fashion irrespective of caffeine content [220].

Consistent with the Belgian [221] and other studies [7,120], earlier analysis of the Dutch population cohort revealed that bacterial taxa could explain BMI and blood lipids independent of age, gender, and host genetics [229]. Species richness was negatively correlated with both BMI and triglycerides and positively correlated with protective levels of HDL cholesterol [120,229]. A significant correlation is not observed, however, between gut microbiota and LDL or total cholesterol levels [7,120,221,229]. The absence of correlation between plasma LDL and the microbiome is notable given that the latter is associated with metabolic disease. Despite plasma LDL being used as the principal target in lipid-lowering therapy for the last three decades, recent evidence suggests that triglyceride, HDL, and apolipoprotein B blood levels may be more useful CVD predictors [230,231,232,233,234,235]. Many factors confound the relationship between plasma LDL concentration and CVD. While one in three individuals are hyper-responders to dietary cholesterol, the ratio of LDL to HDL is minimally affected when others, particularly the elderly, consume an additional 100 mg/day [236]. For individuals with similar LDL concentrations, a predominance of small dense LDL particles (sdLDL) increases one’s CVD risk [236], as does a higher proportion of covalently modified LDL particles, known as lipoprotein(a) [237]. Widely prescribed statin drugs are effective at lowering LDL and to some extent apolipoprotein B concentration, but they do not decrease the proportion of sdLDL and have been found to raise plasma lipoprotein (a) by up to 20%, contributing to what has been termed “residual” CVD risk [238,239]. The lack of an association between plasma LDL concentration and the microbiome is not surprising given these confounding factors.

Fermentable oligosaccharides (fructans, GOS), disaccharides (lactose), monosaccharides (fructose), and polyols (sorbitol, xylitol) are termed FODMAPs [240]. Consumption of dietary FODMAPs pulls water into the small intestine and colon, causing luminal distension. Fermentation of FODMAPs by gut bacteria and yeast then produces hydrogen or methane gas. Restricting FODMAPs in one’s diet has been shown to help alleviate functional GI symptoms in IBS patients (bloating, abdominal pain, diarrhea), but no effects have been reported for intestinal inflammation in IBD [27,240]. Wheat, rye and barley contain fructans and supply much of the FODMAPs contained in the Western diet. A double-blind crossover challenge was conducted of 59 adults self-reporting non-celiac gluten sensitivity (NCGS), who had previously followed a gluten-free diet for at least six months [241]. Participants completed three seven-day challenges in which a muesli bar was consumed containing either FOS, wheat gluten, or placebo, with the amounts of fructan/gluten equal to that contained in four slices of wheat sandwich bread. IBS symptom scores worsened in the fructan challenge (P = 0.04), while symptoms were actually slightly improved relative to placebo upon consumption of gluten (P = 0.55). The finding that fructans are responsible for GI symptoms in self-identified NCGS patients, and not gluten, is also supported by a crossover trial in which 37 subjects with NCGS and IBS followed a low-FODMAP diet before switching to a high- or low-gluten diet [242]. Regardless of the source of symptoms, NCGS and IBS at least have overlapping features and are not entirely separate entities [243].

Long-term implementation of a low-FODMAP diet is problematic due to the restriction of healthy plant foods and the fact that FODMAPs are prebiotics that support gut microbiota. Apples, pears, and stone fruits are high in fructose and other FODMAPs. Legumes and pulses are also high FODMAP, as are several vegetables including onion, garlic, and cauliflower. When administered properly by a trained dietitian, the FODMAP elimination diet is intended to be a process rather than a rigid exclusion diet. The initial elimination phase lasts 2–6 weeks in order to get GI symptoms under control. In the challenge phase, specific foods or types of FODMAPs are reintroduced one at a time and in increasing amounts. The patient is instructed to keep a detailed food diary so they can learn what FODMAPs are best tolerated and can eventually be incorporated into the final integration phase of the diet. Two clinical challenges can occur during this process: a patient’s symptoms may not respond, or they do respond and then the patient becomes reluctant to reintroduce FODMAPs [244]. While long-term studies are lacking, following a low-FODMAP diet reduces the diversity and quality of dietary components being consumed [245], and healthy diet diversity has been linked to more diverse microbiota and better health outcomes [246]. Short-term FODMAP restriction has been shown to disturb the gut microbiota in as little as 2-3 weeks, reducing total bacterial abundance and the population of Bifidobacterium, while increasing the ratio of Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes [247,248].

KD and low-carbohydrate diets have become a popular and effective tool for losing weight and can improve blood CVD parameters in the short-term [249,250]. However, 20-year studies involving a large prospective cohort reveal that diet quality and the source of protein and fat can ultimately determine health outcomes in low (40% of caloric intake) carbohydrate diets [251,252]. In research by de Koning et al., it was found that high plant-based intake of protein and fat reduces the hazard ratio (HR) for T2D to 0.78, whereas high intake of animal protein and fat maximizes the risk (HR: 1.37) [251]. Adjusting for red and processed meat intake was observed to lower the association with animal sources (HR: 1.11). In strict KD, below ground vegetables and legumes high in net carbs, and most fruits, are restricted in order limit total carbohydrate intake to 50 g/day. Restricting plant-based carbohydrates can have considerable effects on gut microbiota given that fiber and prebiotics are required for bacterial diversity [65,119,208]. The reduction in fiber can also contribute to constipation, a common side effect of KD.

In an anti-seizure mouse model, KD was shown to reduce gut bacterial alpha diversity, while elevating the relative abundance of A. muciniphila, but KD was only followed for three weeks [67]. A much longer study of 10 multiple sclerosis patients found that total bacterial abundance and diversity decreased in the short-term but recovered during weeks 12–24 of KD treatment [253]. Akkermansia was observed to increase initially but then declined during long-term KD and pioneer bacteria steadily declined [253]. Pioneer bacteria such as Bifidobacterium and Clostridium are the first to colonize newborns and patients recovering from a course of antibiotic treatment. Twenty children with refractory epilepsy were recently treated with KD for six months [254]. Treatment lowered alpha diversity and decreased the Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio. In 10 of the children who were non-responsive to treatment (<50% seizure reduction), the relative abundance of Ruminococcaceae and Clostridia became enriched, suggesting specific bacteria may serve as an efficacy biomarker or potential therapeutic target [254]. Such alterations in gut microbiota associated with long-term KD suggest the importance of a properly balanced, high quality diet [65].

Consuming excess carbohydrates as part of a Western diet high in refined grains, starch, and added sugar negatively impacts gut microbiota. The first connection between the microbiome and metabolic health was noted in 1970, when the International Sugar Research Foundation found that a high-sugar diet led to high serum triglycerides in conventional rats but not germ-free rats [255]. In a modern Dutch population study, the largest dietary predictor of low gut bacterial diversity was the total intake of carbohydrates, followed by consumption levels of beer, bread, and soda [120]. A study of 178 elderly subjects by Claesson et al. found that patients in long-term residential care consumed a diet higher in fat and lower in fiber than seniors living in their community [246]. Diet diversity was scored using the healthy food diversity index, which differentiates between healthy and unhealthy foods across all food groups, and found to positively correlate with gut bacterial diversity. Individual microbiota clustered based on long-term care or community living status, and microbiota composition significantly correlated with frailty, co-morbidity, and inflammation markers [246]. While obesity research has traditionally compared low versus high fat diets, a rat study found that a low-fat/high-sucrose diet led to reduced bacterial diversity, increased Firmicutes: Bacteroidetes, a bloom in Ruminococcaceae, gut inflammation, altered vagal gut-brain communication, and obesity, similar to an isocaloric high-fat/high-sucrose diet [105].

Artificial food ingredients are specifically being linked to gut dysbiosis. Maltodextrin, a polysaccharide derived from starch hydrolysis, is a common food additive that enables adherent invasive strains of E. coli to adhere to intestinal epithelial cells and grow into biofilm, contributing to gut dysbiosis and intestinal inflammation [21]. Polysorbate-80, an emulsifier used in processed foods, has been shown to enhance translocation of pathogenic E. coli strains across colonocytes [21]. In a mouse study by Chassaing et al., low (0.1–1.0%) mass concentrations of emulsifiers polysorbate-80 and carboxymethylcellulose induced low-grade inflammation, obesity, and dysglycemia in wild-type mice and promoted robust colitis in mice predisposed to the disorder [270]. Fecal transplants to germ-free mice demonstrated that changes in microbiota were responsible. The emulsifiers reduced microbial diversity and levels of health-promoting Bacteroidales, while increasing mucolytic Ruminococcus gnavus and pro-inflammatory Proteobacteria. Reduced mucus thickness was also observed in the emulsifier-treated mice, along with bacterial encroachment into the normally sterile inner mucus layer [270]. Microbiota encroachment has been implicated in IBD and metabolic syndrome. In humans, the average bacterial-epithelial distance of closest bacteria correlates inversely with BMI, fasting glucose levels, and hemoglobin A1c [271]. Such observations point to the consumption of processed foods as one potentiator of the global obesity epidemic [272].

Excessive caloric intake results in fat being stored in white adipose tissue, while energy expenditure by fat oxidation predominantly occurs from thermogenesis of brown adipose tissue. Conversion of white adipocytes, known as beiging, is thus a promising strategy for treatment of metabolic disease. Recently, Li et al. were able to selectively induce the beiging of white adipose tissue in mice using the natural strategy of intermittent fasting [273]. Mice placed on an every-other-day fasting regimen had the same cumulative food intake as the ad libitum control group, but experienced a shift in gut microbiota, increase in fermentation products acetate and lactate, and a reversal of diet-induced obesity. Transport of acetate and lactate across the adipocyte membrane is driven by monocarboxylate transporter 1, whose expression was found to be upregulated in beige cells. Beiging was not observed in germ-free mice, but could be restored upon fecal transplantation of gut microbiota [273]. A previous study in mice demonstrated that cold exposure activates white fat beiging and increases insulin sensitivity via changes in the microbiome [274]. These observations reveal the existence of a microbiota-beige fat axis. In other work, Panda et al. found that diet-induced obesity dampens daily cyclical fluctuations in mice microbiota [275]. Restricting feeding to an eight-hour window each day partially restored circadian fluctuations, including a decrease in the abundance of Lactobacillus observed during the feeding phase. Intermittent fasting, longer multiday fasts, and fasting-mimicking diets have been shown to improve gut barrier function, increase microbial diversity, enhance antioxidative microbial pathways, and even reverse intestinal inflammation in models of IBD [276,277,278].

In addition to altered microbiota and low-grade inflammation, obesity is characterized by increased endocannabinoid (eCB) system tone. A study of the eCB system in lean and obese mice was performed by blocking or activating cannabinoid receptor 1 (CB1) [279]. SR141716A, a CB1 antagonist that reduces food intake, significantly reduced gut permeability and plasma LPS levels in obese mice, decreasing both adiposity and blood glucose levels. In contrast, agonist HU-210 increased eCB system tone in lean mice and raised plasma LPS. Increased gut permeability with HU-210 was attributed to a decrease in the expression of two epithelial tight junction proteins. By comparing diet-induced obesity and intervention with antibiotics or prebiotics, microbiota associated with obesity were shown to be responsible for increasing the expression levels of CB1 in colonocytes and adipose tissue [279].

Endocannabinoids are an appealing therapeutic strategy for many conditions such as treating inflammation in IBD [280]. Cannabinoid antagonist cannabidiol has been shown to counteract the inflammatory environment induced by LPS in mice and in human colonic cultures derived from ulcerative colitis patients, at least in part due to PPAR-γ activation [281]. The use of CB1 agonists has been proposed for increasing GI transit time in IBS-D, while antagonists could prove useful for IBS-C [282]. Partial agonist tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) increases food intake in the short-term, but in epidemiological surveys, obesity is observed to be less prevalent among cannabis users [283]. In mice fed a high-fat diet, chronic treatment with THC was recently shown to stave off increases in the ratio of Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes, increase the abundance of A. muciniphila, and prevent diet-induced obesity [284].

Oral administration of high dose antibiotics can result in rapid changes to gut microbiota and is implicated in dysbiosis [22,285,286,287]. Over-the-counter and prescription non-antibiotic medicines also influence the gut microbiome. Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) are a widely used class of drugs that function by raising gastric pH. PPIs are an effective short-term indicated therapy for gastroesophageal reflux, peptic ulcers, and H. pylori infection, but many chronically afflicted patients take long-term or off-label dosing. Meta-analyses have shown that PPI use increases the risk of developing SIBO and C. difficile infection (odds ratios: 1.71 and 1.99; 95% confidence intervals: 1.20–2.43 and 1.73–2.30, respectively) [288,289]. Antibiotics, PPIs, and atypical antipsychotics have each been implicated in reducing alpha microbial diversity [286,290,291]. Second-generation antipsychotic medications, which contribute to weight gain and metabolic syndrome, gradually increase the ratio of Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes in association with BMI and decrease the abundance of Akkermansia [292,293]. Efforts are now underway to examine how bacterial taxa each respond to treatment with drugs from other common therapeutic classes [290,294]. Opioids can cause severe constipation and at high doses in mice enable bacterial translocation through disruption of the gut barrier [290,295]. Changes in microbiota have been implicated in the creation of intestinal lesions by nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, which reduce blood flow to the gut and weaken the hydrophobic mucosal barrier. Lastly, GI symptoms are a common side effect of statins, which affect bile acid metabolism and have been shown to increase the abundance of five bacterial families including Enterobacteriaceae [290].

The interrelationships discussed in this article between diet, environmental factors, gut microbiota, and their physiological outcomes are summarized in Table 1.

The past decade of research has begun to reveal the overarching roles the gut microbiome plays in human health. Particular species of Bifidobacterium, Akkermansia, and Lactobacillus are beneficial to the human host and are included in many probiotic preparations, but genera such as Bacteroides and Ruminococcus are implicated in negative health outcomes. Antibiotic use and modern sanitation have contributed to a decrease in the diversity of the human microbiome [287]. Core microbial diversity and the ratio of Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes are general indicators of health and may change with age, though inter-individual variation is large and quality of diet and environmental factors play a dominant role [246,297,298,299]. Future research will need to characterize the changes in bacterial composition accompanying different disease states and the corresponding expression patterns in genes of both microbe and host [296,300]. Increased age is associated with oxidative stress and a pro-inflammatory state, and improvements in microbiota have been shown to extend life span in animal models of aging, though human aging studies are lacking [81,278,301,302]. Prebiotics and dietary fiber increase the relative abundance of beneficial anaerobic bacteria, increase butyrate fermentation, and have favorable metabolic effects. Propionate, on the other hand, is an SCFA used as a food preservative that has recently been linked to insulin resistance when consumed in typical concentrations [303]. Lastly, negative results are being reported for gut microbiota-produced acetate. In rats fed a high-fat diet, increased acetate production was found to promote obesity and metabolic syndrome [304]. In an analogous rat model, colonic infusion with resistant starch plus exogenous acetate delayed the development of obesity and insulin resistance and protected the mucosal barrier [305]. Genera such as Faecalibacterium and Roseburia were observed to enable the conversion of acetate into butyrate, increasing serum and fecal butyrate levels.

Inter-individual variation in gut microbiota could explain the disparity in outcomes often observed with lifestyle interventions and why one-size-fits-all diets are not always effective [83,125,201]. The influence of diet type on the relative abundances of microbial populations can be complex and difficult to reproduce across different clinical studies, in part due to the number of individual species involved in each phylum and genus [142]. Individuals have been shown to have highly personalized microbiome responses to different foods depending on their prior history of dietary diversity [322]. Rapid modifications in gut microbiota are possible when adopting a new dietary strategy, such as following an exclusively plant- or animal-based diet [323]. Microbial markers have even been proposed as an objective means of measuring adherence to a given dietary pattern in order to more accurately correlate resultant health outcomes [150]. Microbes collectively encode 150-fold more genes than the human genome [5]. Enzymes in gut bacteria across the main taxonomic groupings have been shown to metabolize 176 common oral drugs, suggesting that differences in gut microbiota may shape individual responses to drug therapy [324]. Ultimately, determining the full landscape of host-microbiota interactions will enable advances in personalized medicine, precision nutrition [125,325], and the development of next-generation probiotics tailored to the individual [326].

