The Role of the Gut Microbiome, Immunity, and Neuroinflammation in the Pathophysiology of Eating Disorders

There is a growing recognition that both the gut microbiome and the immune system are involved in a number of psychiatric illnesses, including eating disorders. This should come as no surprise, given the important roles of diet composition, eating patterns, and daily caloric intake in modulating both biological systems. Here, we review the evidence that alterations in the gut microbiome and immune system may serve not only to maintain and exacerbate dysregulated eating behavior, characterized by caloric restriction in anorexia nervosa and binge eating in bulimia nervosa and binge eating disorder, but may also serve as biomarkers of increased risk for developing an eating disorder. We focus on studies examining gut dysbiosis, peripheral inflammation, and neuroinflammation in each of these eating disorders, and explore the available data from preclinical rodent models of anorexia and binge-like eating that may be useful in providing a better understanding of the biological mechanisms underlying eating disorders. Such knowledge is critical to developing novel, highly effective treatments for these often intractable and unremitting eating disorders.

Eating disorders are serious psychiatric conditions driven, in part, by non-homeostatic eating, including chronic underconsumption of calories in anorexia nervosa (AN) and intermittent binge eating in bulimic syndromes including binge eating disorder (BED) and bulimia nervosa (BN). While AN is often defined by chronic caloric restriction, other core features include increased physical activity, an intense fear of weight gain, endocrine alterations, disturbance of body image, and low body weight [1]. This eating disorder disproportionately affects females with a 12-month prevalence of 0.4–1% among adolescents and young adults [1]. In addition to environmental factors, such as the cultural pressure for thinness in women, it is clear that genetic and hormonal factors also play an important role in the development and maintenance of AN [2,3,4]. Consistent with its complex and poorly understood etiology, the course of AN is highly variable, relapse is common, and the mortality rate is the highest among psychiatric illnesses [5,6]. This highlights a pressing need for research designed to better understand the biological mechanisms underlying AN and to identify biological risk factors.

Similar to AN, highly effective treatments for bulimic syndromes, including BN and BED, are lacking [11], and efforts to develop effective treatments are hampered by our limited understanding of the biological mechanisms underlying these eating disorders. The last few years have, however, led to a growing recognition that both the gut microbiome and the immune system are involved in a number of psychiatric illnesses, including eating disorders [11,12]. Moreover, the important roles that diet composition and caloric intake play in terms of regulating microbiome and immune function has spurred further interest in studying these biological systems in the context of dysregulated eating behavior. Here, we review the evidence that alterations in the microbiome and immune function can promote and maintain eating disorders characterized by caloric restriction in AN and intermittent binge eating in bulimic syndromes including BN and BED.

The gut microbiome has become an emerging focus in a number of health disciplines, including the diagnosis and treatment of psychiatric disorders [13]. This should come as no surprise given that the human body contains at least as many prokaryotic bacterial cells as total eukaryotic cells [14,15]. Moreover, the human microbiome contains 150 times more bacterial genes, derived from thousands of gut microbial species, than what exists in the human genome [14]. The collective genomes of all the microbes lining the full length of the gastrointestinal tract comprise the “gut microbiome”.

Studies involving manipulation of the microbiome further highlight its important role in regulating body weight. For example, the use of prebiotics and probiotics can reduce body weight and fat mass in obese individuals [21], and fecal microbiome transplants from healthy donors has been shown to improve glucose metabolism, insulin sensitivity, and liver function in overweight individuals [22,23]. It has also been shown that fecal microbiome transplants from obese individuals promotes weight gain in germ-free, lean rodents despite no change in caloric intake [24,25]. Taken together, these studies provide compelling evidence that the gut microbiome plays a critical role in regulating body weight and thus offers an important therapeutic target for slowing or reversing weight gain in obese individuals.

While much is known about the role of the microbiome in the development and maintenance of obesity, far fewer studies have been conducted in individuals with eating disorders and, to the best of our knowledge, this emerging literature is restricted to AN. In the first comprehensive investigation, Kleiman et al. [16] characterized the fecal microbiome of a small group of AN patients upon admission (n = 16) and again at discharge (n = 10) from an inpatient treatment facility. At admission, acutely ill AN patients had significantly reduced alpha diversity, relative to healthy controls. Interestingly, alpha diversity was associated with eating disorder psychopathology, with reduced bacterial species associated with greater depression and concern about weight and shape [16]. While the health of the fecal microbiome improved in weight-restored AN patients, alpha diversity continued to be significantly reduced in the AN group at discharge, and significant difference in beta diversity (a measure of how samples of the microbiome vary against each other) were also observed in AN patients between admission and discharge [16]. This is particularly interesting as it suggests that alterations in the gut microbiome may be trait related and thus may play a causal role in AN, rather than simply being a consequence of malnutrition or low body weight.

Most, but not all, studies investigating the fecal microbiome in AN have reported some level of gut dysbiosis, defined by bacterial colonies in the gastrointestinal tract that are disrupted in a way that is detrimental to the host [26,27,28,29,30]. While some studies replicated the first report of decreased alpha diversity in acutely ill AN patients [31,32], others have not [27,28,33]. In light of the strong association between alpha diversity and overall gut health, these equivocal findings highlight the need for additional investigations of alpha diversity in the gut microbiome of individuals diagnosed with, and recovered from, AN. Further research is also needed to assess the specific changes in microbial composition in AN, including changes in beta diversity and microbial metabolites that may perpetuate AN symptoms.

Preclinical rodent models of AN have been valuable in terms of studying the biological mechanisms underlying this eating disorder [34,35,36] and should be particularly useful in elucidating how gut dysbiosis may serve as a biomarker for the development or maintenance of AN. Activity-based anorexia (ABA), one of the more common rodent models of AN, combines food restriction (e.g., limiting food access to 1–2 h per day or providing 40% of baseline food intake) with the opportunity to exercise in a running wheel [37,38]. Under these conditions, rodents eat less than sedentary controls given the same restricted access to food and engage in high levels of running wheel activity, resulting in rapid weight loss. In addition to the caloric restriction and hyperactivity, ABA-exposed rodents develop other symptoms of AN, including low adiposity, hypothermia, and neuroendocrine disruptions [37]. Given the complex social and psychiatric components of AN, it is clear that the ABA paradigm can only model a subset of AN symptoms, but it is widely recognized as the best preclinical model of this complex eating disorder [34,39].

A summary of the changes in the gut microbiome in AN and animal models of AN is provided in Table 1.

The immune system is comprised of two branches, the innate and the adaptive immune system, which play a coordinated role in detecting and neutralizing invading bloodborne and cellular pathogens [52]. The innate immune system is usually the first to respond to an invading pathogen and rapidly produces a generalized, non-specific inflammatory response mediated by neutrophils and eosinophils, followed by macrophages. The B and T lymphocytes of the adaptive immune system respond more slowly but the response is specific to the pathogen and can be recalled upon re-exposure to the pathogen [52].

Data from rodent models of AN, specifically the ABA model described above, may shed some light on the underlying mechanisms of impaired peripheral immune function in AN. Increased levels of proinflammatory cytokines have been observed in ABA. For example, ABA mice displayed early onset intestinal inflammation marked by increased levels of TLR4 mRNA in the colon and an increase in the cell surface expression of TLR4 on colonic macrophages and epithelial cells [70]. ABA was also associated with elevated levels of mucosal proinflammatory cytokine production, specifically TNF-α and IL-6 [70]. It is important to note that these same inflammatory changes were observed in a limited food access control group as well, suggesting chronic malnutrition/starvation alone is sufficient to alter immune function in the mouse gut. In the same study, TLR4 knockout mice had higher rates of mortality due to ABA than wildtype controls, suggesting that while TLR4 may be integral to the proinflammatory response observed in ABA, it also appears to be playing a protective role. However, the underlying mechanisms of TLR4′s protective effects in the context of ABA are unknown and require further investigation [70].

It is now widely accepted that peripheral inflammatory events can directly cause inflammation in the central nervous system. Circulating proinflammatory cytokines have been shown to cross the blood brain barrier and stimulate the release of proinflammatory cytokines from microglia, which express TLRs and serve as the resident immune cells of the brain [71]. Microglia are myeloid cells derived from erythromyeloid progenitors in the yolk sac and enter the nervous tissue early during embryonic development [72]. Central changes in immune signaling can have significant impacts on a variety of brain functions, including feeding behavior and mood regulation [71,73], both of which are dysregulated in AN. While the role of neuroinflammation in AN patients is unknown, evidence from a number of preclinical rodent models suggest that central inflammation, and specifically microglia, play an important role in the pathophysiology of AN.

A comprehensive summary of the changes in peripheral and central immune function in AN and animal models of AN is provided in Table 2.

A shared feature of bulimic syndromes is binge eating, a form of dysregulated eating behavior involving intermittent overconsumption of palatable foods that are high in saturated fats and refined sugar [88]. It is well-documented that chronic consumption of a high fat diet is associated with peripheral and central inflammation, both of which contribute to weight gain and obesity-related comorbidities including metabolic syndrome, insulin resistance, and type 2 diabetes. While there is a robust literature examining immune function in individuals diagnosed with AN, much less is known about the immune system’s response to intermittent overconsumption of calories in individuals diagnosed with bulimic syndromes, including BN and BED, or whether dysregulated immune function may serve as a risk factor for either of these eating disorders.

While multiple studies have reported that autoimmune and inflammatory diseases are associated with increased risk for developing BN and BED, the mechanism underlying this relationship is unknown. Since proinflammatory cytokines produced by autoimmune diseases can suppress appetite and promote weight loss [109], it is possible that the resulting energy deficit may serve as a trigger for dysregulated eating behavior in general and binge eating in particular. Another possible mechanism arises for human imaging studies, which have shown that disease-related neuroinflammation may alter activity in reward and feeding pathways [80,110], and this could serve to mediate the association between inflammatory disease and eating disorder risk. Additional studies are needed to better understand how immune system disturbance may promote eating disorders in general, and bulimic syndromes in particular. Such information is a crucial first step toward identifying novel biological targets for treating these conditions. In this regard, rodent-based models of binge eating may be particularly valuable as they permit prospective investigations of individual differences in immune function that may alter vulnerability to binge eat, and the ability to directly manipulate and target the immune system in treatment-focused studies.

While several well-validated preclinical animal models of binge eating exist, few have been used to examine the role of the immune system in the development or maintenance of binge eating in bulimic syndromes. To the best of our knowledge, there is only one study that used a frustration stress paradigm [111,112] to promote binge-like eating in female rats. In this paradigm, binge eating of a familiar, palatable food is evoked in rats by exposure to three, 8-day cycles of food restriction (food is restricted to 66% of baseline levels on days 1–4 followed by ad libitum feeding on days 5–8) during which they are given access to the palatable food for 2 h/day on days 5–6 and 13–14 of the first two cycles. During the third cycle, the palatable food is presented only on day 24 under the same conditions as in previous cycles (control condition) or after a 15 min “frustration stressor” in which rats can see and smell the palatable food but are prevented from eating it (binge condition). On this final test day, rats subjected to the frustration stressor engage in binge-like eating of the palatable food, relative to control rats [112]. Using this paradigm, Alboni et al. [113] examined changes in gene transcription of inflammatory markers in the hypothalamus of female rats following binge-like or normal consumption of palatable food. While multiple markers were examined, only three were differentially expressed, with lower mRNA levels of IL-18 and its receptor (IL-18R) and higher levels of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) mRNA detected in the hypothalamus of binge-eating versus control rats [113]. It is possible that this decreased transcription of IL-18/IL-18R may have played a permissive role in the binge-like eating observed in this study, as a lack of IL-18 signaling promotes hyperphagia, weight gain, and related comorbidities in rodents [114,115]. The increased mRNA expression of iNOS in the hypothalamus of binge-eating rats is also of interest, as iNOS production and release is stimulated by proinflammatory cytokines [116] and thus provides some indirect evidence that binge-like eating in rats is associated with hypothalamic inflammation. Additionally nitric oxide (NO) has been shown to regulate the expression of neuropeptides that control food intake [117] and clinical studies have shown that NO production is increased in individuals with BN [118]. While these preliminary findings are interesting, it will be important to determine whether similar changes are observed in other animal models of binge-like eating in which animals engage in repeated episodes of binge-like eating. It will also be important to look at more direct measures of neuroinflammation including changes in the number and activation state of microglia in multiple brain areas.

A comprehensive summary of the peripheral and central immune changes in BN, BED, and animal models of binge-like eating is provided in Table 3.

While it is clear that interactions between the gut microbiome, immune system, and nervous system are involved in the pathophysiology of eating disorders, researchers are only beginning to scratch the surface to uncover the intricate mechanisms through which these systems are intertwined. Our summary of the alterations in proinflammatory cytokines, and other markers of peripheral and central inflammation, strongly suggests that the immune system is dysregulated in both anorexic and bulimic syndromes. While AN appears to be associated with an increase in proinflammatory cytokines, immune dysfunction in bulimic syndromes such as BN and BED appear to involve decreased activity of anti-inflammatory cytokines. Additional evidence from longitudinal clinical studies highlights an interesting association between autoimmune and inflammatory diseases and the risk of developing bulimic syndromes. In many studies, the alterations in immune function do not appear to be simply related to malnutrition in AN and BN or excess adiposity in BED. Although the pathogenesis of the alterations in immune function and responsivity in AN, BN, and BED remain unclear, the use of preclinical animal models, like those described here, offer a valuable tool for dissecting the underlying mechanisms. While these kinds of studies are just starting to emerge, with investigations of the microbiome severely lagging in animal models of binge-like eating, they should prove particularly useful in identifying possible biomarkers for early detection and treatment interventions.

Future clinical studies should continue to explore the changes in the gut microbiome and peripheral immunity in eating disorders as these data are lacking, especially in BN and BED. It will also be critical to make use of available human brain imaging technologies, such as PET imaging, to investigate the role of neuroinflammation in eating disorders. Future clinical research would also benefit from a greater focus on longitudinal designs, including acutely ill and recovered individuals, to determine whether alterations in the microbiome or immune system are state or trait markers of eating disorders. Since preclinical rodent models are able to utilize more invasive techniques to quantify gut, immune, and neural changes in response to dysregulated eating, these studies should focus on mechanisms of gut and immune interactions with the brain, with a particular focus on microglial function. Understanding these cellular and molecular mechanisms will be imperative if we are to improve treatment outcomes in patients diagnosed with eating disorders.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

