Gut microbiome mediates the protective effects of exercise after myocardial infarction



Gut microbiota plays important roles in health maintenance and diseases. Physical exercise has been demonstrated to be able to modulate gut microbiota. However, the potential role of gut microbiome in exercise protection to myocardial infarction (MI) remains unclear.

Here, we discovered exercise training ameliorated cardiac dysfunction and changed gut microbial richness and community structure post-MI. Moreover, gut microbiota pre-depletion abolished the protective effects of exercise training in MI mice. Furthermore, mice receiving microbiota transplants from exercised MI mice had better cardiac function compared to mice receiving microbiota transplants from non-exercised MI mice. Mechanistically, we analyzed metabolomics in fecal samples from exercised mice post-MI and identified 3-Hydroxyphenylacetic acid (3-HPA) and 4-Hydroxybenzoic acid (4-HBA), which could be applied individually to protect cardiac dysfunction post-MI and apoptosis through NRF2.

Together, our study provides new insights into the role of gut microbiome in exercise protection to MI, offers opportunities to modulate cardiovascular diseases by exercise, microbiome and gut microbiota-derived 3-HPA and 4-HBA.

Video Abstract video file.(71M, mp4)

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s40168-022-01271-6.

The number of genes associated with gut microbes vastly exceed the total complement of genes in the host [1]. The gut microbiome is critical for maintaining host physiology and homeostasis through metabolic exchange and co-metabolism of substrates [2]. Moreover, the gut microbiome has emerged as an important regulator in numerous facets of human health and disease. Mounting evidence has linked alterations of gut microbiome with a variety of disease including obesity, type 2 diabetes mellitus, fatty liver, hypertension, heart failure, and myocardial infarction (MI) [3–9]. As the gut microbiome is therapeutically modifiable, manipulation represents a novel opportunity to combat chronic diseases.

Alterations of the gut microbiome have been reported upon MI in both animal models and human patients [15, 16]. Mice receiving exercise training demonstrated favorable changes in the composition of gut microbiota [17]. In humans, athletes have a higher richness and diversity of the gut microbiome [18]. However, the role of gut microbiome in the protective effects of exercise in cardiac dysfunction post-MI is unclear. In our study, we aimed to explore the potential roles of gut microbiome in exercise protection in MI.

Male C57BL/6 mice aged 8–10 weeks were purchased from Cavens Lab Animal (Changzhou, China), and raised at the specific pathogen-free (SPF) laboratory animal facility of Shanghai University (Shanghai, China). Mice were maintained on a 12-h light/dark cycle at 25 °C and provided free access to commercial rodent chow (sterilized by Cobalt-60) and tap water (high-temperature sterilization) before initiation of the experiments. Randomized grouping was used and the same group of mice were co-housed with less than 5 animals per cage. All animal experiments were in accordance with the guidelines approved by the committee on the Ethics of Animal Experiments of Shanghai University.

Transthoracic echocardiography examination was used to determine cardiac function as demonstrated by left ventricular ejection fraction (EF) and fractional shortening (FS) performed with the VisualSonics Vevo 2100system (VisualSonics Inc, Toronto, Ontario, Canada) with a 30 MHz central frequency scan head and measured from M-mode images taken from the parasternal short-axis view at papillary muscle level. Each mouse was anesthetized with 1.5% isoflurane and measured at least three times.

At the endpoint of the experiments, one mouse was put in a cage and then the mice feces (100 mg per mice) collected under sterile conditions were frozen using liquid nitrogen and stored at – 80 ℃. Fecal samples, packed with dry ice, were sent for analyses to the laboratory at Majorbio Bio-Pharm Technology Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China).

For 16S rRNA statistical analyses, Pan was calculated by Usearch. Alpha diversity was calculated by Mothur. Principal co-ordinates analysis (PCoA) and non-metric multidimensional scaling analysis (NMDS) were performed by R version 3.3.1, vegan, and mixOmics package, and significant differences were assessed by analysis of similarities (ANOSIM). Enterotype analysis was calculated by the statistical clustering method, which was based on Jensen-Shannon distance (JSD). Correlation analysis was assessed by Spearman. Heatmap, barplot, and pielot were performed by R version 3.3.1, vegan, and mixOmics package. Significant differences were assessed by Wilcoxon rank-sum with FDR.

The maximal dose of antibiotic cocktail was prepared by mixing ampicillin (0.25 mg/mL), metronidazole (0.25 mg/mL), neomycin (0.25 mg/mL), and vancomycin (0.125 mg/mL) in autoclaved water [15]. Animals that received the antibiotic cocktail were referred to as ABX mice, whereas drink autoclaved water were referred to as untreated mice. ABX mice drank maximal dose of antibiotic cocktail for 7 days post-MI surgery, followed by normal autoclaved water. 1/4 ABX mice received a 25% dose of the antibiotic cocktail until the end of the experiment.

For microbiota transplantation, the endpoint-mice fecal samples (100 mg per mice), collected under sterile conditions, were resuspended with pre-cooled PBS, centrifuged for supernatant with 1000 rpm for 5 min at 4 °C, and this step was repeated twice. Then glycerin (20%) was added before storage at – 80 ℃. Mice drank maximal dose of antibiotic cocktail for 7 days post-MI surgery and then were orally inoculated (200 μL for each mouse) at 1-day interval for 1 week. Cardiac function and histopathological detection were detected after 8 weeks.

At the endpoint of the experiments, one mouse was put in a cage and then feces samples (100 mg per mice) collected under sterile conditions were frozen using liquid nitrogen and stored at – 80 ℃. Fecal samples packed with dry ice were sent to the laboratory at Metabo-Profile Biotechnology Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China). Metabo-Profile lnc. (Shanghai, China) performed the quantitation of bacterial metabolites as previously reported [23, 24], using a database composed of 132 standards obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA), Steraloids Inc. (Newport, RI, USA), and TRC Chemicals (Toronto, ON, Canada). In this project, the microbial metabolites were quantitated by ultra-performance liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (UPLC-MS/MS) system (ACQUITY UPLC-Xevo TQ-S, Waters Corp., Milford, MA, USA).

Univariate statistical analyses were assessed either by student T test or Wilcoxon Test, depending on the normality of data and homogeneity of variance. Multivariate statistical analyses (OPLS-DA) were used to observe the similarities and dissimilarities among the groups. Pathway bubbleplot and network diagram were assessed by R language, ggplot2 package, and igragh and Cairo packets. Correlation analysis was assessed by Spearman.

To prepare the metabolites supplement, 3-Hydroxyphenylacetic acid (3-HPA, SANTA CRUZ), 4-Hydroxybenzoic acid (4-HBA, SIGMA), and p-Hydroxyphenylacetic acid (4-HPA, SIGMA) were individually dissolved in autoclaved in saline. Mice drank maximal dose of the antibiotic cocktail for 7 days post-MI surgery and then were orally inoculated (3-HPA, 4-HBA, 4-HPA, 6, 25 mg/kg per day) at 1-day interval for 4 weeks.

Histopathological detection was used to analyze ventricular remodeling. Hematoxylin–Eosin (HE) staining and wheat germ agglutinin (WGA) staining was used to measure cardiomyocyte size. For HE staining, mouse heart tissue fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde followed by buried with paraffin. Paraffin Sect. (5 μm) were treated with Xylene and Ethanol separately. Section incubated with Hematoxylin staining and Eosin staining gradually and 30–60 fields per Sect. (400 × magnification) were viewed under microscope. For WGA staining, mouse heart tissue snappily frozen in OCT at – 80 ℃. Frozen Sects. (10 μm) were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde followed by washing with PBS. Section incubated with WGA-FITC (1:100, sigma # L4895) and DAPI gradually and 30–60 fields per Sect. (400 × magnification) were viewed. Cell size was measured with ImageJ.

Cardiac fibrosis was evaluated by Masson's Trichrome staining. For Masson’s Trichrome staining, mouse heart tissues were fixed and treated with same way of paraffin section. Then section successively incubated with iron hematoxylin staining, ponceau acid magenta, phosphomolybdate staining, and aniline blue dyeing. Then glycerin sealed section and 20 fields per Sect. (200 × magnification) were viewed. Fibrosis was measured with ImageJ.

Neonatal rat cardiomyocytes (NRCMs) were isolated and cultured as previously reported [25, 26]. To induce OGD/R, NRCMs were firstly cultured for 8 h with serum-free no glucose DMEM (Gibco, U.S.A) in an air-tight chamber with a humidified hypoxic atmosphere containing 5% CO2 and 95% N2 at 37 °C. After exposure to oxygen glucose deprivation for 8 h, the culture medium was replaced with serum and glucose-containing DMEM and transferred to a normal incubator for recovery for 12 h. For metabolites treatment, 3-HPA and 4-HBA were incubated with indicated duration and concentration. Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP in situ nick-end-labeling (TUNEL) staining was conducted to detect apoptotic nuclei by confocal microscopy in α-actinin-labeled cardiomyocytes, as described before [27]. Fifteen fields/sample (200 × magnification) were viewed under a confocal microscope (Leica, Germany).

RNA isolation and relative quantification RT-PCR were performed as described previously [26]. The sequences of primers used for RT-PCR were as follows. ANP forward: AGCCGTTCGAGAACTTGTCTT, ANP reward: CAGGTTATTGCCACTT AGGTTCA, BNP forward: GAGTCCTTCGGTCTCAAG GC, BNP reward: TACAG CCCAAACGACTGACG. 18 s RNA were used as internal controls.

Mouse heart tissue were lysed by RIPA lysis buffer (Keygen Biotech) complemented with phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF). BCA Protein Assay (TaKaRa) was adopted to determine protein concentrations. After equal quantities, total proteins were separated in SDS-PAGE gel (10–12%). Using wet tank transfer method, protein bands were transferred onto PVDF membranes (PALL). After blocked with 5% BSA and washed with TBST, protein bands were blotted with primary antibodies at 4 °C overnight as follows: Bax (Abclonal, A12009, 1:1000 dilution), Bcl2 (affbiotech, AF6139, 1:1000 dilution), Caspase3 (Abclonal, A2156, 1:1000 dilution), COL1A2 (Bioworld, BS1530, 1:1000 dilution), NRF2 (Abclonal, A0674, 1:1000 dilution), and β-actin (Bioworld, AP0060, 1:10,000 dilution). After washing with TBST, protein bands were blotted with HRP conjugated secondary antibody and monitored using ECL buffer (Tanon). Quantifications of Western Blots were measured with ImageJ.

Data from the mouse and cell model were expressed as mean ± SD. Significant differences were assessed either by two-tailed student t test, one-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni’s post hoc test, or two-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni’s post hoc test when appropriate. P values less than 0.05 were statistically different. Analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 7.0.4.

The raw reads were deposited into the NCBI Sequence Read Archive (SRA) database (Accession Number: SRP287461). The data for this study were available by contacting the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

To determine if exercise training could be protective for cardiac dysfunction post-MI, mice were subjected to treadmill running 1-week post-MI (Fig. 1A). Eight-week exercise training significantly improved cardiac function as demonstrated by elevated ejection fractions (EF) and fractional shortening (FS) (Fig. 1B) in post-MI mice. Moreover, endurance capacity of these mice was also enhanced (Fig. 1C), whereas the mRNA expression levels of atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) and brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) were increased in MI and were decreased by exercise training (Fig. 1D and E). Moreover, Masson staining showed that exercise training could significantly reduce post-MI cardiac fibrosis (Fig. 1F), while hematoxylin–eosin (HE) and wheat germ agglutinin (WGA) staining displayed that the ultrastructure of myocardium was well-preserved and cardiomyocyte cross-sectional area was decreased in the exercised group post-MI (Fig. 1G and
H). Additionally, the protein expression levels of Collagen1, and the ratios of Bax/Bcl2 and cleaved Caspase3/Caspase3 were increased in MI and were decreased by exercise training (Fig. 1I). Collectively, these data consistently demonstrate that exercise training can mitigate cardiac dysfunction post-MI.

To identify whether the protective effects of exercise training for MI are associated with gut microbial content and composition, we performed 16S rDNA profiling of fecal samples from four groups, including Sham + control, MI + control, Sham + Run, and MI + Run. Bacterial DNA was extracted from fecal samples, sequenced on the Illumina platform, and an average of 56,638.65 ± 12,105.23 (SD) sequences per sample were generated (Additional file 1: Table S1).

To identify whether the change in gut microbial are associated with cardiac function parameters, we analyzed the relationship between different cardiac function indexes and the top 50 genera. Alistipes and Ruminococcus were most positively correlated with EF and FS, while Lachnospiraceae_UCG-001 was most negatively correlated with EF and FS (Fig. S4).

To investigate if gut microbiota in general is responsible for the beneficial effects of exercise training in cardiac dysfunction post-MI, we administered oral antibiotics to male mice 1-week post-MI for 7 days to pre-deplete the gut microbiota and started exercise training for another 8 weeks (Fig. S5A). As the maximal dose give to the mice, which was named ABX mice (ABX treated for 1 week as indicated in Fig. S5A), led to 42% mortality in MI mice, we also used a quarter of this dose (1/4 ABX group, 1/4 ABX treated for 9 weeks as indicated in Fig. S5A) that did not result in post-MI deaths (Fig. S5B and C). As indicated in Fig. 3A, both ABX administration and 1/4 ABX administration impaired cardiac function of exercise MI mice, which is evidenced by the loss of beneficial effects of exercise training, including EF and FS (Fig. 3A), endurance capacity (Fig. 3B), the mRNA expression levels of ANP and BNP (Fig. 3C and D), cardiac fibrosis, cross-sectional cardiomyocyte area, and apoptosis (Fig. 3E–H). Of note, ABX or 1/4 ABX had no significant effect on cardiac function in MI mice (Fig. S6). Thus, these data confirm that gut microbiota are involved in the protective effects of exercise training in cardiac dysfunction post-MI.

We also further confirmed the effects of ABX or 1/4 ABX in gut microbiota in MI by Pan analysis and alpha diversity, which showed that as compared to MI groups, ABX or 1/4 ABX decreased levels of gene enrichment (Fig. S7A and B, Additional file 1: Table S8-S11). Based on the Community barplot analysis, the relative abundance of gut microbiota at the phylum level was changed by ABX or 1/4 ABX (Fig. S7C and D, Additional file 1: Table S12–13). Moreover, the changes of genus ABX or 1/4 ABX in MI followed by running training were also showed in Fig. S8 and Additional file 1: Table S14.

Many diseases’ severities have been previously reported to be influenced by microbiota transplantation such as hypertension, metabolic syndrome, and MI [6, 15, 28]. Here, we sought to determine whether the beneficial effect of exercise training in MI is transmissible with fecal microbial transplantation by using fecal samples from exercised MI mice (Fig. 4A). Using echocardiographic analysis, we observed that mice receiving microbiota transplants from exercised-MI mice had better cardiac function as compared to those mice receiving microbiota transplants from MI mice (Fig. 4B). Although no significant difference of endurance capacity was observed, mice receiving microbiota transplants from exercised-MI mice had attenuated cardiac hypertrophy and fibrosis, decreased cross-sectional cardiomyocyte area, and apoptosis (Fig. 4C–I).

We further investigated the effects of FMT in community richness and structure in MI mice treated with ABX. Pan analysis showed that mice received microbiota transplants from exercised-MI mice or non-exercised-MI mice could both increase community richness (Fig. S9A). Based on the community barplot analysis, the relative abundance of gut microbiota at the phylum level and genus level was changed by FMT (Fig. S9B and C, Additional file 1: Table S15–16). We also used PCoA and NMDS analysis based on the relative abundance of genus to examine the community structures of the gut microbiotas, and found that the gut microbiota of mice received microbiota transplants from exercised-MI mice were separated from those mice received microbiota transplants from non-exercised-MI mice (Fig. S9D and E). Moreover, the changes of genus by FMT were also showed in Fig. S10.

We performed MicrobioMET (Metabo-Profile, Shanghai, P.R. China) to analyze metabolomics in mice fecal samples from exercise post-MI. Overall, 116 metabolites including amino acids, fatty acids, indoles, organic acids, and phenols were quantitated using ultraperformance liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (UPLC-MS/MS) system (Additional file 1: Table S17).

Collectively, these findings suggest that 3-HPA, 4-HPA, and 4-HBA may potentially contribute to the protective effects of exercise post-MI.

As 3-HPA, 4-HBA, and 4-HPA were indicated to potentially play a role in mediating beneficial effects of microbiota transplants from exercised MI mice, we checked whether their positive effects in cardiac function post-MI could be directly transferred. Every metabolite was tested at two doses, 6 mg/kg and 25 mg/kg. 3-HPA at both doses and 4-HBA at a dose of 25 mg/kg could significantly lead to improved EF and FS post-MI while 4-HPA failed to have beneficial effects (Fig. 6A). Besides, 3-HPA and 4-HBA at both doses could enhance endurance capacity in post-MI mice (Fig. 6B). Moreover, 3-HPA at both doses and 4-HBA at a dose of 25 mg/kg significantly attenuated cardiac hypertrophy and fibrosis, decreased cross-sectional myocardium area, and apoptosis (Fig. 6C–H). Therefore, supplementing these two metabolites, 3-HPA and 4-HBA, protects cardiac dysfunction post-MI.

We further checked the effect of 3-HPA and 4-HBA in vitro. As expected, 3-HPA and 4-HBA decreased NRCMs apoptosis induced by OGD/R as indicated by a reduction in TUNEL staining positive cardiomyocytes and the ratios of Bax/Bcl2 and cleaved Caspase3/Caspase3 (Fig. S14 and Fig. 7A–D). As NRF2 has been reported to be a target of phenols [29], and NRF2 could protect against MI and apoptosis induced by OGD/R [30, 31], we further analyzed whether NRF2 mediated the protective effects of 3-HPA and 4-HBA on apoptosis. 3-HPA and 4-HBA increased the expression of NRF2, and inhibition of NRF2 prevented the protective effects of 3-HPA and 4-HBA on apoptosis (Fig. 7B, D–F). Together, our findings illustrate that 3-HPA and 4-HBA protect cardiomyocytes apoptosis by activating NRF2.

There is a growing recognition of the contribution of gut microbiota to health and disease susceptibility. Herein, we described exercise training improved cardiac dysfunction and rescued gut microbial richness and community structure post-MI. Besides, we observed that two metabolites, 3-HPA and 4-HBA, played potential roles in mediating beneficial effects of exercise in MI mice through NRF2.

In conclusion, our study revealed that gut microbiota mediated the protective effects of exercise after myocardial infarction based on the 16S rRNA sequencing analysis, oral antibiotics administration, and fecal microbial transplantation. We identified two metabolites from the fecal of exercised mice post-MI, 3-HPA and 4-HBA, protecting against cardiac dysfunction post-MI and apoptosis through NRF2. Our study provides insights into the composition of the gut microbiota in exercise and MI mice, enhances our understanding of the effect of 3-HPA and 4-HBA on MI, and launch approaches to modulate cardiovascular diseases by exercise, microbiome, and metabolites.

Together, our study provides new insights into the role of gut microbiome in exercise protection to MI, offers opportunities to modulate cardiovascular diseases by exercise, microbiome, and gut microbiota-derived 3-HPA and 4-HBA.



Publisher's Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

