Maternal exposures and the infant gut microbiome: a systematic review with meta-analysis

Early life, including the establishment of the intestinal microbiome, represents a critical window of growth and development. Postnatal factors affecting the microbiome, including mode of delivery, feeding type, and antibiotic exposure have been widely investigated, but questions remain regarding the influence of exposures in utero on infant gut microbiome assembly. This systematic review aimed to synthesize evidence on exposures before birth, which affect the early intestinal microbiome. Five databases were searched in August 2019 for studies exploring pre-pregnancy or pregnancy ‘exposure’ data in relation to the infant microbiome. Of 1,441 publications identified, 76 were included. Factors reported influencing microbiome composition and diversity included maternal antibiotic and probiotic uses, dietary intake, pre-pregnancy body mass index (BMI), gestational weight gain (GWG), diabetes, mood, and others. Eleven studies contributed to three meta-analyses quantifying associations between maternal intrapartum antibiotic exposure (IAP), BMI and GWG, and infant microbiome alpha diversity (Shannon Index). IAP, maternal overweight/obesity and excessive GWG were all associated with reduced diversity. Most studies were observational, few included early recruitment or longitudinal follow-up, and the timing, frequency, and methodologies related to stool sampling and analysis were variable. Standardization and collaboration are imperative to enhance understanding in this complex and rapidly evolving area.

The Developmental Origins of Health and Disease (DOHaD) hypothesis proposes that the period from conception to age 2 years – the ‘First 1,000 Days’ of life – is a critical window of growth and development.1 This period is characterized by rapid maturation of the metabolic, endocrine, neural, and immune signal/response pathways that underpin regulatory capabilities – all of which are highly influenced by both the maternal milieu and exposures in the perinatal environment. Collectively, these can ‘program’ offspring development in ways that affect future disease risk.2,3 During these first thousand days, fetal exposure to microbial metabolites occurs and ultimately microbial colonization of the neonatal gastrointestinal tract also takes place as an integral part of postnatal maturation.4,5 The outcome is a complex adaptive system (human ‘holobiont’) with an interconnected network between microbiome, immune function, and metabolic regulation, affecting an individual’s nutrient metabolism, development, and long-term health outcomes.2,3,6,7 The DOHaD framework may therefore be extended to incorporate the microbiome (a dynamic community with the property of self-similarity over time), in recognition of the influence of perinatal factors on microbiome assembly in early life, and their possible long-term effects.7

The presence and activity of a “symbiotic” intestinal infant microbiome is known to affect processes of nutrient uptake, maintenance of gut barrier function, and immune response 8 as well as promoting optimal growth, 2,3,9 immune system maturation, 10,11 and neurodevelopment.12,13 Such wide-ranging influence means that maladaptive interactions between the nascent postnatal microbial community, host, and their environment are also possible and a spectrum of adverse outcomes, including obesity, inflammatory bowel disease, allergies, asthma, cardiovascular disease, and neurodevelopmental disorders have been associated with microbiome differences.14,15 Whilst only part of the complex interplay between a host and their genetics and environment (much of which is genetically constrained), it follows that any factor that influences the composition, stability, or activity of the microbial community (or affects the host capability to perceive and respond) in early life may be considered a risk factor for predisposition toward disease. The concept of “dysbiosis” has been proposed to distinguish those diseases with complex etiology that cannot be adequately explained by genetic factors or a single pathogenic agent. Observational studies suggest that gestational age, 16–18 delivery mode 16,19–24 and early postnatal factors, including infant feeding, 21,25,26 antibiotic treatment, 27,28 and household exposures, 29–32 affect the composition and/or diversity of the infant intestinal microbiome. However, differences in sample size and methodologies concerning how and when the microbiome is characterized, and indeed the application of the very concepts of microbiome and dysbiosis, have limited comparison of findings across studies.

In order to measure the effect of exposures on shaping the infant microbiome, the determination of a ‘normal’ infant microbiome state is a crucial, yet challenging task. There has been significant variation in how the characterization of the microbiome has been performed, 33,34 alongside a growing appreciation for potentially vast differences between the microbiomes of apparently healthy people that underpin unique and complex interactions with their environment, genetics, and lifestyle.35,36 Likewise, understanding the expected development and maturation of an individual’s gut microbiome from birth is ongoing. Whilst controversy remains regarding antenatal exposures such as in utero gut colonization 37–39 and the long-term influence of perinatal exposures including delivery mode, 40,41 it is understood that children under 36 months of age have dynamic and highly individual microbial profiles characterized by a lower diversity index (fewer bacterial species) compared to older children and adults.42 Postnatal development of an individual’s microbiome appears to occur in two colonization ‘phases’, separated by the introduction of solid food around 6 months, and is further influenced by illness, antibiotic exposure, and other environmental factors (Table 2). The interplay between these exposures informs the establishment of a comparatively stable, “adult-like” composition by early childhood, 43,51,52,58,59 including those born prematurely.60 Preterm neonates have a less species-diverse microbiome, often with an abundance distribution characterized by higher levels of facultatively anaerobic pathogens such as Enterobacter, Enterococcus, Klebsiella, and Staphylococcus compared to term neonates.61,62 These differences persist until children are at least 4 years of age.62

The aim of this work was to systematically review, and where possible to conduct a meta-analysis on the evidence for relationships between maternal exposures during pregnancy and measures of the infant intestinal microbiome. Secondary aims were to identify knowledge gaps, highlight the diversity of methods used in the field, and provide recommendations for future research to better understand mechanistic links between exposures, alterations in microbiome composition, diversity and/or function, and later-life disease risk.

This systematic review protocol was registered with PROSPERO Online 79 [CRD42020150602] and was conducted according to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis (PRISMA) statement.

The literature search was conducted by AMG. Studies published in English from five relevant databases (MEDLINE, EMBASE, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane/CENTRAL) were collected in August 2019, using identified keywords and index terms. The search terms were divided into three groups, combined with the Boolean phrases “AND” between groups and “OR” within groups: 1 Pregnancy/or pregnan*.mp., or Prenatal.mp., or Perinatal.mp., or Maternal.mp., or Mother*.mp. and 2 Infant.mp. or Infant/or Infant health.mp. or Infant Health/or birth outcome.mp. and 3 Microbiome.mp. or Microbiota/, or gut microbiome.mp. or Gastrointestinal Microbiome/. There were no limits applied regarding the year of publication.

Articles were included if they: 1 were intervention or observational studies (randomized controlled trials, case-control, cross-sectional or longitudinal studies) conducted in humans only, 2 collected pre-pregnancy or pregnancy ‘exposure’ data, independent of the maternal intestinal microbiome (any kind of exposure permitted), from which an impact on infant outcomes was assessed, and 3 collected infant outcome/s, including at least one measure of the infant intestinal microbiome at less than or equal to 12 months of age.

Articles were excluded if they: 1 were of an inappropriate study type (animal studies, in vitro studies, conference abstracts, and proceedings published more than 2 years ago, or which have subsequently resulted in a published paper [in which case, the paper was included, if appropriate], case series, case reports, book chapters, guidelines, commentaries, editorials, letters to the editor, reviews and meta-analyses), 2 did not collect pre-pregnancy or pregnancy “exposure” data, and/or 3 did not measure infant intestinal microbiome composition or diversity beyond identifying the abundance of a specific species only.

All studies identified were retrieved from online databases and exported to the reference management system, EndNote (Version X8, Thomson Reuters, New York, NY, USA). Studies were screened by AMG, based on titles and abstracts. Full texts were retrieved following screening and subsequently reviewed by AMG and three other authors (RL, RT, and KD). Disagreements were resolved by discussion with a third investigator (AG).

AMG evaluated the methodological quality of included studies using the Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN) checklists 80 for cohort and case–control studies and controlled trials. Studies were assessed on their internal validity with respect to subject selection, outcome assessment, confounding, and statistical analysis. Overall quality was coded as high, acceptable, or low/unacceptable based on responses to questions in the SIGN tool (see Supplementary Table 1 for assessments for each included study).

Data relating to study design, sample size, participant demographics, pregnancy “exposure/s”, infant outcomes, measurement of the infant microbiome, and recruitment and follow-up periods were extracted using a pre-determined template on Microsoft Excel. This information was used to construct Table 1 and Supplementary Table 1, according to the major study characteristics identified that related to the microbiome.

For each included publication, data pertaining to the composition and/or diversity of the infant intestinal microbiome were collected, according to the metrics used by authors. In studies investigating the impact of maternal probiotic supplementation, the presence or absence of the species provided by the probiotic supplement was also compiled (Table 3).

It was not possible to perform meta-analyses for all exposure groups, owing to diverse interventions and/or outcomes measured with respect to the infant gut microbiome. Associations were described as significant if P < .05. For exposures where meta-analysis was possible, data were pooled according to pregnancy exposure using a random-effects model in Review Manager Software, version 5.4 (RevMan, 2020). The Shannon Index, a measure of within-sample (alpha) diversity, based on the sum of the proportion of each species relative to the total number of species in the community, 98 was used as the primary outcome on which study outcomes were compared in meta-analyses. Unless otherwise stated, alpha diversity was reported using the Shannon Index, calculated on taxon abundances after classification to species rank. Authors were contacted if data were not available in the text; otherwise, data were calculated from included figures. Where data were not available, the publication was not included in the meta-analysis. Means and standard deviation (SD) were used to calculate the mean difference (MD) in alpha diversity between groups, according to pregnancy exposure. Heterogeneity was assessed in each meta-analysis using Chi2, degrees of freedom (df), and I2 statistics. Using the I2, heterogeneity was regarded as moderate to substantial if 30–75% and considerable if greater than 75%, based on Cochrane recommendations.99

Study selection is summarized in Figure 1. The initial database search identified 1,441 unique publications after the removal of duplicates. Further 1,237 publications were excluded after assessing titles and abstracts based on study type, missing data, and/or irrelevance. Full texts of 204 articles were retrieved. At this stage, articles were excluded if they did not measure a specific pregnancy “exposure” compared to an infant outcome (n = 64) or if the measurement of the infant intestinal microbiome was limited to one species only and/or a valid methodology was not used (n = 45). Others were excluded based on inappropriate study type (n = 3) or other reasons (n = 6). A total of 76 publications were therefore included in the review.

The characteristics of included studies are summarized in Table 1. Detailed information regarding each included publication is outlined in Supplementary File Table 1. Studies were published from 2004 to 2019, with the majority (72%) from the past 5 years (2015–2019). Most studies were observational (74%, n = 56). The remaining 20 articles (26%) were intervention studies, 12 of which were randomized controlled trials. The settings of included studies were Europe (n = 39), North America (n = 26), Asia (n = 8), Africa (n = 1), South America (n = 1), and Oceania (n = 1).

The total number of mother-infant dyads included in the review was 17,509, with a median sample size of 84 (range: 6–1,681). Some studies purposefully recruited women with a history of allergic or other diseases (21%, n = 16). The majority of studies (71%, n = 54) recruited women of reproductive age via antenatal clinics, typically in their second trimester or later. Few (3%, n = 2) used advertising campaigns, or recruited via schools and shops (n = 1), and others recruited infants at or shortly after birth and retrospectively gathered maternal data (18%, n = 14). Five studies (7%) did not report a clear recruitment strategy. Body Mass Index (BMI) was the only exposure for which pre-pregnancy data were available in this review; all others related to factors during pregnancy and/or delivery.

The majority of studies (76%, n = 58) used 16S rRNA gene sequencing as their primary methodology for the assessment of the infant microbiome, with 12 studies (16%) using more than one method (see Table 1 for further detail). Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) (16%, n = 12), fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) (11%, n = 8), and culture-based methods (4%, n = 3) were also used to quantify specific target populations. A small number of recent studies (9%, n = 7) also used metagenomic sequencing to further characterize the infant microbiome. Since all methods ultimately relied on a common rRNA phylogeny-based classification scheme, species composition and abundance distributions across studies were considered broadly comparable. Direct comparison of taxon abundances across different methods was not possible and readers are referred to Table 1 and Supplementary Table 1 to identify such cases.

The frequency and timing of stool sample collection and analysis also varied (Table 1). The mean number of stool samples analyzed per study was two; whilst five studies analyzed more than five samples, 93% sampled between one and five times across infancy. Almost half of the included studies sampled at least once within the first week of life (46%, n = 35), though 83% (n = 63) of studies sampled at least once between 1 and 4 months. Fewer studies sampled between 4 and 6 months (30%, n = 23) or beyond 6 months (16%, n = 12).

Seventeen intervention studies 81–97 investigated the relationship between prenatal maternal probiotic supplementation and the infant intestinal microbiome (Table 3), with a variety of other outcomes studied (e.g., allergy development). Probiotics including one 81,84,89,90,96,97 or more 82,85,83,86–88,91–95 Lactobacillus and/or Bifidobacterium species were administered in the form of capsules/powder, 85–95 milk/yogurt 82–84 or oil droplets 81 to women in their second 84,86,87 or third trimester.81–83,85,88–93,95–97 Four studies did not describe randomization procedures with regard to probiotic intervention, 85–87,89 whilst all others were randomized controlled trials (Supplementary Table 1). Thirteen articles focused on allergy development in high-risk infants, recruiting pregnant women with a personal or family history of atopic disease, 81,86–97 and three publications investigated whether probiotic intervention during pregnancy and infancy affected the risk of allergy development.85,92,93 Here we focus on evidence of whether probiotic administration induced a measurable change in the infant microbiome.

Overall, results showed no persistent effect of maternal probiotic or prebiotic supplementation on the infant gut microbiome following cessation of treatment.

Sixteen articles primarily explored the effect of oral antibiotic use in pregnancy 101–105 or intravenous antibiotic exposure during delivery (intrapartum antibiotic prophylaxis, IAP) 48,106–115 on infants’ intestinal microbiome composition and/or diversity (Figure 2). IAP was administered for maternal Group-B Streptococcus (GBS) positivity, 106,108–111,113–115 preterm premature rupture of the membranes (PPROM), 108,110 and/or as routine practice in caesarean-section deliveries.108,110 Five studies investigated antibiotics alongside other exposures.116–120

Means and confidence intervals were pooled in a meta-analysis including five studies 106,108,110,113,115 which assessed the relationship between IAP exposure and alpha diversity of the infant intestinal microbiome (Figure 3). Maternal IAP exposure was associated with a nonsignificant reduction in infant α-diversity (mean difference, −0.24, 95% CI: −0.58–0.09), with high heterogeneity (I2 = 91%). Each study used 16S rRNA gene sequencing for microbiome analysis though the age of infants at sampling varied from 1 week to 3 months.

The remaining studies explored lifestyle, 149 pollution, 153 pet ownership 155 or multiple factors 118 during pregnancy and the infant microbiome and are outlined in Supplementary Table 1. These exposures warrant future investigation; although some studies were large, associations were often not independently associated with the infant gut microbiome and require corroboration with further studies.

As shown in Supplementary Table 1, two intervention studies 91,92 and two observational studies 109,140 (5% total included studies) were considered to be of high methodological quality as defined by the SIGN checklists. These were characterized by clearly explained research questions, inclusion/exclusion criteria, and demographics of subjects, participant randomization, and concealment procedures. Potential confounders were also considered and accounted for in statistical analyses.

Three trials (4%) were considered of poor quality, providing inadequate information regarding randomization, concealment, group differences, and attrition rates to allow for a higher rating.84,85,89 These publications were not included in any meta-analyses. Six abstracts (8%) also did not provide sufficient detail in order to warrant quality assessment.112,121,139,141,144,151

The current systematic review of 20 interventions and 56 observational studies encompasses 12,770 and 4,312 mother-infant dyads, respectively, and provides a comprehensive synthesis of available data on prenatal factors affecting the infant gut microbiome. The review synthesizes current evidence on these relationships, including whether (or not) they affect the infant microbiome and consider their potential impact on infant (and/or long term) health outcomes, aligned with the DOHaD framework. To our knowledge, this is also the first review to quantify associations between maternal factors and measures of the infant intestinal microbiome, using meta-analysis where possible.

Multiple exposures, including maternal antibiotic treatment and probiotic use, diet, anthropometry, chronic health conditions (obesity, diabetes, asthma, and mood disorders), and genetic and environmental factors have been examined for their association with the infant intestinal microbiome. However, current evidence needs to be interpreted with caution, as the methodological quality of studies in the field is variable and the reproducibility, magnitude, and longevity of the effects of these exposures – within the context of a complex network of contributing factors – remain challenging to determine.

There is increasing interest in the manipulation of the intestinal microbiome through the use of probiotic or prebiotic supplements during pregnancy to optimize maternal and infant outcomes. However, despite representing the exposures for which most data were available, the current review provides little support that probiotic or prebiotic supplementation during pregnancy has enduring effects on the offspring intestinal microbiome. Apart from shortly after birth, there were no significant differences between groups in the relative abundance of supplemented species or overall microbiome diversity over time.82,85,86,93,97,94,100 Many studies also provided probiotics to mothers and infants, such that the specific effect of maternal supplementation on the infant gut microbiome and/or later-life health outcomes could not be assessed.85,92,93 Our findings are consistent with a recently published systematic review and meta-analysis which did not find evidence to support probiotic or prebiotic use in reducing the risk of preterm birth or other adverse maternal and infant outcomes, including GDM, PPROM, and small- and large-for-gestational age (SGA, LGA).157

Antibiotics are provided to approximately 25% of pregnant women and account for nearly 80% of all medications prescribed during pregnancy.158,159 Evidence supporting an association between early antibiotic exposure and the risk of allergy/atopy, 160 obesity, 161 diabetes, 162 and celiac disease, 163 and concerns regarding antibiotic resistance, 164 highlight the need for management guidelines regarding the requirement, dose, and duration of perinatal antibiotics considering the risk of altering maternal and offspring intestinal microbiota.

The current review found that maternal antibiotic exposure during delivery was associated with a modest reduction in alpha diversity in their infants, compared to unexposed controls (Figure 3). In non-obese diabetic (NOD) mouse models, prenatal antibiotic exposure has likewise been associated with significantly lower diversity using the Shannon index (P = .042), 165 and reduced bacterial diversity has been linked with an elevated risk of poorer health indicators, including obesity and inflammation.166,167 However, many studies in the current review found that differences in infant gut microbiome composition and/or diversity owing to antibiotic exposure were likely to disappear after only a month.101,109,106,109,113,109,114 The type, timing, and duration of antibiotic exposure (if collected) also varied (Figure 2). Whilst one study 115 found a dose–response relationship between the duration of antibiotic treatment and Bifidobacterium relative abundance, further research is required to strengthen the evidence for this association and the duration of effects. Additionally, whilst some studies focused on the use of IAP for specific indications, e.g., women with GBS, 106,111,114,115 ongoing investigation is required to understand whether the indication for antibiotic treatment is equally, or perhaps more, important than the impact of antibiotic exposure, per se. For example, routine IAP in planned cesarean section deliveries may confer substantially different risks to infants when compared to IAP treatment for other reasons (e.g., PPROM or chorioamnionitis), which may have independent effects that are modified or compounded by antibiotic exposure. Overall, robust evidence to address the impact of maternal exposure to antibiotics on infant health is lacking. Whilst some data were available to suggest that maternal antibiotic exposure presents an elevated risk for altered community assembly, it was of small effect size and the ability to clearly separate the influence of antibiotics from other factors is limited.

Through two meta-analyses, the current review highlights that maternal pre-pregnancy weight and GWG are modestly associated with infant intestinal microbiome diversity, with maternal overweight/obesity and excessive GWG both associated with a slightly reduced Shannon Index (Figures 3 and 4). Whilst Collado and colleagues 130 found numerous compositional differences in OTUs classified to genus according to maternal pre-pregnancy weight and GWG in infants at one and 6 months of age, including higher counts of Bifidobacteria in women with normal pre-pregnancy BMI and GWG, others found limited compositional differences in the intestinal microbiota related to maternal weight or GWG, 129,168 even when there were differences in the gut bacterial composition of mothers according to their weight status.

Further investigation is needed using higher resolution microbiome analyses over longer time-courses to assess the influence of maternal perinatal weight status and GWG on the composition and diversity of her infant’s microbiome. Maternal obesity per se may not reliably impact the infant gut microbiome when variations in delivery mode, breastfeeding, and the transition toward family foods are considered. Future studies should also seek to determine whether aspects of the maternal diet during pregnancy mediate the effects of maternal pre-pregnancy weight and GWG on the infant microbiome to inform both weight management and nutrition recommendations for women prior to and during pregnancy.

Evidence that suboptimal nutrition at conception and across pregnancy influences pregnancy, birth, and infant outcomes, including the prevention of neural tube defects 175 and impaired embryonic and fetal growth and development have been well described.176,177 However, in the current review, there were few eligible studies investigating the impact of diet in pregnancy, with limited outcomes related to the infant microbiome once adjusted for covariates including demographics, delivery mode, and/or breastfeeding status.133–138

Another area of interest has been in exploring the links between maternal diet, the intestinal microbiome, and infant immune development, and propensity to allergic diseases, including asthma, eczema, and food allergies.183,184 A large systematic review and meta-analysis in 2018 including 260 original studies found that fish oil supplementation during pregnancy and lactation may reduce the risk of allergic sensitization to the egg but did not find associations between other dietary exposures and allergic or autoimmune disease risk.183 Data were inconclusive or inconsistent for many dietary exposures therefore definitive conclusions could not be drawn.183 Maternal dietary intake and Prevotella presence during pregnancy and the relationship with offspring food allergy risk have been described recently by authors of the Barwon Infant Study.185 A large, dose–response relationship was found between maternal Prevotella in stool and a reduced risk of infant food allergy risk at 12 months. However, associations between maternal diet during gestation (fiber intake) and maternal Prevotella presence or offspring allergy development were not found.185 While previous research has suggested the release of lipopolysaccharides (LPS) from gram-negative bacteria induces inflammation associated with the progression of disease, 186,187 mechanistic links between maternal dietary components, maternal gut microbiome and offspring microbiota, immune development, and susceptibility toward allergic disease remain to be elucidated.

The current review highlights the difficulty of analyzing the contributions and/or interactions of individual prenatal exposures and the infant microbiome. Since both mothers and infants can be exposed simultaneously to many different factors (the impacts of which may depend on timing and/or dosage, maybe highly modifiable over time, are likely to be related to and/or interacting with each other, and can influence the delivery and postpartum factors), the need to consider a comprehensive, life-course approach is clear.

Over the past 15 years, advances in technology, especially culture-independent high-throughput sequencing technologies, have resulted in an exponential increase in research characterizing the composition and function of the microbiome and examining their associations with health outcomes.34,35 Simultaneously, conventions in naming, cataloging, and analyzing microbes and their properties have evolved considerably.34

Finally, while most studies included in the current review applied 16S rRNA sequencing to provide an overview of the taxonomic profiles of the intestinal microbiome, a smaller number of more recent studies incorporated metagenomic techniques in their study design.72,91,95,117,118,121,123 Amplicon sequencing provides a comprehensive measure of composition within the resolution limits of the marker gene, whereas metagenomic samples all genes from the microbial community in a sample to provide finer taxon resolution (at the expense of sample depth) and more direct information on the diversity and function of intestinal microbiome communities.190 Technical changes are swiftly advancing the field, and whilst careful attention needs to continue to be applied to the challenges of analyzing microbiome data, owing to its compositional nature 191 and interpretation of results, 190,192 exploring the early life metagenomic profile will allow for enhanced understanding of the function of intestinal microbiota (and their metabolites) in the disease process prior to clinical presentation – a crucial path forward in linking the role of the microbiota in health and disease.

This review was constrained by the limitations of included studies and the current body of evidence. Although our adherence to a protocol registered with PROSPERO, methodological reporting in line with the PRISMA statement, and detailed data extraction allowed for a comprehensive comparison between a large number of studies, there was substantial heterogeneity of data (Table 1). Whilst useful in highlighting the diversity of tools used and areas of opportunity for further research, this heterogeneity meant many studies could not be combined in meta-analyses. Abstract publications in the past 2 years were included to address potential publication bias, though without peer review this increases the risk of inclusion of studies of poor quality. Non-English language studies were ineligible, which limited the number of included studies. Finally, paternal factors were not explored in the current review but represent an important focus of future research.

This review highlights that the effects of prenatal and postnatal exposures on the developing gut microbiome are additive, with their relative impacts difficult to isolate, such that there is a need to move beyond simple associations toward more complex analyses and with multiple measures over time, in order to understand patterns and mechanisms without mis- or over-interpretation of data.35 Crucially, just as questions related to the maternal transfer of microbiota cannot be reliably answered without strain-level classification, understanding the factors that influence the infant intestinal microbiome is not possible with a single timepoint and sample. Current variability in the literature pertaining to sample size, methodologies used to characterize the microbiome, and reporting standards have also contributed to inconsistent and often non-comparable results. Best-practice guidelines for microbiome analysis and reporting provide a useful starting point from which to ground future research, 190,192 alongside tailoring research designs, such that they are powered to reliably answer these knowledge gaps.

A core data set, including standards for methods and outcomes used to characterize the human microbiome, alongside comprehensive characterization of exposures and environments and standardized conceptual terminology, is needed in order to standardize research in the field and build the evidence base to allow for meaningful recommendations.194 Table 4 provides preliminary recommendations for future studies, including considerations for mothers and infants, and study methodologies. It is acknowledged that continued advancement in the field, especially in metagenomic technologies, will inevitably redefine what is known and how current unknowns are explored.

BMI = Body Mass Index; GWG = Gestational Weight Gain; GDM = Gestational Diabetes Mellitus; PPI = Proton Pump Inhibitor; OTU = Operational Taxonomic Unit.

The current systematic review with meta-analysis provides a comprehensive synthesis of available data on prenatal factors affecting the infant gut microbiome, gaps in existing knowledge, and opportunities for future research. Whilst there is strong interest in how microbial communities are established throughout gestation, infancy, and childhood, and how they alter in response to innate and environmental exposures, there is a lack of consistency in methodologies concerning recruitment, follow-up, clinical data collection, stool sampling, and microbiome analysis, necessary for robust comparison and synthesis of results. Standardization in research investigating associations between modifiable maternal exposures and the offspring intestinal microbiome will allow for the enhanced synthesis of research findings, understanding of the mechanisms underpinning them, and the development of practical solutions to complex health challenges related to the microbiome, likely beginning well before birth.

AMG, AG, and AH designed the review protocol. AMG was involved in the planning and initial literature search, identification of eligible studies, data extraction, quality assessment, and manuscript preparation. RL, KD, and RT assisted with the identification of eligible studies. AG, AH, and CEC reviewed the quality and consistency of the final manuscript. All authors approved the final manuscript.

AMG is supported by a Research Training Program (RTP) stipend from the Australian Federal Government. CEC is supported by an Australian National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) Senior Research Fellowship and a University of Newcastle, Faculty of Health and Medicine, Gladys M Brawn Senior Research Fellowship.

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Supplemental data for this article can be accessed here.

