Hepatic circadian clock oscillators and nuclear receptors integrate microbiome-derived signals

The liver is a key organ of metabolic homeostasis with functions that oscillate in response to food intake. Although liver and gut microbiome crosstalk has been reported, microbiome-mediated effects on peripheral circadian clocks and their output genes are less well known. Here, we report that germ-free (GF) mice display altered daily oscillation of clock gene expression with a concomitant change in the expression of clock output regulators. Mice exposed to microbes typically exhibit characterized activities of nuclear receptors, some of which (PPARα, LXRβ) regulate specific liver gene expression networks, but these activities are profoundly changed in GF mice. These alterations in microbiome-sensitive gene expression patterns are associated with daily alterations in lipid, glucose, and xenobiotic metabolism, protein turnover, and redox balance, as revealed by hepatic metabolome analyses. Moreover, at the systemic level, daily changes in the abundance of biomarkers such as HDL cholesterol, free fatty acids, FGF21, bilirubin, and lactate depend on the microbiome. Altogether, our results indicate that the microbiome is required for integration of liver clock oscillations that tune output activators and their effectors, thereby regulating metabolic gene expression for optimal liver function.

The mammalian body is a complex ecosystem that consists of a eukaryotic core and a myriad of microorganisms, including the gut microbiome (microbial communities and their metabolites). Together, they form a holobiont, whose parts live in symbiosis with a high capacity to adapt to changing environmental conditions1,2.

Despite the newly acquired information about microbiome–host bidirectional interactions, little is known about the microbiome–liver axis. Although the gut microbiome has been implicated in regulation of liver metabolism, including the hepatic molecular clock14, much remains to be explored on its effects on the daily rhythms of hepatic physiological patterns. It is well established that feeding rhythm drives circadian transcriptional regulation by the liver clock15; however, how the microbiome is involved in this process remains elusive. The data herein demonstrate an altered clock expression pattern in mice lacking a microbiome, which results in shifts in clock-controlled gene expression. In particular, the activity of nuclear receptors activated by fatty acids and cholesterol is profoundly affected. Altogether, these data indicate that the microbiome contributes not only to harvesting energy from nutrients but also to collecting or producing signals that are essential to controlling the hepatic clock genes and their effectors such as nuclear receptors.

Based on the recently established link between the peripheral clock in intestinal epithelial cells and the microbiome12, we hypothesized that the microbiome also impacts liver physiology possibly via the liver clock core, which consists of two interlocked feedback loops that comprise several clock genes7. Liver and blood samples from C57Bl/6 male mice maintained in germ-free (GF) or specific pathogen–free (SPF) conditions were collected around the clock to address the question. Analysis of gene expression from liver samples showed that Bmal1, Rev-erbα, Rev-erbβ, Per1, Per2, and Cry1 displayed significantly different mRNA expression patterns in GF mice compared to SPF mice as demonstrated by analysis with the JTK_Cycle algorithm16 (Fig. 1a,b; see Supplementary Tables S1 and S2 online). Cry1 gene expression was shifted toward the dark period whereas Rev-erbβ, Per1 and Per2 expression was shifted toward the light period (Fig. 1b). Moreover, Bmal1, Rev-erbα, Per1, Cry1 mRNA levels were higher at some specific time points in GF mice compared to SPF mice. Therefore, we next assessed whether the altered expression pattern of the hepatic clock core components also affected genes encoding the output transcription factors, namely the PAR bZip factors Dbp and Tef, and the basic helix–loop–helix factor Dec2 (Bhlhb42) (Fig. 1a and see Supplementary Tables S1 and S2 online). The expression pattern of these liver clock output effectors was disturbed in GF mice as their rhythmic period of gene expression was modified in GF compared to SPF mice. Interestingly, analysis of gene expression correlation between the hepatic core clock genes and their effectors showed that their gene expression pattern was globally conserved in liver of GF compared to SPF mice, suggesting that the hepatic clock in GF mice is functional but with a perturbed expression pattern. (see Supplementary Fig. S1 online). Monitoring of GF and SPF mice in an open field for 24 hours showed no major difference in their light/dark phase locomotor activity patterns suggesting that differences observed in hepatic clock gene expression were not due to a switch in light/dark activity (see Supplementary Fig. S2 online). Collectively, these observations implied a microbiome-mediated regulation of the expression patterns of clock-connected genes and output regulators they control.

To further our understanding of the liver gene expression profiling observed in the absence of a microbiome, we established expression correlation networks of liver clock genes. Because the liver clock genes affected in the GF mice are known transcription factors, we assumed that many of their downstream target genes also would be affected. To address this point, we selected the top 50 most correlated genes in the SPF condition among them those with an expression significantly correlated (adjusted P value < 0.05) either positively or negatively with each of these transcription factors (see Supplementary Fig. S3 online). The interactions among the 50 genes themselves are also depicted in the figure. We observed that under the GF condition, the correlation networks of Cry1, Rev-erbα, Rorγ, and Per2 were highly affected because out of the expression of 50 genes significantly correlated (P < 0.05) in SPF (indicated in magenta), the expression of only 8–15 (also in magenta in GF) remained significantly correlated under this condition. In addition, the density of these four networks was highly influenced in the absence of a microbiome, implying that the correlation between the expression levels of the genes belonging to these networks was significantly altered. The correlation network for the six other liver clock members (Clock, Bmal1, Rev-erbβ, Per1, Cry2, Rorα) was less affected (see Supplementary Fig. S4 online). Altogether, these results underscore the profound impact that the microbiome has on global hepatic gene expression with significant modulations of the liver core clock genes and their downstream targets.

Because the microarray data implied an insufficiency in network connectivity in xenobiotic, lipid, and glucose metabolism in GF mice not exposed to the microbiome, we next assessed whether key hepatic regulatory mediators also were affected. Among these, nuclear receptors are transcription factors whose activity is controlled by ligands. They are crucial for the regulation of many metabolic and detoxification genes in the liver, where several of them present a daily expression pattern17. If microbiome depletion had no or little effect on expression levels of PXR and CAR (detoxification) or LXRα and PPARα (lipid metabolism), the expression of their target genes was deeply influenced (Fig. 3a–d). Indeed, Cyp3a11 and Cyp2b10, target genes of PXR and CAR, respectively, encode a xenobiotic and a drug/steroid-metabolizing enzyme. These two genes, as well as Fasn (Fatty acid synthesis) and Cyp4a14 (Fatty acid hydroxylation), which are target genes of LXRα and PPARα, respectively, showed a very low expression in the liver of GF mice, with no or very dampened daily oscillations (Fig. 3a–d). This result also applies to FGF21, another target gene of PPARα, one that encodes a circulating FGF belonging to a group of proteins believed to function as classic peptide hormones18 (Fig. 3d). FGF21 is a nutritionally regulated hormone that induces a broad range of beneficial metabolic effects and emerges as a key player in a mechanism coordinating behaviour, growth, and metabolism during periods of reduced dietary protein intake19. These findings suggest a possible shortage of endogenous ligands or of other factor/s required to activate the nuclear receptors and that the gut microbiome and its metabolites are essential components in activating these receptors. Analysis of the gene expression correlation networks for PPARs, PXR, CAR, and LXRs, as was done for the clock genes, revealed alterations in these networks in the absence of the microbiome, which were particularly severe for LXRβ and PPARα (Fig. 4 and see Supplementary Figs S5 and S6 online).

Altogether, these gene expression profiling results are consistent with a robust effect of the gut microbiome on liver clock oscillation, influencing many key hepatic functions through modification of the transcriptional activity of several major liver factors acting as fatty acid, endobiotic, xenobiotic, sterol, and glucose sensors.

Gut microbes generate short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) by fermentation of soluble dietary fibres. Among these SCFAs, propionate is a substrate of intestinal gluconeogenesis (IGN) whose regulation is necessary for the metabolic benefits associated with fibre and SCFAs22. Because of the important metabolic impact of IGN, the changes we observed in hepatic metabolism of GF mice compared to SPF mice could result from the known impairment of IGN in GF mice. To address this question, we used mice with an intestinal-specific knockout of the catalytic subunit of glucose-6-phosphatase (I-G6pcKO), the essential enzyme of gluconeogenesis23. We tested whether the absence of IGN would modulate the expression of some hepatic genes, which exhibit modified expression in GF mice. To do so, we analysed the clock genes Rev-Erbα, Bmal1, and Per2 (Fig. 5a), Cyp4a14, Fgf21 (Fig. 5b), Fasn, Lpk (Fig. 5c), Cyp2b10, and Cyp3a11 (Fig. 5d), whose daily expression is dramatically modified in GF mice (Fig. 3). The expression of most of these genes at ZT6 in I-G6pcKO SPF mice was similar to that of wild-type mice, with the expression of Cyp genes increased in IGN-deficient mice (Fig. 5). At ZT18, wild-type and mutant mice did not differ for any genes tested. These results suggest that the changes in hepatic metabolic oscillations induced by the lack of a gut microbiome are not caused by the reduction in IGN observed under GF conditions12.

The results presented so far suggest a strong influence of the gut microbiome on liver metabolism. To test the outcome of the observed modifications in gene expression on liver physiology, we next performed an unbiased hepatic metabolic profiling by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) to assess whether the absence of a gut microbiome in GF mice influences the course of daily hepatic metabolite abundance. Modifications of the metabolite profiles at the four time points (ZT0/ZT6/ZT12/ZT18) would demonstrate that gene expression changes are translated into modifications in metabolic pathways activity.

Collectively, these results demonstrated a severely modified hepatic metabolism in GF mice, with a systemic impact on circulating biomarkers.

The beneficial adaptation of organisms to the natural light–dark cycle is reflected in biological rhythms, which includes oscillations of diverse metabolic functions in peripheral organs adjusted to the feeding time3. Work by Schibler and colleagues15 showed that circadian gene expression in peripheral organs is connected to food intake, and food processing is a major purpose of circadian gene expression in mouse liver. In all animals, food intake is intimately associated with the gut microbiome, which increases energy extraction from nutrients.

In conclusion, our work demonstrates that the gut microbiome appears to be very important in establishing physiological oscillations in the liver and further supports a recent report showing that bacterial metabolites can influence daily clock gene expression within hepatocytes14. Our data show that the gut microbiome regulates core clock genes, their effectors, and the activity of key nuclear receptors, resulting in broad changes in rhythmic gene expression and hepatic metabolites. Therefore, specifically assembled food taken in a timely manner could affect liver function; indeed, food intake in mice and humans follows a daily cycle, and alterations in microbiome composition and diversity are frequently observed following diet changes43,44. The liver responds to changes in the gut microbiome most likely via cues carried through the portal vein, which can serve as an entry for bacteria and bacteria-generated metabolites. In fact, the gut microbiome has already been reported to be associated with liver function in health and disease2,14,45,46. To fully understand the pathophysiology of several liver diseases, including non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, non-alcoholic steatohepatitis, and hepatocarcinogenesis47,48, it is important to consider the implications of the daily oscillations of liver functions. Altogether, this work emphasizes that the gut microbiome, which is required for optimal energy harvest from nutrients, is also involved in collecting or producing signals that affect the daily activity of the liver.

Mice were housed at the Core Facility for Germfree Research (CFGR), Karolinska Institute Stockholm, or at the Germfree Facility of Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore under either strict axenic (germ-free, GF) or conventional specific pathogen–free conditions (SPF). All mice were maintained on autoclaved R36 Lactamin (Stockholm, Sweden) or autoclavable Labdiet 5010 (Singapore) chow on a 12-hour light (ZT0-ZT12) 12-hour dark (ZT12-ZT24) cycle. ZT stands for Zeitgeber time; ZT0 is defined as the time when the lights are turned on and ZT12 as the time when lights are turned off. GF mice were bred and maintained in germ-free plastic isolators. SPF mice used in experiments were born from SPF mothers placed before delivery in the same plastic isolators as those used for maintenance of germ-free mice. All food, bedding material, and water were similar for germ-free and SPF mice. Protocols involving the use of GF and SPF animals were approved by the Regional Animal Research Ethical Board, Stockholm, Sweden (Stockholms norra djurförsöksetiska nämnd), and followed proceedings described in the EU legislation (Council Directive 86/609/EEC). Animal husbandry was in accordance with Karolinska Institute guidelines and approved by the above-mentioned ethical board. For the animals handled in Singapore, the protocols were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (2012/SHS/743).

Intestine-specific G6pc-null mice (I-G6PcKO) were previously described49 and were housed in the SPF animal facility of Lyon 1 University under controlled temperature conditions with a 12-hour light 12-hour dark cycle. The mice had free access to water and to a standard chow diet (Safe 04). 15 week-old I-G6Pc and C57Bl/6J (WT) male mice were sacrificed by cervical dislocation at ZT6 and ZT16 (n = 6 animals/genotype/time point). Livers were collected and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and kept at −80 °C for further used. All procedures concerning these mice were performed in accordance with the EU legislation (Council Directive 86/609/EEC). The regional animal care committee (CREEA CNRS, Rhône Alpes, Auvergne, France) approved all the experiments.

Total RNA was extracted with TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen). RNA amounts were determined using the NanoDrop®ND-1000, and the RNA quality was assessed using RNA 6000 NanoChips with the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent, Palo Alto, CA, USA). For each sample, 100 ng of total RNA was amplified using the WT Sense Strand Target Labelling kit (Affymetrix, Cat. no. 900223); 5.5 μg of the resulting sense cDNA was fragmented by UDG (uracil DNA glycosylase) and APE 1 (apurinic/apyrimidic endonuclease 1) and biotin-labelled with TdT (terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase) using the GeneChip® WT Terminal Labelling kit (Affymetrix Cat. no. 900671, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Affymetrix Mouse Gene 2.0 ST arrays (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, USA) were hybridized with 2.7 μg of biotinylated target at 45 °C for 17 hours and washed and stained according to the protocol described in the Affymetrix GeneChip® Expression Analysis Manual (Fluidics protocol FS450_0007). The arrays were scanned with a GeneChip® Scanner 3000 7G (Affymetrix). Normalized expression signals were calculated from Affymetrix CEL files by the Robust Multi-array Average algorithm, using the Affymetrix Expression Console Software (version 1.3.0.187). Hybridization quality also was assessed with Expression Console Software. All data were analysed using R (www.r-project.org). Microarray data analysis was conducted using Bioconductor packages (www.bioconductor.org, v 2.12,50 as described in GEO entry GSE71628). A model was fitted using the limma lmFit function51. A correction for multiple testing was then applied using Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) procedure for the false discovery rate (FDR)52. ProbeSets with (BH) adjusted P values ≤ 0.01 were considered to be differentially expressed between conditions. Hierarchical clustering was applied to the samples and the differentially expressed probeSets using 1-Pearson correlation coefficient as distance and Ward’s criterion for agglomeration. The enrichment of Gene Ontology (GO) Biological Processes was evaluated using a conditional hypergeometric test (GOstats package)53.

For real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR), total RNA samples (2 μg) were reverse-transcribed using the High Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Applied Biosystems). Primers for SYBR Green assays are listed in Supplementary Table S7. Amplifications were performed on an ABI Prism 7300 Real Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems). qPCR data were normalized by TATA-box binding protein mRNA levels and analysed with LinRegPCRv2012.256. Statistical analyses for qPCR data were performed with Student’s t-test at each time point between SPF and GF mice. In case of unequal variances between the two groups, the Wehch’s two sample t-test was used. P values were corrected for multiple testing using BH procedure and FDR < 5% threshold is considered as significant differences.

See Supplementary Methods online.

The pre-processed NMR data were imported into Simca-P+ software (version 13.0.2, Umetrics AB, Umea, Sweden) for multivariate statistical analysis. First, principal component analysis was used to detect intrinsic clusters and outliers. Then, partial least squares–discriminant analysis (PLS–DA) was used to study the relationship between time and NMR spectral data. Seven-fold cross validation was used to determine the number of latent variables to include in PLS-DA models. R2 (proportion of explained variation) and Q2 (predictive ability) values were used to assess PLS-DA model validity. Typically, a valid model has R2 > 50% and Q2 > 0.4. A permutation test (200 iterations) was used to assess PLS-DA model robustness. Discriminant NMR buckets were selected using the very important variable (VIP) value, a global measure of the influence of each variable on the PLS-DA model. The non-parametric Kruskal–Wallis test was finally used to determine significant variables among the VIP-selected variables. This test was conducted using R software.

NMR data were preprocessed using orthogonal signal correction (OSC) with time as a correction factor. The OSC filtering was applied to remove variation in the NMR matrix data not correlated with the time (confounding factors such as physiological, experimental, or instrumental variation). Filtered data were then Pareto scaled. PLS-DA was applied to the filtered and scaled data. Hierarchical clustering and a heatmap were used to classify averaged NMR data according to phenotypes (SPF vs GF) over Zeitgeber time (ZT0/ZT6/ZT12/ZT18). In this method, identical NMR profiles are clustered together. The heatmap was drawn using the R “gplots” package (http://www.r-project.org/).

See Supplementary Methods online.

For each data set, statistical tests for rhythmicity were performed using JTK_Cycle algorithm16 (http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0748730410379711), reporting BH adjusted P values for the identification of waveform parameters for each variable (ProbeSet for microarray, gene for qPCR, bucket for metabolomic, biochemical compound), and BH adjusted P values for multiple testing between all variables. Variables with FDR < 5% were considered significantly rhythmic.

Variables were then classified into 6 different classes according their rhythmicity significance and parameters (period and phase lag) regarding SPF and GF mice. Class 1: significant rhythmic variables and identical parameters results for both SPF and GF mice; Class 2: significant rhythmic variables in both SPF and GF mice but with a phase lag in GF mice compared to SPF; Class 3: significant rhythmic variables in both SPF and GF mice but with a different period in GF mice compared to SPF; Class 4: significant rhythmic variables in SPF but not in GF mice; Class 5: significant rhythmic variables in GF but not in SPF mice; Class 6: no significant rhythmic variables neither in SPF nor in GF mice.

How to cite this article: Montagner, A. et al. Hepatic circadian clock oscillators and nuclear receptors integrate microbiome-derived signals. Sci. Rep. 6, 20127; doi: 10.1038/srep20127 (2016).

Author Contributions A.M. Designed experiments, performed experiments, supervised experiments, analysed the data, wrote the paper. A.K. Designed and performed experiments. A.P. Performed experiments, analysed the data. Y.L. Performed biostatistical analysis of transcriptomic data. Y.B. Performed gene expression correlation network analysis. C.C. Performed experiments, analysed the data. M.T.F. Performed statistical analyses of metabolomic data. A.G.S. Designed experiments, performed experiments. R.B. Provided critical reagents. Y.-C.Y. Performed the open field test experiment. H.S.J. Designed the open field test experiment. M.A.-A. Performed experiments. G.M. Provided critical reagents and supervised experiments. V.A. Designed and performed experiments. S.L. Designed and supervised biostatistical analysis of transcriptomic data. H.G. Designed experiments, performed experiments, supervised experiments, analysed the data, wrote the paper. S.P. Designed experiments, supervised experiments, analysed the data, wrote the paper. W.W. Designed experiments, supervised experiments, analysed the data, wrote the paper.

