The gut microbiome influences the bioavailability of olanzapine in rats

The role of the gut microbiome in the biotransformation of drugs has recently come under scrutiny. It remains unclear whether the gut microbiome directly influences the extent of drug absorbed after oral administration and thus potentially alters clinical pharmacokinetics.

In this study, we evaluated whether changes in the gut microbiota of male Sprague Dawley rats, as a result of either antibiotic or probiotic administration, influenced the oral bioavailability of two commonly prescribed antipsychotics, olanzapine and risperidone.

The bioavailability of olanzapine, was significantly increased (1.8-fold) in rats that had undergone antibiotic-induced depletion of gut microbiota, whereas the bioavailability of risperidone was unchanged. There was no direct effect of microbiota depletion on the expression of major CYP450 enzymes involved in the metabolism of either drug. However, the expression of UGT1A3 in the duodenum was significantly downregulated. The reduction in faecal enzymatic activity, observed during and after antibiotic administration, did not alter the ex vivo metabolism of olanzapine or risperidone. The relative abundance of Alistipes significantly correlated with the AUC of olanzapine but not risperidone.

Alistipes may play a role in the observed alterations in olanzapine pharmacokinetics. The gut microbiome might be an important variable determining the systemic bioavailability of orally administered olanzapine. Additional research exploring the potential implication of the gut microbiota on the clinical pharmacokinetics of olanzapine in humans is warranted.

This research is supported by APC Microbiome Ireland, a research centre funded by Science Foundation Ireland (SFI), through the Irish Government's National Development Plan (grant no. 12/RC/2273 P2) and by Nature Research-Yakult (The Global Grants for Gut Health; Ref No. 626891).

Despite the growing evidence of a relationship between drugs and the gut microbiome, pharmacokinetic studies illustrating the potential clinical significance of such findings are still lacking. Yoo and colleagues have previously shown antibiotic-induced microbiota depletion can alter the absorption or metabolism of lovastatin, aspirin, and amlodipine and also that supplementation with the probiotic strain Lactobacillus reuteri reduced the bioavailability of acetaminophen possibly linked to the modulation of the metabolic activity of the gut microbiota.

The study herein investigates if perturbations to the gut microbiota, induced by an antibiotic or probiotic mix, can translate to altered pharmacokinetics of olanzapine or risperidone in rats. This is the first pharmacokinetic study, to our knowledge, to explore microbiota-mediated metabolism of CNS-active drugs. Given that antibiotic-induced microbiota depletion precipitated a 1.8-fold increase in olanzapine bioavailability, several different mechanisms governing gut-microbiota-drug interactions were investigated. Interestingly, the microbiota-targeted interventions did not alter the pharmacokinetics of risperidone, suggesting the impact of microbiota depletion may be drug-specific.

The results suggest that sources of variability in the composition and function of the gut microbiota may need to be considered a potential cause of altered drug pharmacokinetics and, ultimately, patient response to certain drugs.

A growing body of evidence supports the role of the gut microbiota in dictating the fate and activity of drugs [1,2]. In recent times, the ability of the gut microbiota to directly metabolise drugs, and consequently influence drug pharmacokinetics and clinical outcomes, has come under increasing scrutiny [2,3]. Classically, the influence of the gut microbiome on drug pharmacokinetics was mostly limited to bacterial metabolism of drug metabolites excreted via the bile into the intestine (for example, glucuronide conjugates) leading to prolongation of drug half-life, or as commonly referred to the enterohepatic recirculation. More recently, studies have highlighted how the microbiome may directly metabolise a variety of drugs and how the metabolic activity of the microbiome can both activate or degrade drugs [4]. The microbiome can also produce metabolites which compete with drugs for drug-metabolising enzymes or can modulate the latter's gene expression [2,5]. While the metabolic capacity of the microbiome to metabolise a diverse array of drugs is clear, what remains unclear is the extent to which this significantly impacts clinical pharmacokinetics of drugs in vivo (i.e.,>20% change in systemic drug concentrations) [6]. Similarly, changes in the gut microbiome have been increasingly reported as a potential source of inter-individual variability, but a limited number of studies have explored whether changes in gut microbiome can lead to clinically significant changes to in vivo pharmacokinetics.

Log P: partition co-efficient;

The primary objective of this study was to assess whether perturbations to the gut microbiota would influence the oral bioavailability of either OLZ or RISP. Two models of microbiota-targeted interventions in rats were explored: one rat group received an antibiotic cocktail over two weeks to deplete the microbiota, and a second group received a commercially available cocktail of probiotics (VSL#3) over the same period. The impact of these microbiota-directed interventions on the oral bioavailability of both drugs was subsequently compared to control rats.

Adult male Sprague Dawley rats (n = 6–7/group; 200–250 g on arrival) were obtained from Envigo UK. Based on our experience in employing these microbiota-targeted intervention animal models coupled with results from published comparative bioavailability studies, the following statistical parameters were employed in powering this study design: the power (1-β) of the study set as 80%, calculations based on an effect size of 1.33 (estimated from previous studies with similar experimental design), with the significance level (α) set as 5%. These calculations were performed on G*Power (version 3.1.9.2 University Kiel, Germany). Under these conditions, a total sample size of 6–7 was determined necessary to achieve significance for comparisons. They were housed 3–4 per standard cage in a conventional animal facility and maintained under a 12 h light/dark cycle, provided with chow and water ad libitum. Animals were randomly assigned to different cohorts using a random number generator. Rats in the same cage underwent the same treatment to avoid confounding factors such as a coprophagic effect. Animals were acclimated to housing conditions for one week before the experimental treatment.

Animal experiments comply with the ARRIVE guidelines and were carried out in accordance with the U.K. Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act, 1986, and associated guideline European Directive 2010/63/EU. Approval by the Animal Experimentation Ethics Committee of University College Cork (AE19130/P049) was obtained before the commencement of all animal-related experiments. The body weight of each rat was regularly monitored every three days to assess weight-loss induced by probiotic or antibiotic treatment.

Antibiotics or probiotics were administered for 14 days in the drinking water. The antibiotic cocktail consisted of ampicillin 1 g/L, vancomycin 500 mg/L, and imipenem 250 mg/L [adapted from [20]], and the solution was freshly prepared every second day. The probiotics consisted of VSL#3, a commercially available multi-strain preparation, which was administered in a dose of 5•1010 bacteria/kg/day [21]. VSL#3 contains four strains of lactobacilli (Lactobacillus paracasei, L. plantarum, L. acidophilus and L. delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus), three strains of bifidobacteria (Bifidobacterium longum, B. breve and B. infantis) and Streptococcus salivarius subsp. Thermophiles. The probiotic solution was prepared daily just before the start of the dark cycle (Fig. 1a).

The two-week pre-treatment with either vehicle, probiotics or antibiotics, was followed with a 24 h intervention-free period to limit any drug-antibiotic or -probiotic interactions. After the 24 h period elapsed, a single dose of OLZ (20 mg/kg) or RISP (15 mg/kg), suspended in 0.1% v/v methylcellulose, was administered to the rats via oral gavage. Following administration of the antipsychotics, whole blood samples were collected into heparinized tubes from the tip of the tail at different timepoints (30 min, 1 h, 1.5 h, 2 h, 4 h, 6 h, 8 h). The plasma was harvested by centrifugation at 3000 g for 10 min and stored at −20 °C until further analysis. Tissue samples from the liver (frontal lobe), caecum, duodenum, and colon were also taken at dissection and immediately snap-frozen. At dissection, caecal content was also isolated from the caecum and stored separately. Faecal samples were collected periodically during the pre-treatment period. All samples were kept at −80 °C until further analysis.

The liquid-liquid extraction (LLE) protocol and HPLC conditions employed for the detection of OLZ and RISP in plasma samples was based on previously published methods with some modifications [22,23]. Detailed information on plasma and caecum preparation, as well as drug extraction, is presented in the Supplemental Methods. The accuracy of the technique was determined by carrying out the extraction procedure on plasma or caecal content samples spiked with known concentrations of the drug of interest, followed by HPLC analysis. For analyte identification and quantification, calibration standards were prepared by spiking 10 or 20 µl of working standard solutions (RISP or OLZ) into 90 µl of blank rat plasma or 200 µl of blank rat caecal contents respectively at final concentrations of 15.6–2000 ng/ml. Calibration curves were generated by plotting the [peak area of analyte versus internal standard (I.S.); OLZ], or analyte peak area (RISP), versus the concentration of the analyte using least-square linear regression. The correlation coefficients of the calibration curves were greater than 0.94. The percentage coefficient of variation (% CV) for the HPLC method, assessed over five days, was less than 16% for both drugs. Further information on the HPLC equipment is detailed in the Supplemental Methods.

The maximum plasma concentration (Cmax) and the time taken to reach Cmax (Tmax) for OLZ and RISP were estimated directly from the plasma concentration-time profiles. Pharmacokinetic parameters, including the area under the plasma drug curve (AUC), clearance (Cl), and mean residual time (MRT), were all calculated using a non-compartmental model. The AUC was calculated using the linear trapezoidal method from the first to the last measured plasma concentration, i.e., AUC0-8h. Antipsychotic drug clearance from plasma was estimated by dividing AUC by the administered drug dose, and MRT was calculated by dividing AUC0-8h by the area under the first-moment curve (AUMC0-8h). Each point in the PK curve represents the average of seven independent samples (n = 7/experimental group/drug), apart from the OLZ 1h time-point only where plasma samples were harvested from 3 rats (n = 3). The reduced numbers at this specific time-point arose due to difficulties in obtaining free-flowing blood from the tail of certain rats. As a safety and welfare precaution, we decided to not apply any undue pressure to the tail to minimise the amount of stress inflicted to these animals and jeopardise the collection of later time-points. The OLZ or RISP concentration in each individual plasma sample was calculated based on the average of duplicate readings.

DNA was extracted from the caecal content using the Qiagen QIAmp Fast DNA Stool Mini Kit coupled with an initial bead-beating step. The V3-V4 hypervariable region of the 16S rRNA gene was amplified and prepared for sequencing as outlined in the Illumina 16S Metagenomic Sequencing Library protocol. Samples were sequenced at the Teagasc Sequencing Facility (TFRC, Moorepark) on the Illumina MiSeq platform using a 2 × 250 bp kit. Reads were assembled, processed and analysed following the pipeline described in Supplemental Methods.

Total RNA was extracted from the intestinal tissue and the front lobe of the liver with the mirVanaTM miRNA isolation kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific/Ambion) following the manufacturer's protocol. A Nanodrop 1000 (Thermo Scientific, UK) was used to determine RNA concentration. RNA was reverse transcribed using a high capacity cDNA reverse transcription kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific/Applied Biosystems) in a G-storm thermocycler (G-storm, Surrey, UK). Genes of interest (listed in the Supplemental Methods) were amplified using SYBR Green primers. Each transcript value was calculated as the average of triplicate samples across experimental conditions. Values were normalized to β-actin or GAPDH. Data were analysed with the comparative cycle threshold method (2−ΔΔCt) [24], and presented as a fold change vs vehicle group.

Total proteins from liver samples were extracted through sonication, BCA quantification (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and heat denaturation. Protein levels were detected on SDS-page gels using appropriate primary antibody dilutions against CYP1A2 (1:5000; Abcam ab22717), CYP2D1 (1:1000; Enzo BML-CR3210), CYP3A1 (1:1000; Millipore AB1253), UGT1A (1:500; Santa Cruz sc-271268), secondary antibody HRP-conjugated to rabbit or mouse (1:10000; Thermo Fisher Scientific). For CYP1A2, CYP2D1 and CYP3A1, the control for protein loading consisted of β-actin (1:1000; Santa Cruz, sc-47778). For UGT1A the control for protein loading consisted of ERK1/2 (1:1000; Cell Signaling #9102). Quantification of protein bands was performed using ImageJ software, and protein levels were normalized to the loading control and presented as fold change relative to the vehicle group. Significance was determined by a one-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett's test.

Fecalase, the enzyme fraction of faeces [25], was prepared from approximately 70 mg fresh-frozen rat faeces collected on day 12 of the 14-day pre-treatment period, according to a modified method previously described [26]. Briefly, the faecal pellet was suspended in 1 mL potassium phosphate buffer (0.01M, pH7.4) and homogenised using a mini Bead-Beater machine for 1.5 min. The faecal suspension was centrifuged at 2000 rpm for 5 min, and the resulting supernatant was centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 20 min. The supernatant isolated after the second centrifugation step (fecalase) was then used for the assay of enzyme activity.

For quantification of enzymatic activity, the reaction mixture, containing 50 µl fecalase, 100 µl potassium phosphate buffer (0.01M, pH 7.4) and 100 µl 4-nitrophenyl-β-D-glucopyranoside (1 mM, Sigma Aldrich) for β-glucosidase or 100 µl 4-nitrophenyl-β-D-glucuronide (1 mM, Sigma Aldrich) for β-glucuronidase, was incubated at 37 °C for 15 min. After incubation, 250 µl NaOH (0.5 N) was added to stop the reaction, and the absorbance was measured at 405 nm (UV–vis spectrophotometer). The Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific) was used, following the kit protocol, to measure the total protein concentration in the fecalase samples. Enzyme activity was indicated as the amount required to catalyse the formation of 1 µmol of p-nitrophenol per minute under the standard assay conditions.

To assess whether either OLZ or RISP was subject to bacterial-derived enzymatic degradation, the drug was incubated with fecalase prepared from vehicle-, probiotic- and antibiotic-treated rats. The reaction mixture, containing 50 µl fecalase, 200 µl potassium phosphate buffer (0.01M, pH 7.4) and 50 µl OLZ or RISP (0.25 mM, in DMSO), was prepared in duplicate and incubated with agitation (450 rpm) at 37 °C for 48 h. As experimental controls, a fecalase-only reaction mix [50 µl fecalase and 250 µl potassium phosphate buffer (0.01M, pH 7.4)] and drug-only reaction mix [50 µl OLZ or RISP (0.25 mM, in DMSO) and 250 µl potassium phosphate buffer (0.01M, pH 7.4); in triplicate] were also prepared and incubated simultaneously to the experimental samples. Aliquots (60 µl) were taken at T0, T24, and T48 from each sample. Methanol was added to each aliquot (1:1) to stop the reaction. The amount of remaining OLZ or RISP was then determined using HPLC-UV. Peak areas of OLZ and RISP were normalised to the drug-only control of each corresponding day of incubation.

Previous research has illustrated the glucuronide metabolite of the monoamine neurotransmitter serotonin, serotonin β-D-Glucuronide (5-HT-GLU), is subject to deconjugation by bacterial-derived β –glucuronidase [27]. As a positive control, 5-HT-GLU was incubated using the same reaction mix as outlined above with some modifications. Each reaction mix was maintained at 37 °C for one hour (from T0 to T1), as per a previous method [27]. After an aliquot was taken at T0 and T1, the reaction was stopped with MeOH (1:1). Before HPLC-ECD analysis, an equal volume of I.S. (n-methyl 5-HT, 2 ng/20 µl in HPLC mobile phase) was added to each sample and vortex-mixed. The total volume (300 µl) was then transferred to the HPLC vial, and 20 µl of the final sample was injected onto the column for analysis. The method for the HPLC-ECD quantification of the parent compound 5-HT was based on our previously published method [28].

All datasets were checked for normality (Shapiro-Wilk test) and homogeneity (Levene's test). Data that satisfied both homogeneity and normality tests were analysed using one-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett's test. The corresponding data are presented as mean + SEM and include the following datasets: body weight, AUC bar plots, duodenal and hepatic gene expression, hepatic protein levels and fecalase readout. The plasma pharmacokinetic curves and parameters (Fig. 4a–c) are presented as mean + SD to clearly illustrate subject variability. In order to explore differences in the drug concentrations over time, a repeated measures ANOVA was also performed in conjunction with Tukey's multiple comparisons test. Datasets that did not satisfy the assumptions of homogeneity and normality were analysed using the Kruskal-Wallis non-parametric test followed by Mann-Whitney test and corrected for multiple comparisons using the Benjamin-Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR) method. These datasets (caecum weight and microbiota genera) are presented as median and min-to-max values. Spearman's correlation coefficient was employed for the analysis of associations between pharmacokinetic parameters and bacterial taxa abundance. Grubbs method was employed to test for any specific outliers [29]. The threshold for statistical significance was set at p < 0.05.

The funders had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, interpretation or writing of the report.

Over the two-week administration of either antibiotic or probiotic cocktails, rat body weight was monitored daily. There were no differences observed between control (i.e., vehicle-treated rats) and probiotic- or antibiotic-treated animals (Fig. 1b). Upon cessation of the study and collection of organs, the caecum weight was significantly increased in antibiotic-treated rats (Fig. 1c).

To assess the impact of the microbiota-targeted interventions, 16S sequencing of bacterial rRNA was performed on the caecum content. As expected, the sequencing revealed a significant decrease in the bacterial richness and diversity of rats treated with antibiotics as compared to the control group (Fig. 2b). Moreover, separation by group was further illustrated through principal coordinate analysis (PCoA), with statistical support of the significant separation between the antibiotic and the vehicle group (p < 0.001, Fig. 2c). The marked difference between the antibiotic and the control group was also detected at the genus level, with several genera being depleted in the antibiotic group (Fig. 2a). The phylum and family microbiome signatures were also significantly disrupted by antibiotics (Fig. S1). In probiotic-treated rats, no marked differences were evident at the genus level, alpha, or beta diversity (Fig. 2).

At the phylum and family level, several bacteria were altered by both microbiome-targeted interventions (Figure S1, Tables S1, and S2), with antibiotics causing a depletion in several families. At the genus level, antibiotics induced a broad depletion, while the genera Anaeroplasma was significantly increased in antibiotic-treated rats and Lachnospiraceae UCG006 was increased but not significantly (Fig. 3, Table S3). The three bacterial strains present in the VSL#3 probiotic formulation belong to the genera Lactobacillus, Streptococcus, and Bifidobacterium. Among these three taxa, only Streptococcus was significantly increased in the caecum of probiotic-treated rats compared to vehicle-treated rats. Other taxa that were significantly increased in probiotic-treated rats included Erysipelatoclostridium, Marvinbryantia, and Odoribacter (Fig. 3).

The plasma concentration levels of OLZ and RISP were determined after oral administration to the vehicle-, probiotic- and antibiotic-treated animals. The plasma concentration-time profile and AUC of OLZ are shown (Fig. 4a). The resultant pharmacokinetic parameters are also described in Fig. 4c. Antibiotic-induced microbiota depletion significantly increased the AUC0-8h of OLZ by approximately 82% after a single oral dose. Probiotic treatment had no impact on the pharmacokinetics of OLZ. In the case of RISP, neither of the microbiome-directed interventions significantly influenced its oral bioavailability (Fig. 4b).

In order to further explore differences in the profile of the drug concentrations over time, a repeated measure ANOVA was performed. OLZ plasma concentrations were significantly higher after antibiotics, relative to vehicle, at the 1.5 h and 4 h time-points (OLZ: ABX vs vehicle; p < 0.05 at both time-points). This is in line with the overall PK difference in terms of total AUC. In the case of RISP, a significant difference in plasma concentrations was found at the 6h time-point (RISP: ABX vs vehicle; p < 0.05 at 6 h). The magnitude of the difference at 6 h, however, appears to be relatively small and given the lack of a difference in total AUC, the potential impact of this effect is, thus, considered minor.

After demonstrating that changes in the microbiome occurred in parallel with changes in the systemic absorption of OLZ (Fig. 4a), we compared whether the relative abundance of specific taxa was associated with pharmacokinetic parameters [including AUC0-8h, Cmax, Tmax, and CL] in both antipsychotic-receiving groups. In OLZ-treated rats, the relative abundance of Alistipes negatively and significantly correlated with AUC (Fig. 5). This correlation was not observed in RISP-treated rats. All other taxa, including Bifidobacterium, did not show significant correlations with pharmacokinetic-related parameters after adjusting for multiple testing (Fig. 5).

To test whether the probiotics or antibiotics had any direct effect on the hepatic expression of CYP enzymes relevant for the metabolism of antipsychotics, RT-qPCR was employed to examine the CYP gene expression at the transcript level. Interspecies comparison of CYPs isoforms present in rats and humans have been previously described (Fig. 6a) [32]. Neither the probiotic nor antibiotic treatment altered the hepatic mRNA expression of the rat-equivalent human isoenzymes implicated in the metabolism of OLZ and RISP (Fig. 6a). To further confirm the transcript findings at the protein level, Western blotting analysis of the same CYPs was performed. As shown in Fig. 6a, there was no difference in CYP1A2 or CYP2D1 protein in the livers of probiotic- and antibiotic-treated rats. Conversely, both microbiota-targeted interventions significantly upregulated CYP3A1 protein, the magnitude of the effect more substantial in the case of the antibiotic-treated rats (p < 0.001 vs probiotic p < 0.05). As CYP3A1 is, however, only a minor metaboliser of RISP, the significance of this finding is somewhat limited.

Previous studies have suggested that antibiotic administration can induce a dysregulation in intestinal barrier function [33,34], and the presence of the gut microbiota is important to maintain normal barrier function. For this reason, we assessed the gene expression of two key tight junctions, occludin and zonula occludens-1 (ZO-1) in the duodenum, the main site of absorption of xenobiotics. This was carried out to exclude the possibility that an antibiotic-induced barrier dysfunction in the duodenum might be responsible for the increased absorption of OLZ in the circulation. Neither probiotics nor antibiotics induced changes in the expression of tight junctions (Fig. 6b). The gene expression of multidrug resistance protein 1a (MDR-1a), a major efflux transporter in the intestinal lumen, was also assessed. The isoform 1a was selected in the duodenum because of its widespread distribution in this tissue compared to the isoform 1b [35]. Neither of the microbiota-targeted interventions, however, altered the expression of MDR-1a in the duodenum (Fig. 6b).

While OLZ undergoes an extensive first-pass effect, the major metabolic pathway involved in this first-pass effect is unclear. We aimed to assess if phase II metabolism, or possibly first-pass metabolism through UGT could be a contributory factor to the increased systemic absorption of OLZ in antibiotic-treated rats. There is limited evidence comparing species differences of UGT isoforms in rats and humans, especially in terms of substrate specificity. We, therefore, measured the transcript levels of UGT2B3 and UGT1A3 in the duodenum and liver, as surrogate rat isoforms predicted to be the most similar to the human 2B10 and 1A4, respectively [36]. In the liver, antibiotics increased both UGT isoforms, while probiotics significantly increased the transcript levels of UGT2B3 (Fig. 7a). None of the microbiota-targeted interventions, however, altered the expression of MDR-1a in the liver (Fig. 7b). In the duodenum, probiotic intake increased UGT2B3 and decreased UGT1A3; while antibiotics reduced the transcript levels of UGT1A3 (Fig. 7c). In addition, the protein levels of UGT1A were quantified both in the liver and in the duodenum (Fig. S3). Neither of the microbiota-targeted interventions significantly influenced the protein levels of the enzymatic family UGT1A at both body sites.

Fecalase, the enzyme fraction (i.e. cell free extract) of faeces [25], can be used as an ex vivo metabolism assay to study the metabolic activity of the gut microbiota, as well as xenobiotic metabolism by the intestinal bacteria. This strategy has previously elucidated the role of the gut microbiota in the metabolism of lovastatin, aspirin, and amlodipine. In this study, the activity of two microbial-derived enzymes was investigated as a surrogate readout of the metabolic activity of the gut microbiota. Antibiotic-induced microbiota depletion markedly decreased the expression of β-glucuronidase faecal enzymatic activity by the end of antibiotic treatment. This reduced β-glucuronidase activity was confirmed based on a significant reduction in the conversion of 5-HT-GLU to the parent compound, 5-HT, in antibiotic-treated rats relative to vehicle-treated rats. (Fig. 8a). Both microbiota-targeted interventions significantly reduced β-glucosidase activity relative to vehicle-only rats (Fig. S2b).

The probiotic treatment did not elicit a similar effect in β-glucuronidase. It is, therefore, tempting to speculate if different bacterial strains may express these enzymes. At this juncture, having shown the fecalase assay can successfully illustrate fecalase-mediated metabolism, the next step was to assess if OLZ or RISP were also subject to fecalase-mediated degradation. OLZ and RISP were incubated with fecalase from the vehicle-, probiotic- and antibiotic-treated rats for 48 h, and HPLC was used to estimate the remaining amount of the drug. Our data revealed that neither drug was degraded by fecalase (Fig. 8b).

Pharmacomicrobiomics is an emerging field that explores the effects of microbiome variations on drug pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics [37,38]. While the vast metabolic capacity of the microbiome to metabolise a diverse array of drugs is clear, what remains unexplored is the extent to which changes in the microbiome can result in clinically significant changes in systemic drug levels.

While this study suggests that chronic antibiotic use may lead to elevated olanzapine levels, a complex relationship between drug pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics exists. As mentioned, our previous research illustrated antibiotic-induced depletion of the gut microbiota can dissipate the metabolic side-effects associated with OLZ, an effect that could be presumed contrary to these pharmacokinetic results. While the 1.8-fold increase in the systemic availability of OLZ may increase the risk of dose-limiting side-effects, including somnolence and dizziness and metabolic dysfunction [56,57], the overall clinical relevance may be dependent on specific patient-related factors including age, hepatic function and concomitantly taken medication. Nonetheless, elevated OLZ levels have been linked to an increased risk of developing diabetes, peripheral oedema and postural hypotension and warrant consideration in clinical practice [58]. Clinically, antibiotic-related interactions with OLZ have, thus far, been linked to the direct inhibition of CYP1A2; the co-prescription of ciprofloxacin may necessitate a reduction in OLZ dosage to minimize adverse effects. The results herein provide further scope to consider the impact of antibiotic-induced effects on OLZ therapy.

SC, JW, TGD, NPH, GC, JFC, and BTG designed the experiment. SC and JW conducted the experiments and prepared the figures. AVG and AVZ conducted western blotting for the protein UGT1A. SC, JW, AVG, NPH, GC, JFC, and BTG performed literature search and participated in data interpretation. SC, JW, GC, CRS, and FF were involved in data collection. SC, JW, BTG, CRS, FF, and CS performed data analysis. SC and JW wrote the initial draft of the manuscript. All authors critically revised the manuscript and approved the final version.

Study protocol and all data collected for the study, including raw data and data analysis will be made available to others upon request. All data will be available upon publication of the manuscript, by contacting the corresponding author. Data will be made available after approval of a proposal and with a signed data access agreement.

BTG has spoken at events sponsored by AbbVie. CS receives funding from 4D Pharma, Dupont and Nutricia. GC has spoken at events sponsored by Janssen Ireland and Probi, and receives funding from Pharmavite. JFC has spoken at events sponsored by Janssen Ireland, Neuropharmex, Mead Johnson, Friesland Campina, has been a consultant for Nestle & Alkermes and receives funding from Mead Johnson, Cremo, 4D Pharma, Dupont, GSK, Suntory Wellness, Pharmavite, and Nutricia. NPH has spoken at events sponsored by Johnson & Johnson and Coloplast. TGD has spoken at events sponsored by Servier, Lundbeck, Janssen, AstraZeneca and receives funding from Mead Johnson, Cremo, 4D Pharma, Dupont, GSK, Suntory Wellness, Pharmavite, and Nutricia.

(**Point of contact for correspondence during review and processing of the manuscript).

Supplementary material associated with this article can be found in the online version at doi:10.1016/j.ebiom.2021.103307.

