The aging gut microbiome and its impact on host immunity

The microbiome plays a fundamental role in the maturation, function, and regulation of the host-immune system from birth to old age. In return, the immune system has co-evolved a mutualistic relationship with trillions of beneficial microbes residing our bodies while mounting efficient responses to fight invading pathogens. As we age, both the immune system and the gut microbiome undergo significant changes in composition and function that correlate with increased susceptibility to infectious diseases and reduced vaccination responses. Emerging studies suggest that targeting age-related dysbiosis can improve health- and lifespan, in part through reducing systemic low-grade inflammation and immunosenescence—two hallmarks of the aging process. However—a cause and effect relationship of age-related dysbiosis and associated functional declines in immune cell functioning have yet to be demonstrated in clinical settings. This review aims to (i) give an overview on hallmarks of the aging immune system and gut microbiome, (ii) discuss the impact of age-related changes in the gut commensal community structure (introduced as microb-aging) on host-immune fitness and health, and (iii) summarize prebiotic- and probiotic clinical intervention trials aiming to reinforce age-related declines in immune cell functioning through microbiome modulation or rejuvenation.

Age-related declines in the immune system significantly affect the health and well-being of the elderly [1]. Such loss of power of the immune system, termed immunosenescence, correlates with decreased vaccination responses and increased incidence and severity of infectious disease [2]. This is once more exemplified by the current COVID19 pandemic, where age and frailty are among the strongest predictors for morbidity and mortality to SARS-CoV-2 infection [3, 4]. Aging does not only impair proper immune cell functioning, but virtually affects all tissues and cellular circuits in our bodies resulting in frailty and death. Even the trillions of microbes that host our bodies are not exempt from aging and its consequences. While the microbiota is relatively stable throughout adulthood, aging induces significant shifts in gut microbiome composition and function associated with a decline in diversity [5]. Given the intimate involvement of the gut microbiome in proper functioning of the host-immune system [6–8], targeting age-related dysbiosis may represent an attractive strategy to prevent or restore functional declines in immune responses as we age. This may occur indirectly through sustaining intestinal tissue function and regeneration thus reducing microbial extravasation, uncontrolled activation of immune cells and inflammaging or through direct effects on the hematopoietic stem cell niche or hematopoiesis itself. With a central role of the gut microbiome on the immune system, future vaccine successes and strategies to reinforce the aging immune system critically depend on a better understanding of the aging host–microbe superorganism.

While aging mainly refers to chronological aging (time), each individual ages biologically with a different pace reflecting individual cumulative erosion of the various tissues, organs, or systems [9]. Biological age is influenced by each individual’s genetics, environment, and lifestyle [10, 11]. The term “immunosenescence” was introduced few decades ago to refer to functional impairments, faulty or aberrant immune responses observed in elderly [1]. Age-related changes in the quality and quantity of immune responses lead to a progressive decline in the ability to trigger effective antibody and cellular responses against infections and vaccinations [2, 12]. This is exemplified by epidemiological studies associating elderly (often defined as people older than 65 years) with higher risk for infections, autoimmune disorders, malignancies and mortality [13, 14]. Cellular and molecular features of immunosenescence were described for both the innate and adaptive immune system [15, 16]. T-lymphocyte biology of aging was prominently studied, but all hematopoietic-derived cells show hallmarks of aging including the presence of dysfunctional antibody-producing B cells, antigen-presenting cells, natural killer cells, and neutrophils [2–5]. Epigenetic alterations were also reported in the earliest hematopoietic progenitors that may explain observed age-related myeloid skewing [17]. Despite the biology of immune aging is an intensively studied topic and strategies to remove senescent cells from our bodies using senolytics are emerging, there is still no consensus on the triggers of senescence. Aging of primary lymphoid organs (bone marrow and thymus attrition), chronic antigenic overload (e.g., CMV), gut dysbiosis or inflammation are proposed drivers of immunosenescence that together with an accumulation of genetic defects, cellular stress, and/or cell exhaustion cause a drop in immune fitness as we age [18–21].

Inflammation is a highly controlled physiological process critical to fight pathogens, mop up debris and heal injuries [22]. As we age, the dynamic balance of pro- and anti-inflammatory networks declines as a result of a complex and changing interplay of genetic, environmental, and lifestyle factors [23, 24]. This non-resolving, chronic inflammatory state—termed inflammaging—represents a significant risk factor for both morbidity and mortality [25]. Several factors including chronic infections, physical inactivity, visceral obesity, diet, psychological stress, sleep deprivation, or intestinal dysbiosis can initiate and maintain inflammaging [26]. Chronic exposure to stressors promotes cell senescence and dysregulation of innate immunity—a major characteristic of inflammaging—that mirrors in consistently elevated local and systemic levels of inflammatory mediators with interleukin-6 (IL-6), tumor necrosis factor-α (TNFα), IL-1β, and C-reactive protein (CRP) commonly reported in aged individuals [27]. Although dysregulation of an innate monocyte-macrophage network may be at the center of inflammaging [28, 29], emerging evidence suggest a critical role for senescent cells including T and B cells that through their senescent-associated secretory phenotype contribute to chronic low-grade inflammation [30]. In return, chronic expression of or exposure to inflammatory stimuli may render pre-activated immune cells refractory to further stimulation leading to the observed increased frequency and severity of infectious diseases in the elderly. Thus, preexisting inflammation has been demonstrated to be an important determinant of vaccine responsiveness [31, 32]. Indeed, chronic low-grade inflammation has a negative impact on host immunity, as elevated inflammatory responses are detrimental for vaccine efficacy against influenza [33] or yellow fever [34]. In this context, clinically approved drugs with immunomodulatory properties such as metformin, imiquimod [35] and anti-inflammatory drugs (e.g., aspirin and NSAIDS) may represent attractive approaches to increase efficacy of vaccines by transiently alleviating chronic low-grade inflammation prior to vaccination [36, 37]. Further, inflammaging may have multiple health consequences by fueling age-associated diseases including metabolic syndrome, cardiovascular disease, sarcopenia, cancer, and neurodegenerative diseases as most if not all age-related disorders share an inflammatory signature. Despite communalities between aging, inflammation, and chronic disease, biomedical research continues to spend billions of dollars to tackle each of these disease states individually [38]. This raises the provocative question whether targeting chronic low-grade inflammation or the mechanisms causing inflammaging may slow down aging and its associated diseases.

More recently, the importance of inflammation in aging associated complications lead to the development of a variety of immune metrics claiming to predict morbidity and mortality. Such immune metrics include iAGE based on an inflammatory age score [44], GlycanAge relying on immunoglobulins glycation [45] or Nightingale health index where systemic inflammation with glycoprotein acetylation (GlycA) predicts long-term risk of respiratory infections, cardiovascular diseases and all-cause mortality [46]. With health management in aging societies becoming a growing economic burden, such immune metrics represent promising tools to identify at risk individuals for early pharmacological or nutritional intervention [47].

Similar to host-cellular systems, the gut microbiome undergoes dynamic changes through time as it integrates and responds to signals from the environment [48, 49]. Diet, drug use, physical activity, and social environment are among the factors that constantly shape the composition and function of the gut microbiome [50]. An imbalance in the microbial community structure—referred to as dysbiosis—is a common accomplice of age-related disorders that collectively represent the leading cause of disability and mortality worldwide [51]. To cope with a constant changing environment, the gut microbiome responds in a dynamic manner both through changes in bacterial species composition and metabolic function. This process is tightly regulated by the host-immune system that figures as an architect to shape the gut microbiome by allowing commensal bacteria to thrive and occupy mucosal niches while selectively eliminating or neutralizing harmful microbes. As immune fitness progressively declines with age, surveillance of this dynamic host–microbial handshake is impaired resulting in wide-ranging functional consequences for host health and immunity (Fig.
1).

Although we are starting to understand how bacterial taxonomic composition and diversity change in response to age, our knowledge on bacterial evolution and associated functional consequences for host fitness remains enigmatic. Two scenarios are possible: (i) observed age-related changes in gut-microbial community structures are a simple consequence of physiological tissue adaptations occurring during host aging or (ii) age-related dysbiosis is a product of bacterial evolution that directly triggers host aging by enabling specific bacterial taxa to escape immune surveillance. A better knowledge of the aging host–microbial superorganism is thus of utmost importance to forge ahead microbiome-based therapies to fight aging and age-related diseases.

Age-related alterations in the composition of the intestinal microbiota not only occur in humans but also laboratory model organisms—from flies to fish to mice. These model systems that control for genetics, age, diet, and the microbiome itself provide strong scientific evidence that intrinsic alterations in host physiology or microbial evolution are sufficient to promote a dysbiotic state [65, 66]. Importantly, these model organisms have demonstrated that the gut microbiome has the potential to beneficially modulate aging processes to promote health- and lifespan of the host. Studies with the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster—a frequently used aging model to study the interplay between microbial dynamics, age-related changes in intestinal physiology and organismal health—have elegantly demonstrated that intestinal dysbiosis not only precedes, but also predicts the onset of age-related intestinal barrier dysfunction, systemic immune activation, and organismal death [67]. In line, flies maintained under axenic conditions throughout life displayed reduced rates of aging [68] suggesting that preventing age-associated dysbiosis in these model settings can limit inflammaging and improve immune homeostasis to promote organismal health [69].

Collectively, these findings in preclinical model systems demonstrate that correction of age-associated intestinal dysbiosis is beneficial and thus provide a rationale for microbiome-based therapeutic approaches to improve immune system functioning, fight aging, and its associated disorders. While fecal microbiota transplants (FMT) have antiaging properties in animal models (see above) and FMT has been successfully used to treat recurrent Clostridium difficile infection in men, several barriers remain to propose FMT as anti-aging strategy in clinical settings. A better understanding of the characteristics of a healthy microbiome is of utmost importance (including virome and fungome) to ensure the safety of the recipient with respect to long-term outcomes.

Despite unprecedented advances in our understanding of the gut microbiome across life, its potential on vaccinology has yet to be realized. Given that the microbiome tightly regulates immune cell development and function [80–82], it may ultimately affect vaccine efficacy [83–85]. Variation in gut-microbial community structures due to environmental, socioeconomic, nutritional, or hygiene conditions may thus explain observed geographical heterogeneity in vaccine responses [50, 86]. Therefore, a better mechanistic understanding on how the microbiome may boost vaccination responses may help to develop new strategies to curtail infectious death in the elderly.

Going forward, rationally designed vaccines leveraging the microbiome as endogenous adjuvant holds promise in the field of vaccinology. Such approaches may require personalization and engineered reversibility to manage efficacy and potential complications in frail individuals [116]. Given that diet is one of the most potent factors shaping the gut microbiome, nutritional interventions with pre- and probiotics that promote a diverse microbiome to sustain health have received considerable interest as discussed below.

The concept of food developed to promote health or reduce the risk of disease was introduced in the mid-1980s in Japan by health authorities under the term “functional foods” [117]. Health authorities wanted to support preventive nutrition-based approaches to improve quality of life and reduce health care cost associated to an ageing population [117]. As a result of the intimate interaction of the gut microbiome with the host-immune system, functional foods studied in clinical trials to improve elderly immunity comprise mainly prebiotics (e.g., fibers), probiotics, a combination of both (i.e., symbiotics), or secreted soluble metabolites (also called postbiotic e.g., SCFA). As immune fitness declines with age that associates with the inability of older adults to fight infections and respond to antigenic challenges [13], most of these trials explored infection prevalence severity and duration or specific vaccination outcomes. Among the 400 clinical studies identified, we retained 31 studies based on their relevance (immune readouts and target population being elderly individuals >60 years) and summarized them in Table
1. Those studies were conducted in community-dwelling individuals, nursing home residents or hospitalized patients who can take oral supplement or need tube-feeding. The majority of the studies identified (20 studies) were Randomized Double Blind Placebo controlled with well-balanced groups to take into consideration classical confounding factors like age, gender and sometimes medical conditions, nutritional status and history of infection or immunization. Except one study with severely ill pancreatitis patients, where probiotic intake had severe adverse events [118] (highlighted in red in Table
1), all the nutritional interventions were reported to be safe. About two third of the studies (19 out of 31) had positive outcomes (highlighted in green in Table
1), with either improved vaccine responsiveness and or reduction of infection (severity or prevalence). However, we cannot exclude potential publication bias with positive results. Most of the studies used probiotics (live or heat killed) alone or in combination with prebiotics (symbiotic). It explored mainly the impact of the nutritional formulation on TIV response (seasonal vaccine) or influenza-specific antigen recall response in vitro (14 studies). Half of them had positive outcomes with expected improved seroconversion, and or reduced upper-, and lower respiratory tract infection episodes or reduced influenza-like illness (numbers, severity, and or duration). Interventions conducted by academics and the food industry to improve immune system functionality commonly used influenza vaccine challenge models. This bias can be explained by its public health relevance as well as the existing link between antibody titers following vaccination and protection against respiratory infections. It is linked to established seroconversion and seroprotection titers accepted by regulatory bodies to claim improvement of immune function.

Overall, there is a lack of consistency between studies which may have multiple reasons such as strain specific differences or doses, as well as prebiotic nature and quantity, or age and medical conditions of the subjects. Of note, none of these studies identified did an extensive analysis of the patient microbiota pre- and post-intervention. While those data may exist as independent reports to characterize the ingredient properties, it would be crucial in the future to conduct systematic parallel evaluation of human microbiota and immune parameters pre- and post-intervention to reveal relevant interactions or causalities as exemplified by the seminal work of Hagan and colleagues discussed earlier [115].

In the past 12 months, we were painfully reminded how age affects our immune fitness resulting in increased susceptibility to fatal infectious disease. Although chronological age is nonreversible, aging associated alterations in the gut microbiome, inflammaging, and immunosenescence—common accomplices of immune-mediated chronic disorders and frailty—are potentially targetable to sustain immunity and health as we age. While anti-inflammatory drugs and senotherapeutic approaches to selectively eliminate senescent cells (senolytics) or to suppress the senescence associated secretory phenotype (senomorphics) are quickly moving towards clinical trials as antiaging therapies [122–125] (Fig.
2), their long-term use needs to be carefully balanced with regard to susceptibility to infectious disease and potential other side effects. Further research is also needed to explain the paradox why reducing systemic low-grade inflammation may boost vaccine responses while the prevailing view in vaccinology is that adjuvants improve vaccine responses by promoting local inflammation [126].

Given the ever-growing impact of the gut microbiome on the host-immune system, it is reasonable to speculate that restoring age-related declines in gut-microbial richness and function—be it through personalized nutrition or supplements—may represent a prophylactic measure to fight functional declines in immune fitness. In this context, pre-, pro-, and postbiotics or synbiotics with the ability to reinforce immunity through supporting intestinal barrier integrity or by regulating inflammatory processes have been tested in clinical settings (Table
1). However, a lack of consistency between studies, strain specific differences or doses, prebiotic nature and quantity or age and medical conditions of the subjects have made it difficult to validate the effectiveness of such approaches to reinforce age-associated declines in host-immune fitness. None the less, mining the gut microbiome is a treasure trove waiting to be unlocked, and gerontology is no exception here. As exemplified by numerous preclinical studies, restoration of a youthful microbiome has rejuvenating potential for the aged host through sustaining immunity and health-span [67, 69, 74]. Thus, a better understanding of the dynamic age-related changes in gut-microbial community structures and associated metabolome, how such alterations affect cellular immune networks and how these pathways can be therapeutically targeted will have wide-reaching implications for future strategies to reinforce or even rejuvenate the aging immune system. With a growing aging population, such solutions are urgently needed to support healthy aging and to slow down the ever-rising health care costs.

Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

