Gut microbiome pattern reflects healthy aging and predicts survival in humans



The gut microbiome has important effects on human health, yet its importance in human aging remains unclear. Here we demonstrate that, starting in mid-to-late adulthood, gut microbiomes become increasingly unique to individuals with age. We leverage three independent cohorts comprising over 9000 individuals and find that compositional uniqueness is strongly associated with microbially produced amino acid derivatives circulating in the bloodstream. In older age (over ~80 years), healthy individuals show continued microbial drift toward a unique compositional state, whereas this drift is absent in less healthy individuals. The identified microbiome pattern of healthy aging is characterized by a depletion of core genera found across most humans, primarily Bacteroides. Retaining a high Bacteroides dominance into older age, or having a low gut microbiome uniqueness measure, predicts decreased survival in a four-year follow-up. Our analysis identifies increasing compositional uniqueness of the gut microbiome as a component of healthy aging, which is characterized by distinct microbial metabolic outputs in the blood.

The ecological dynamics of the human gut microbiome have been characterized by rapid change in early life (0–3 years), followed by a long period of relative stability, ending with gradual changes associated with advanced age1,2. Particularly in older populations (65+ years), studies over the past several years have revealed a number of associations between gut microbiome composition and measures of physical fitness 3, frailty 4, and diet 5, highlighting the importance of proper gut microbiome function into the latter decades of human life. Despite substantial progress in our understanding of the human gut microbiome, very little is still known about when age-associated changes in the gut microbiome begin, how these changes influence host physiology, and whether aging patterns within the gut microbiome simply reflect, or contribute to, long-term health and survival outcomes. Importantly, identifying aging patterns within the gut microbiome could have major clinical implications for both monitoring and modifying gut microbiome health throughout the human lifespan.

The heterogeneity of findings in aging studies indicates there may exist multiple gut microbiome patterns of aging, some of which reflect better health and life expectancy outcomes than others. Although recent analyses have demonstrated a link between gut microbiome composition and long-term health outcomes 15,16, the scarcity of cohorts with longitudinal follow-up data, the lack of detailed molecular phenotyping and health metrics, and the relatively small sample sizes of existing studies on aging limit our understanding of gut microbial changes seen across the human lifespan. In the present study, we overcome these limitations and present an analysis of the gut microbiome and phenotypic data from over 9000 individuals from three independent cohorts spanning 18 to 101 years of age, with longitudinal follow-up data in an older cohort of predominantly community-dwelling individuals that allowed us to track survival outcomes.

We primarily studied two distinct cohorts: a deeply phenotyped population of individuals who were enrolled in a scientific wellness company (the ‘Arivale cohort’, ages 18–87) (Extended Data 1) and the Osteoporotic Fractures in Men (MrOS) cohort (ages 78–98)17–19 (Extended Data 2) (Fig. 1). These cohorts further subdivide into two groups each. The Arivale cohort separates into Group A (N=2539) and Group B (N=1114), where the distinguishing factor is the use of different vendors for the collection and processing of stool samples (see Methods). The MrOS cohort separates into a discovery cohort (N=599) and a validation cohort (N=308), because although stool samples from this population were all collected at the same timepoint, they were processed in two separate batches approximately 3 years apart. We further confirmed the identified aging pattern in an additional external dataset from the American Gut Project (AGP) (N=4575)20. We began by analyzing baseline data from the Arivale cohort to identify gut microbial aging patterns across most of the adult human lifespan, and investigate how these patterns correspond to host physiology. We then extended our analysis into the MrOS cohort, where we had detailed health metrics and follow-up data on mortality, to evaluate how the patterns identified within the Arivale cohort correspond to health and survival in the latter decades of human life.

To characterize gut microbial patterns associated with aging, we initially performed a β-diversity analysis comparing all available baseline microbiome samples from a heterogenous, and relatively healthy Arivale population (Fig.1 and Extended Data 1). To capture the compositional divergence indicative of healthy aging observed in centenarians, our analysis involved extracting the minimum value for each individual from a calculated Bray-Curtis dissimilarity matrix. This value reflects how dissimilar an individual is from their nearest neighbor, given all other gut microbiome samples in the cohort. We refer to this as a measure of ‘uniqueness’: the higher the value, the more distinct the gut microbiome is from everyone else’s in the studied population. Arivale participants showed initial drift toward an increasingly unique gut microbiome composition starting between 40–50 years of age at the genus level, and 50–60 years at the amplicon sequence variant (ASV) level, and this continued to increase with every passing decade (Fig. 2a). The correlation between uniqueness and age was consistent across two different microbiome vendors used for gut microbiome processing, at both the ASV and genus level, independent of sex, BMI and Shannon diversity (Fig. 2b and Extended Data 3). We replicated our analysis using additional β-diversity metrics. Uniqueness based on Weighted UniFrac demonstrated a similar positive association with age across both vendors at both the ASV and genus levels, while the unweighted Jaccard metric resulted in comparable associations with age at the ASV level, but considerably weaker associations at the genus level (Extended Data 3). Similar results were obtained when using Unweighted UniFrac, though the association was weaker in Vendor A compared to Vendor B. Genus-level analysis once again showed weak to no association with age when using Unweighted UniFrac (Extended Data 3). We expected unweighted (i.e. presence-absence) β-diversity metrics to show a weaker association with aging, given our initial hypothesis that the shifting relative dominance between core taxa and accessory taxa would drive rising uniqueness (i.e. this pattern should only be apparent when using weighted metrics that incorporated taxon abundances). From this point forward, we focus primarily on the Bray-Curtis uniqueness measure, because it is a weighted measure not influenced by phylogeny and is well suited to capture changes in gut bacterial dominance previously observed in smaller cohorts of extremely long-lived individuals (decline in core taxa) 9.

To further characterize the observed gut microbiome aging pattern, and understand how it is reflected in host physiology and health, we tested the correspondence between genus-level Bray-Curtis uniqueness and a wide variety of clinical laboratory tests, demographic information, and self-reported lifestyle/health measures in the Arivale cohort, adjusting for microbiome vendor (Fig. 2d, Extended Data 4). Of all the factors tested, age demonstrated the strongest association with gut microbiome uniqueness. Several other factors were significantly associated with uniqueness, including prescription medication use and alcohol consumption (Extended Data 4). However, after adjusting for age, mainly lipid markers remained significantly associated with gut microbiome uniqueness, with the direction of association indicating healthier metabolic and lipid profiles in individuals with more unique gut microbiomes: e.g. lower low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, higher vitamin D, and lower triglycerides in individuals with more unique microbiomes (Fig. 2d). Interestingly, self-reported dietary measures showed little to no association with our gut microbiome uniqueness metric. However, the depth of information on dietary habits captured by our questionnaires was limited, hence these results need to be interpreted with caution. More detailed dietary questionnaires are likely required to capture the broad impact of diet on gut microbial composition reported previously 5. The same age-adjusted analysis was replicated using the ASV-level Bray-Curtis uniqueness measure, showing similar results in terms of lipid profiles (high-density lipoprotein (HDL), vitamin D) and sex, as well as additional significant associations with antibiotics use and creatinine levels (Extended Data 4).

Our research group has previously demonstrated a strong reflection of gut microbiome community structure in the human plasma metabolome22. In order to better understand how host physiology reflects the increasingly unique composition of the gut microbiome seen with aging, and to gain potential mechanistic insight into the functional changes that take place in the microbiota, we regressed our uniqueness measure against each of the 653 plasma metabolites measured in the Arivale cohort, adjusting for covariates (see Methods). A total of seven metabolites, all microbial in origin, remained significantly associated with genus-level uniqueness after multiple hypothesis correction (Bonferroni P-Value<0.05) (Fig. 3a&b). Repeating the analysis at the ASV-level independently across all 653 metabolites identified six analytes significantly associated with uniqueness, 4/6 overlapping with the genus-level analysis, as well as an additional significant association with indolepropionate and catechol sulfate not captured by the genus-level measure (Fig.3c, Extended Data 5). The identified metabolites fell primarily into one of two classes: phenylalanine/tyrosine metabolites (phenylacetylglutamine, p-cresol glucuronide, p-cresol sulfate) and tryptophan metabolites (3-indoxyl sulfate, 6-hydroxyindole sulfate, indoleacetate, indolepropionate). Interestingly, significant changes in both tryptophan and phenylalanine pathways have been previously reported in centenarians relative to younger controls, with centenarians showing greater activation of these pathways in the gut microbiome 23,24. A metabolite previously enriched in centenarians relative to younger controls, phenylacetylglutamine 24, demonstrated the strongest correspondence with gut microbiome uniqueness in our analysis, explaining 7.7% of the variance at the genus level (adj. β (95%CI) = 0.014 (0.011,0.017), P-Value= 2.53e-19) and 3.6% at the ASV level (β (95%CI) = 0.007 (0.005,0.009), P-Value= 1.29e-09) (Fig. 3c&d, Extended Data 5). These findings indicate that the observed gut microbial drift towards a more unique compositional state seen with age is characterized by a distinct shift in gut microbial amino acid metabolism, which may serve as a useful biomarker for gut microbiome changes across the human lifespan.

To better understand the long-term health implications of the identified aging dynamics of the gut microbiome, we extended our analysis into a separate cohort of older men with paired health and longitudinal follow-up data (the MrOS cohort, see Methods). The MrOS cohort is a prospective cohort study that recruited older male participants across the United States. At the fourth follow-up visit, a subset of the participants provided stool samples for 16S rRNA sequencing of their gut microbiome (discovery cohort N=599, validation cohort N=308)19. All participants who provided a stool sample exceeded 78 years of age at the time of sampling, allowing us to gain insight into the relationship between the gut microbiome and host health at the latest decades of human life (Fig.1 & Extended Data 2). Once again, we calculated a uniqueness score for each individual using the genus-level Bray-Curtis dissimilarity metric. Projecting MrOS microbiome data onto the first two Principal Coordinates revealed that samples with the highest Bray-Curtis uniqueness tended to fall away from common microbiome profiles, i.e. Bacteroides or Prevotella dominated ecosystems (Fig. 4a–c). We further correlated individual taxa with gut microbiome uniqueness. While the negative association of genus-level gut microbiome uniqueness with Bacteroides and the sum of Bacteroides/Prevotella was the strongest, a number of genera belonging to the Firmicutes phylum showed positive associations with the same measure of compositional divergence (Fig. 4D). Interestingly, a number of the identified taxa positively associated with uniqueness, both beneficial (Christensenellaceae) and potentially pathogenic (Methanobrevibacter, Desulfibrio) have been previously implicated in human longevity, enriched in long-lived individuals 8,9. We further replicated the same analysis in the MrOS validation cohort, the Arivale cohort across vendors and stratified by sex, as well as the AGP dataset. In each case, we observed a high level of congruence in the major taxa that correlate with compositional uniqueness, indicating that rising uniqueness with age is characterized by the rise and decline of the same sets of taxa across considerably diverse populations. (Extended Data 6).

Next we explored the impact of adjusting age-uniqueness linear regression models for individual medication use. The five most prevalent supplements and drugs reported by MrOS participants, as well as antibiotic use in the last month, did not impact the association between age and Bray-Curtis uniqueness in healthy composite individuals, and did not change the lack of the same relationship in the remainder of the cohort (Extended Data 8). Although drug-microbiome interactions are more complex than what can be captured by our approach, we conclude that medication use is not the main driver behind the observed variability in gut microbiome aging patterns across health states.

Next, we focused exclusively on community-dwelling individuals (i.e. excluding participants in assisted living, nursing homes, and/or who have been hospitalized in the past 12 months) from the two MrOS data sets, combined together for increased power (N=706) (Fig. 1). We performed genus-level differential abundance analysis to identify genera associated with age in healthy composite individuals (N=173) and the remainder of the cohort (N=533), separately, adjusting for batch (discovery/validation) and BMI. In healthy composite individuals, only the genus Bacteroides (adj. β (s.e.): -0.063 (0.017), P-Value=0.0004) demonstrated a significant negative association with age after multiple hypothesis correction (Fig. 5a). These findings are consistent with our gut dissimilarity analysis, where the uniting feature of unique microbiomes is the depletion of the most common and dominant genera. Consistently, there was no significant association between age and relative Bacteroides abundance in participants who did not meet our health criteria (adj. β (s.e.): −0.0085 (0.009), P-Value =0.35) (Fig. 5a). In contrast, individuals in worse health demonstrated a distinct gut microbiome aging pattern characterized by a decline in the genera Lachnoclostridium (adj. β (s.e.): −0.037 (0.0095), P-Value =1.59e-04) and the Rumminococace family genus UBA1819 (adj. β (s.e.): −0.075 (0.016), P-Value =3.72e-06). These results indicate there may be multiple gut microbiome aging patterns in the later stages of human life that are associated with distinct health outcomes.

Our findings from both β-diversity and differential abundance analysis in healthy elderly MrOS participants indicate that the identified gradual aging pattern may, in its end stages, resemble gut microbiome changes previously observed in extremely long-lived individuals (i.e. loss of core taxa) 8,9. Therefore, we utilized longitudinal data from the MrOS cohort to investigate whether the characterized gut microbiome pattern is not only reflective of healthy aging, but also predictive of survival. We performed the analysis in two steps: 1) on all community-dwelling participants (N=706) and 2) only on community-dwelling participants in the top age tertile (85+ years of age, N=256) at time of gut microbiome sampling, because these participants were the closest to achieving extreme age in the course of the study’s follow-up period (~4 years). When focusing on all individuals in the cohort, we identified a significant positive association between relative Bacteroides abundance and increased risk of all-cause mortality, independent of age, BMI, clinical site, self-perceived health, diagnosis of congestive heart failure, and batch in which stool samples were processed. Replicating the analysis in the oldest individuals (85+ years old) revealed a stronger association and higher Hazard Ratios compared to the whole cohort (Table 2 & Fig. 5b). Using the participants’ calculated Bray-Curtis and Weighted UniFrac uniqueness scores yielded comparable results in 85+ year olds, where mortality risk decreased in individuals with more unique gut microbiomes independent of the same covariates. In contrast, the same associations between Bray-Curtis and Weighted UniFrac uniqueness measures and mortality were not present when younger participants were included in the analysis (Table 2). Once again, we replicated the same analysis on the ASV level. Across both dissimilarity metrics, the trends were consistent with the genus level measures, however only the Weighted UniFrac metric passed the significance threshold across all multivariable models (Table 2 and Fig.5c).

There is limited understanding of how the human gut microbiome changes throughout adulthood and how these changes influence host physiology. Here, we evaluated gut microbiome patterns associated with aging across over 9000 individuals from three distinct study populations spanning 18–101 years of age. The major findings of our analysis were: 1) individual gut microbiomes became increasingly more unique to each individual with age, starting in mid-to-late adulthood, and this uniqueness was positively associated with known microbial metabolic markers previously implicated in immune regulation, inflammation, aging and longevity; 2) in the latter decades of human lifespan, healthy individuals continued to show an increasingly unique gut microbial compositional state (associated with a decline in core taxa) with age, while this pattern was absent in those in worse health; 3) in individuals approaching extreme age (85+ years old), retaining high relative Bacteroides abundance and having a low gut microbiome uniqueness measure were both associated with significantly decreased survival in the course of 4 year follow-up. These observations are strengthened by the presence of similar age-related trends across two independent microbiome vendors, and three demographically distinct cohorts (Arivale, MrOS, AGP).

Previously, studies on the gut microbiome in older cohorts have highlighted patterns separating community dwelling individuals from frailer older persons residing in long-term care facilities. These studies revealed significant associations between gut microbial composition and health markers, inflammation, and diet 4,5, and characterized gut microbial patterns indicative of age-associated decline 2. Coupling these findings with results from studies investigating gut microbiome development in children and adults1 has led some to hypothesize that the gut microbiome remains relatively stable throughout adulthood and into old age, at which point gradual compositional changes reflect, and potentially contribute to, declining health. In the current analyses, we have expanded the investigation of the gut microbiome in aging to cover majority of the adult lifespan in multiple, large deeply-phenotyped cohorts. While it is evident from previous research that gut microbiomes of older individuals (65+ years) change with deteriorating health, we propose that gut microbiomes of healthy individuals continue to develop along a distinct trajectory. This trajectory originates in adulthood, is accompanied by a rise in specific plasma microbial metabolites, reflects a healthy aging phenotype, and is predictive of extended survival in the latest decades of human life. As our understanding of the aging microbiome increases, monitoring and identifying modifiable features that may promote healthy aging and longevity will have important clinical implications for the world’s growing older population.

Procedures for the current study were run under the Western Institutional Review Board (WIRB) with Institutional Review Board (IRB) Study Number 20170658 at the Institute for Systems Biology and 1178906 at Arivale (both in Seattle, WA).

The institutional review board at each of the 6 MrOS study sites approved the study protocol, and written informed consent was obtained from all participants.

The Arivale cohort consists of individuals over 18 years of age who between 2015 and 2019 self-enrolled in a now closed scientific wellness company. Briefly, majority of Arivale participants (~80%) were residents of Washington or California when in the program. While the cohort tends to be healthier than the general US population, it is more reflective of populations in these two states 40. The cohort is also predominantly female (~60%), which may be due to women being more likely to join these types of programs. For this study, only baseline measurements were considered for each participant, and individuals who provided a stool sample were included in the analysis. Demographic information on the cohort is provided in Extended Data 1.

The MrOS study is an ongoing prospective study of close to 6000 men recruited across six clinical U.S. sites. The cohort, recruitment criteria, and stool sample collections have been previously described in detail 18,19. Briefly, the recruitment for the MrOS cohort was designed to obtain a population sample representative of older (65+) U.S. men in the community. Since this was a volunteer population, it is likely enriched for healthier individuals. However, comparison between MrOS participants and NHANES data (representative of the US population), showed the two cohorts are quite similar 41. The cohort was not chosen to enrich for individuals with frailty, fractures, or osteoporosis. During the fourth follow-up visit of the original study, a subset of participants across all six clinics was asked if they would consent to have their stool sampled for microbiome analysis. Participants who agreed were given the OMNIgene-GUT stool/feces collection kit (OMR-200, DNA Genotek, Ottawa, Canada) and collected the fecal sample at their homes. Demographic information on MrOS participants is provided in Extended Data 2. In the initial uniqueness analysis, all participants with available high-quality microbiome data were used (N=907). Subsequent differential abundance analysis focused exclusively on community-dwelling individuals (N=706) (excluding individuals in assisted living, nursing homes and who have been hospitalized in the past 12 months). Finally, survival analysis was conducted on all community dwelling individuals as well as specifically on community dwelling individuals in the latest stages of aging (85+ years old, N=256). The number of deaths in the whole community dwelling group and in 85+ year old community dwelling group was 66 and 41, respectively.

Independent of the vendor used, stool samples were collected at the participants’ homes using DNA collection kits with a proprietary chemical DNA stabilizer provided by the microbiome vendor to maintain DNA integrity at ambient temperatures following collection. Gut microbiome sequencing data in the form of FASTQ files were provided on the basis of either the 300-bp paired-end MiSeq profiling of the 16S V3 + V4 region (DNAgenotek, vendor A) or 250-bp paired-end MiSeq profiling of the 16S V4 region (Second Genome, vendor B). Further analysis was performed using the denoise workflow from mbtools (https://github.com/gibbons-lab/mbtools) that wraps DADA2. In summary, we first trained DADA2 42 error models separately for each sequencing run and used those to obtain sequence variants for each sample. This was followed by de novo chimera removal which removed ~17% of all reads as chimeric and resulted in about 89,000 final sequence variants across all samples. Taxonomy assignment was performed using the RDP classifier with the SILVA database (version 132). Here 99% of the reads could be classified on the family level, 89% on the genus level and 32% on the species level. Species level taxonomy was identified by exact alignment to the SILVA reference sequences. Sequence variants were aligned to each other using DECIPHER 43 and the multiple sequence alignment was trimmed by removing each position that consisted of more than 50% gaps. The resulting core alignment had a length of 420 base pairs and was used to reconstruct a phylogenetic tree using FastTree 44. Downstream gut microbiome data analysis was conducted using the Phyloseq Package 45. In two separate analyses, gut microbiome samples were rarefied to 21123 (vendor A, DNAGenotek) and 25596 (Vendor B, Second Genome) reads, the minimum number of reads per sample for each vendor. For uniqueness analysis, the Bray-Curtis 46, Unweighted and Weighted UniFrac 47, and Jaccard matrices were calculated for all samples within each vendor using the rarefied genus and ASV tables. The minimum value for each row, corresponding to the dissimilarity of each sample to their nearest neighbor, was then extracted from the matrix and used for downstream analysis.

Stool samples were processed at the Alkek Center for Metagenomics and Microbiome Research (CMMR) at Baylor College of Medicine using their custom analytic pipeline in two separate batches (Discovery N=599, Validation N=320). Samples for both batches were collected during the same follow-up visit (visit 4), at which point all health-related data analyzed in this study was also collected. Sequencing data in the form of FASTQ files was then processed using the same pipeline as described above for the Arivale cohort. Preliminary microbiome data analysis was conducted using the Phyloseq Package. For α-diversity and uniqueness analysis, reads were rarefied to an even depth of 10000 reads. A total of 12 samples in the validation cohort had less reads than the specified cut-off, and hence were excluded from the analysis (Validation N=308). α-diversity measures were calculated at both the ASV and genus levels using the Phyloseq package 45. Both the rarefied ASV and genus tables were used for ß-diversity analysis comparing samples across the whole cohort. Uniqueness was calculated as described for the Arivale cohort. The calculated uniqueness measure for each participant was then used for downstream analysis. As part of our analytical pipeline, we also performed differential abundance analysis assessing the relationship of individual genera with age in individuals defined as healthy and unhealthy, separately. Analysis was performed in R (version 3.44) using beta-binomial regression through the Corncob package (version 1.0) 48. Models were adjusted for BMI, and batch (discovery/validation). Type 1 error was controlled using the Bonferroni method (P<0.1).

ASV abundances from the American Gut Project were obtained from the 125bp BIOM table deposited in figshare [6137192] 49 provided in the original manuscript by McDonald et. al.20. Metadata for study participants was obtained from the table provided in the same publication and also deposited in figshare [6137315] 50. Taxonomy was again assigned using the “assignTaxonomy” function contained in DADA2 on the raw ASVs returned by deblur and using the SILVA database (version 138). The combined data was then converted to Phyloseq objects for further downstream processing. Only samples with corresponding age in the metadata and a minimum of 10000 reads were used for analysis. Individuals <18 years old were further removed from the dataset. This resulted in a sample size of 4575. Additional information on the cohorts, data and software can be found in the Reporting Summary document.

Blood draws for all assays were performed by trained phlebotomists at LabCorp or Quest service centers. For the 24-hour period leading up to the blood draw, Arivale participants were required to avoid alcohol, vigorous exercise, aspartame and monosodium glutamate, and to begin fasting 12 hours in advance. Metabolomics analysis was conducted on baseline plasma samples from the Arivale cohort by Metabolon Inc. (North Carolina, USA) 51. Each EDTA-plasma Arivale sample was thawed on ice, after which a recovery standard was added to each sample for quality control purposes. As part of sample preparation, aqueous methanol extraction was performed to remove the protein fraction while retaining the maximum amount of small molecular weight compounds in the sample. The sample extract was then aliquoted into five separate fractions, one for each of the four methods used for subsequent metabolite quantification, and one aliquot as a potential backup. Excess organic solvent was removed from the aliquoted samples by placing the samples on a TurboVap® (Zymark). Aliquoted sample extracts were stored overnight under nitrogen before analysis. Regardless of which method for metabolite detection was used, all samples were run on the Waters ACQUITY ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) and a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive high resolution/accurate mass spectrometer interfaced with a heated electrospray ionization (HESI-II) source and Orbitrap mass analyzer operated at 35,000 mass resolution. The four aliquoted sample extracts were dried then reconstituted in solvents compatible with each of the four methods used for downstream metabolite quantification. To ensure injection and chromatographic consistency, each solvent further contained a series of standards at fixed concentrations. Two of the four aliquots were analyzed using acidic positive ion conditions chromatographically optimized for either more hydrophobic (solvent consisting of water, methanol, acetonitrile, 0.05% perfluoropentanoic acid (PFPA) and 0.01% formic acid (FA)) or hydrophilic compounds (water and methanol, containing 0.05% PFPA and 0.1% FA). Both of these aliquots were eluted using a C18 column (Waters UPLC BEH C18-2.1×100 mm, 1.7 μm). Aliquot 3 was analyzed under basic negative ion optimized conditions with elution performed using a dedicated C18 column in solvent containing methanol and water, with 6.5mM Ammonium Bicarbonate at pH 8. The fourth and final aliquot was analyzed via negative ionization following elution from a HILIC column (Waters UPLC BEH Amide 2.1×150 mm, 1.7 μm) using a gradient consisting of water and acetonitrile with 10mM Ammonium Formate, pH 10.8. Mass spectrometry (MS) analysis was performed using dynamic exclusion and alternating between MS and data-dependent MSn scans. The scan range varied slightly between the four methods used, and covered 70–1000 m/z. To further account for potential run and day variability, process blanks and EDTA-plasma technical replicates were run intermittently throughout the study run-days. A biochemical library of over 3300 purified standards based on chromatographic properties and mass spectra was used for identification of known chemical entities. For statistical analysis, the raw metabolomics data were median scaled within each batch, such that the median value for each metabolite was one. To adjust for possible batch effects, further normalization across batches was performed by dividing the median-scaled value of each metabolite by the corresponding average value for the same metabolite in quality control samples of the same batch. In this study, we analyzed participants’ baseline plasma metabolomics data. Further filtering was performed to retain only individuals who provided blood and stool samples within 21 days of each other (median=0, interquartile range =−2 to 4 days). Individuals with Bray-Curtis uniqueness values greater or less than 3 standard deviations from the mean were removed prior to statistical analysis. A 10% missing value threshold was set, which was passed by 653 metabolites. Missing values for metabolites were imputed to be the median observed value for that metabolite. A total of 1459 Arivale participants had paired gut microbiome-plasma metabolome data and met the inclusion criteria. Values for each metabolite were log transformed prior to analysis. Clinical laboratory tests were conducted by either Quest or LabCorp. A 10% missing value threshold was set for each clinical laboratory test used in the analysis. All but 104 participants (N=3549) had paired clinical laboratory-gut microbiome data. Both metabolomics and clinical laboratory tests were scaled and centered prior to analysis and only baseline measures for each individual were used.

Data on lifestyle, diet and health were obtained through self-administered questionnaires completed by Arivale participants during their initial assessment. For reporting antibiotic use, participants chose from three possible responses (‘not in the past year’, ‘in the past year’ and ‘in the past three months’) which were recoded into ordinal variables 0, 0 and 1 respectively. Participants chose one of several possible frequencies in response to how often they experience diarrhea, that were recoded as follows: ‘infrequently/never’ = 0, ‘once a week or less’ = 1, ‘more than once a week’ = 2 and ‘daily’ = 2. Similarly, alcohol use (no. of drinks per day) was reported on the following scale which was recoded into corresponding ordinal variables: (0) ‘I do not drink’, (1) ‘1–2 drinks’: (2) ‘3–4 drinks’: (3) ‘5–6 drinks’: (4) ‘More than 6 drinks’. Current tobacco use and prescription medication were both modelled as binary variables (yes/no). Finally, for dietary variables (fruit, vegetables, grains, and sweets intake), participants chose one of the following responses, which were then recoded to the corresponding ordinal variables: (grains): (0) ‘Zero/less than 1 per day’: (1) ‘1–2’: (2) ‘3–4’: (3) ‘5–6’: and (4) ‘7 or more’. (fruits, vegetables): (0) ‘Zero/less than 1 per day’:’(1) ‘1’: (2) ‘2–3’: (3) ‘4–5’: (4) ‘6 or more’. (chocolates/sweets): (0) ‘Less than once per month’: (1) ‘1–3 times per month’: (2) ‘Once per week’: ‘(3) ‘2–4 times per week’: (4) 5–6 times per week’: (5) Once per day’: (6) 2–3 times per day’: (6) ‘4–5 times per day’: (6) ‘6+ times per day’. Sleep was reported as the average amount of sleep you get a day on a three-point scale: (0) ‘Less than 6 hours’: (1) ‘7 to 9 hours’: (2) ‘More than 9 hours’. As the Arivale cohort consists of self-enrolled participants, the response rates for different questionnaires vary. The number of missing values for each response is reported in Extended Data 4.

We utilized four different health measures that were collected on MrOS participants during their fourth follow-up visit, when stool samples were collected for microbiome analysis. Medication use, self-perceived health, and the Life-Space score (LSC) were all self-reported. Self-perceived health captured each individual’s rating of their own health compared to other individuals their own age. The implementation of the LSC in the MrOS cohort has been described in detail previously and is summarized below 52. The LSC consisted of five levels pertaining to the question: “During the past 4 weeks, have you been to: (1)-“other rooms of your home besides the room where you sleep?”; (2)-“an area outside your home such as your porch, deck, or patio, hallway (of an apartment building), or garage, in your own yard or driveway?”; (3)-“places in your neighborhood, other than your own yard or apartment building?”; (4)-“places outside your neighborhood, but within your town?”; (5)-“places outside your town?”. Within each of these levels, participants answered how often they traveled to that area and whether assistance in the form of equipment or another person was required. The LSC was then calculated by assigning a score to each of the 5 levels outlined above and summing them. Level scores were obtained by multiplying the level number (1–5) by an independence factor (2=no assistance; 1.5=use of equipment only; 1=use of another person with/without equipment) and a frequency factor (1=less than once/week; 2=1–3 times/week; 3=4–6 times/week; and 4=daily). The final LSC measure could range from 0 (restricted to one’s bedroom) to 120 (traveled outside one’s town daily without assistance). We defined healthy individuals as those in the top tertile of the LSC cohort distribution. This corresponded to an LSC value of ≥96. Walking speed was calculated based on the time it took each participant to walk 6 meters (m/s). Like with the LSC, we defined healthy individuals based on walking speed if their speed was in the top tertile (≥1.17). A total of 7 MrOS participants did not have available walking speed data. This is due to either the participants not coming to the clinic, or not being able to attempt the test. These individuals were classified in the walking speed low group in our analysis.

Depending on the statistical approach, analysis was conducted using either R (v 3.6) or Python (v 3.7). The relationship between the calculated uniqueness measure and age in the Arivale cohort was modeled using Ordinary Least Square (OLS) linear regression (Python) where square root transformed Bray-Curtis uniqueness was modeled as the dependent variable and each age decade was compared to the youngest reference group (<30 years), adjusting for sex, BMI, and either genus or ASV-level Shannon diversity, depending on what level the uniqueness measure was calculated. We chose to adjust for Shannon diversity because, in the Arivale cohort, it was associated with both age and microbiome uniqueness (higher α-diversity makes you more likely to be unique). We wanted to assess the significance of our dissimilarity pattern independent of changes in α-diversity seen with age and previously reported in literature. The same adjustment was not made for MrOS participants, since α-diversity measures showed no association with age in that cohort. When assessing the relationship between clinical, lifestyle, and demographic variables with gut microbial uniqueness, Bray-Curtis uniqueness values greater or less than 3 standard deviations from the mean were removed. OLS linear regression was then used to assess the individual relationship between each factor and square root transformed Bray-Curtis gut microbial uniqueness, with microbiome vendor included as a covariate. Percent variance explained by each factor was calculated by taking the percent variance explained by the complete OLS model (variable of interest and microbiome vendor) and subtracting the percent variance explained by microbiome vendor alone. The same analysis was then repeated with age included as a covariate (age-adjusted models). When investigating the relationship between plasma metabolite concentrations and gut microbial uniqueness, each metabolite was log transformed and subsequently scaled and centered. The square root transformed Bray-Curtis uniqueness measure was then regressed against each metabolite individually, adjusting for microbiome vendor, sex, age, age2, a sex*age interaction term, BMI, and Shannon diversity using OLS regression. In each instance where multiple hypotheses were tested, type I error was controlled for using the Bonferroni method (P<0.05). In the MrOS Cohort, correlation between Bray-Curtis Uniqueness and age was calculated using the Python statistical functions package (scipy.stats) using the square root transformed uniqueness measure. Mortality analysis was conducted in R using the package survival (v 2.44–1.1). Relative Bacteroides abundance (after rarefaction) and uniqueness scores were scaled and centered prior to survival analysis. Cox-proportional hazard regression models were generated assessing the relationship between survival and Relative Bacteroides abundance, Bray-Curtis uniqueness or Weighted UniFrac uniqueness independently, adjusting for clinical site, batch (discovery/validation) and age, and adjusting for clinical site, age, BMI, self-perceived health (excellent, good, <good), diagnosis of congestive heart failure, and batch in which stool samples were processed (discovery/validation).

Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.

Code Availability: Code used to process gut microbiome samples is available on the Gibbons lab GitHub page (https://github.com/gibbons-lab/mbtools) and code used for statistical analysis is available through the Hood-Price lab GitHub (https://github.com/PriceLab/AgingMicrobiome).

Data availability: Qualified researchers can access the full Arivale deidentified dataset supporting the findings in this study for research purposes. Requests should be sent to gro.ecneicsbsi@sigam.werdna. The MrOS data set is available to researchers through the following website: https://mrosdata.sfcc-cpmc.net. The data is available to qualified researchers upon submission and approval of a research plan. The American Gut Project biom table and the accompanying metadata is publicly available through figshare, reference numbers [6137192]49 and [6137192]50, respectively.

