Environmental Perturbations during the Rehabilitation of Wild Migratory Birds Induce Gut Microbiome Alteration and Antibiotic Resistance Acquisition



Wild migratory birds are essential for sustaining healthy ecosystems, but the effects of a rehabilitation period on their gut microbiomes are still unclear. Here, we performed longitudinal sampling, 16S rRNA sequencing, and antibiotic resistance monitoring of the gut microbiome of six species of wild migratory birds protected as natural monuments in South Korea that are subject to short- or long-term rehabilitation periods. Overall, gut microbiome diversity was significantly decreased in the early stages of rehabilitation, and it did not recover to a level comparable to that of wild birds. Moreover, while the abundance of short-chain fatty acid-producing bacteria decreased, that of zoonotic pathogens increased, indicating rehabilitation-induced dysbiosis. The metabolic pathways involved in the degradation of aromatic pollutants were significantly downregulated, suggesting the depletion of pollutant-degrading microorganisms. Antibiotic resistance of Escherichia coli significantly increased during rehabilitation, particularly ciprofloxacin and tetracycline resistance, and seven of the rehabilitated wild birds acquired multidrug resistance. The diet and habitat changes experienced by wild migratory birds during rehabilitation may have induced the observed gut microbiome dysbiosis and acquisition of antibiotic resistance. These rehabilitation-induced alterations might affect the adaptability of wild birds to their natural environments and contribute to the spread of antibiotic resistance after their release.

IMPORTANCE Wild migratory birds are key for ecosystem health but highly sensitive to anthropogenic activities. Therefore, wild migratory birds often undergo rehabilitation to prevent species extinction or biodiversity monitoring. However, the impact of rehabilitation on the gut microbiome of wild migratory birds, which is closely associated with host fitness, remains unclear. For the migratory bird species considered natural monuments in South Korea evaluated here, such impacts could include rehabilitation-induced gut microbiome dysbiosis and acquisition of antibiotic resistance, with possible repercussions on the adaptability of wild birds and spread of antibiotic resistance in the environment after their release. Therefore, the dynamics of the gut microbiome and antibiotic resistance should be considered for implementing sustainable rehabilitation strategies.

Wild migratory birds play an essential role in sustaining a healthy ecosystem. For instance, wild migratory birds contribute to shaping the distribution of global biodiversity, as they are involved in the long-distance dispersal of various organisms, including seeds and microorganisms (1). Moreover, as they may frequently interact with humans, they are sensitive to human activities (2, 3). Owing to their high position in the food chain and sensitivity to both natural and anthropogenic environmental changes, wild migratory birds are recognized as highly effective indicators of biodiversity (4). However, migratory birds are facing an ever-growing anthropogenic threat due to the increasing modifications of their natural habitats and global climate change (5). Consequently, several migratory bird species have been classified as endangered by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) or as natural monuments (5,–7). Therefore, an improved understanding of the impact of human activities on wild migratory birds is required for the development of sustainable conservation strategies.

It is essential to improve the understanding of the dynamics of the gut microbiome of wild birds in response to rehabilitation to establish a sustainable conservation strategy for these species. Thus, in the present study, we investigated the effect of rehabilitation on the gut microbiome of wild migratory birds. We performed longitudinal sampling, 16S rRNA sequencing analysis of the gut microbiome, and antibiotic resistance monitoring on six species of wild migratory birds that are protected as natural monuments in South Korea. Individuals of Falco tinnunculus, Falco subbuteo, Otus bakkamoena, Otus scops, Ninox scutulata, and Accipiter gentilis kept in a rehabilitation center were evaluated from the wild state (immediately after rescue) to the release state (immediately before release). Our study revealed the dynamics of the gut microbiome, including changes in the taxonomic composition, diversity, bacterial network, and potential metabolic pathways, as well as changes in antibiotic resistance, which may affect host fitness after release to the natural habitat. This study provides information for developing sustainable rehabilitation strategies for wild birds.

The overall scheme of our sampling and study design is shown Fig. 1. To understand how the gut microbiome changes during rehabilitation, we first analyzed its taxonomic composition in both the wild and release states. The taxonomic composition of the gut microbiome at the phylum and genus levels is shown in Fig. 2.

The dominant genera differed between the wild and release states. For instance, Ralstonia and Enterococcus were the most enriched genera in the wild state (averages of 15.00% and 13.88%, respectively), followed by Staphylococcus and Bacteroides (averages of 9.92% and 9.26%, respectively). In the release state, Escherichia-Shigella and Ralstonia were the most enriched genera (averages of 25.27% and 21.11%, respectively), followed by Bacteroides and Enterococcus (averages of 9.40% and 6.42%, respectively).

We investigated the dynamics of alpha diversity during rehabilitation to determine whether dysbiosis of the gut microbiome occurred. We analyzed the shift in the alpha diversity of the gut microbiome based on two indices: the number of amplicon sequence variants (ASVs) and Shannon’s index. Both indices showed significantly lower values (P < 0.05) in release birds than in wild birds (Fig. 3a and
b). Notably, the Wilcoxon test for paired samples showed that the values of both alpha-diversity indices decreased significantly (P < 0.05) during long- and short-term rehabilitation (Fig. 3c and
d). However, the decreases in the values of both alpha diversity indices were not significantly different (P > 0.05) between the short- and long-term rehabilitation groups (Fig. 3e and
f). Longitudinal analysis revealed that the alpha diversity of the gut microbiome significantly decreased (P < 0.05) in the first 2 weeks of rehabilitation, and it did not recover to the wild-state level during long-term rehabilitation (Fig. 3g and
h).

Shifts in beta diversity were evaluated using principal coordinate analysis (PcoA) based on the unweighted UniFrac distance, followed by permutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA). There was a significant difference in the gut microbiome composition between the wild and release states (P < 0.05). Moreover, samples taken from wild birds immediately before their release were clustered, regardless of the period of rehabilitation (Fig. 4a).

To explore the specific components of the gut microbiome that contributed to this shift, and thus to the disruption of the microbiome composition and function (dysbiosis), we performed differential abundance analysis between the wild and release states. Proteobacteria was the only phylum significantly enriched in the release state compared to the wild state (adjusted P < 0.05). Twelve genera (Fig. 4b), namely, Brachybacterium, Alistipes, Fournierella, Parabacteroides, the Ruminococcus torques group, the Eubacterium coprostanoligenes group, CHCKI001, Blautia, Sutterella, Rubrobacter, Reyranella, and ASF356, were significantly decreased in the release state compared to the wild state (adjusted P < 0.05). In contrast, only five genera (Atopostipes, Escherichia-Shigella, Campylobacter, Lactobacillus, and Peptoclostridium) were significantly enriched in the release state compared to the wild state (adjusted P < 0.05).

To elucidate the shifts in the ecological interactions among gut microorganisms during rehabilitation, co-occurrence networks were constructed for the wild and release states. Seventy-nine and 62 genera (nodes) were considered significant (P < 0.05, r > 0.7) in the wild and release state networks, respectively (Fig. 5a). Moreover, 1,814 correlations (edges) were observed in the wild state network, whereas 1,208 edges were observed in the release state network. The networks of the gut microbiome in the wild and release states shared 52 nodes and 483 edges (Fig. 5b). The numbers of unique edges and nodes in the network of the gut microbiome in the wild state were 27 and 1,331, respectively, while the network of the gut microbiome in the release state comprised 10 unique edges and 725 unique nodes. Compared to the wild state, ecological interactions between the gut microorganisms were attenuated in the release state, as shown by the decrease in average degree values from 45.35 to 38.35. The corresponding correlograms for the networks of the gut microbiome in the wild and release states are shown in Fig. 5c. Detailed information on the nodes and edges is provided in Tables S2 and S3 in the supplemental material, respectively.

The impact of rehabilitation on the metabolic pathways of the gut microbiome was analyzed using PICURSt2 software (Fig. 6a and
b). Differential abundance analysis showed that six metabolic pathways, including aromatic compound degradation, nucleoside and nucleotide degradation, glycan biosynthesis, fatty acid and lipid degradation, and cell structure biosynthesis, were significantly enriched (adjusted P < 0.05) in the wild state. On the other hand, 11 metabolic pathways, including carbohydrate biosynthesis, cofactor, carrier, and vitamin biosynthesis, lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis, glycan biosynthesis, amino acid degradation, fatty acid and lipid biosynthesis, amine and polyamine degradation, and carbohydrate biosynthesis, were significantly enriched (adjusted P < 0.05) in the release state.

To explore if antibiotic resistance of the gut microbiome of wild birds shifted during rehabilitation, we isolated Escherichia coli from fecal samples. The 30 E. coli strains isolated from 15 of the 17 wild birds (one isolate each per bird for the wild and release states) were then tested for antibiotic susceptibility. In the wild state, E. coli showed the highest resistance rate to ampicillin (46.67%), followed by tetracycline (33.33%), amoxicillin (13.33%), and ciprofloxacin (6.67%). In the release state, E. coli showed the highest resistance rate to ampicillin and tetracycline (both at 66.66%), followed by ciprofloxacin (60.00%), amoxicillin (26.67%), and cefotaxime (6.67%). E. coli showed no resistance to colistin, imipenem, and cefoxitin in both the wild and release states (Fig. 7a). Antibiotic-resistant scores, determined by the number of antibiotic resistance phenotypes, were significantly increased (Wilcoxon test, P < 0.05) in the release state compared to that in the wild state (Fig. 7b). Notably, seven (87.5%) of the eight E. coli strains with no antibiotic resistance in the wild state acquired multidrug resistance in the release state (Fig. 7c).

As the host gut microbiome is closely associated with host fitness, it is essential to better understand the influence of wildlife rehabilitation procedures on the dynamics of the gut microbiome to establish sustainable rehabilitation strategies. The present study aimed to explore the impact of rehabilitation on the gut microbiome of wild migratory birds, as it may affect their adaptability after being released into natural habitats. We hypothesized that environmental stress during rehabilitation may induce gut microbiome dysbiosis and increase antibiotic resistance in wild migratory birds. Therefore, we investigated the dynamics of the gut microbiome of wild migratory birds using longitudinal sampling, 16S rRNA sequencing, and antibiotic resistance monitoring.

Dietary modifications during rehabilitation may also have contributed to the acquisition of antibiotic resistance in wild birds. Indeed, 1-day-old chicks are a major source of in-farm-transmitted antibiotic resistance owing to their high antibiotic resistance levels (58, 59). The remaining antibiotic-resistant microorganisms in the guts of chicks could have colonized the guts of wild birds during rehabilitation, resulting in increased antibiotic resistance. Collectively, our findings indicate that wild birds may acquire antibiotic resistance during rehabilitation and thus serve as the source of antibiotic resistance spread in the environment after they are released.

Our study shows that wildlife rehabilitation induces alterations in the gut microbiome and the acquisition of antibiotic resistance in wild migratory birds. The diversity of the gut microbiome significantly decreased during rehabilitation, and it did not recover to the level observed in the wild state, indicating the possibility of rehabilitation-induced dysbiosis. Moreover, zoonotic pathogens, including Peptoclostridium and Campylobacter, were enriched, whereas SCFA-producing bacteria were depleted in the gut of wild migratory birds at the end of the rehabilitation period, and the ecological network of the gut microbiome showed decreased complexity. Metabolic pathways involved in the degradation of aromatic compounds were significantly downregulated, indicating that the ability of the gut microbiome to degrade these pollutants might have been compromised. Overall, these results indicate that the rehabilitation-induced dysbiosis of the gut microbiome of wild migratory birds may affect their adaptation to the wild environment after release. Moreover, wild birds may serve as a potential source of the dissemination of antibiotic resistance when released into wild environments because they may acquire antibiotic resistance during rehabilitation. Therefore, more attention should be devoted to studying the dynamics of the gut microbiome of wild migratory birds during rehabilitation, in order to achieve sustainable rehabilitation strategies.

Orphaned wild migratory birds were rescued in Seoul, South Korea, and immediately transferred to the Seoul Wildlife Rehabilitation Center. They were kept in individual cages, following the rehabilitation manual of the Seoul Wildlife Center. One-day-old chicks (sourced from the poultry industry) and captive-bred quail were provided to birds that were alert and had the ability to feed themselves. The health status and behavior of the rescued wild birds were monitored daily by veterinary staff at the Seoul Wildlife Center. Injured and convalescent wild birds, birds showing abnormal clinical signs, and juvenile birds not capable of self-feeding were excluded from the study. Thus, all birds used in the present study were clinically healthy. When birds were physically and behaviorally able to forage and breed in the wild, and therefore considered ready for release by veterinarians, they were released into a native forest or park. Wild birds that were rehabilitated for less than 4 weeks were considered to have undergone short-term rehabilitation, while those that were rehabilitated for 4 weeks or more were considered to have undergone long-term rehabilitation. Information regarding the wild birds used in the present study is provided in Table S1 in the supplemental material.

Fecal samples of the wild birds were collected by veterinarians, immediately transferred to the laboratory, and processed for gut microbiome 16S rRNA sequencing analysis and antibiotic resistance monitoring. Sample collection was performed in the wild state, within the first 2 weeks of rehabilitation, and then at 4-week intervals until release. Fifty fecal samples were used for DNA extraction and microbiome 16S rRNA sequencing analysis (Fig.1b).

Fecal DNA extraction and sequencing were performed as previously described (14). Briefly, DNA was extracted from fecal samples using a Fast DNA soil kit (MP Biomedicals, Santa Ana, CA, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Sequencing of the 16S rRNA V3-V4 hypervariable gene region was performed using the primers 341F (5′-TCGTCGGCAGCGTCAGATGTGTATAAGAGACAGCCTACGGGNGGCWGCAG-3′) and 805R (5′-GTCTCGTGGGCTCGGAGATGTGTATAAGAGACAGGACTACHVGGGTATCTAATCC-3′) from Illumina Inc. (San Diego, CA, USA). PicoGreen was used for pooling and normalizing the amplified products. All sequencing procedures were conducted using the Illumina MiSeq platform at Macrogen, Inc. (Seoul, South Korea).

Bioinformatics analysis of the sequence data was performed using the QIIME2 (version 2021.02) software package (60). Raw sequence data were filtered, dereplicated, and denoised to generate ASV tables, using DADA2 as implemented in QIIME2 (61). A phylogenetic tree of the ASVs was generated using MAFFT (https://mafft.cbrc.jp/alignment/software/). The taxonomy profile of ASVs was generated using the q2-feature-classifier implemented in QIIME2 against the SILVA database (version 138, Ref NR99) (62). Sequence data were normalized using the rarefaction to the minimum library size method for downstream analysis.

Downstream analysis of sequence data was performed using the MicrobiomeAnalyst R package (63). The alpha diversity of the microbiome was measured using the number of observed ASVs and Shannon’s index. The significance of differences in alpha diversity was evaluated using the Mann-Whitney U test for intergroup comparisons and the Wilcoxon test for paired samples. The beta diversity of the microbiome was measured using the unweighted UniFrac distance, followed by PERMANOVA to evaluate significant differences in beta diversity. Differential abundance analysis of the gut microbiome and its metabolic pathways was performed using edgeR (64). A co-occurrence network was constructed using network analysis for metagenomic abundance profiles (NAMAP) based on Pearson’s correlations, using the MetagenoNets tool (65, 66) with r > 0.7 and P < 0.05 as the cutoff values for significant correlations. Metabolic pathways were analyzed using the phylogenetic investigation of communities by reconstruction of unobserved states (PICRUSt2) (67) and the MetaCyc database (https://metacyc.org).

To isolate E. coli for monitoring antibiotic resistance in wild birds during rehabilitation, fecal swabs from 17 wild birds in the wild state and release state were inoculated into 2 mL of E. coli broth (Oxoid, Basingstoke, UK) and enriched overnight at 37°C. After enrichment, 100 μL of the culture broth was spread on MacConkey agar (Oxoid) and incubated at 37°C for 24 h. Cultures were then streaked on eosin methylene blue agar (BD, Sparks, MD, USA), and colonies exhibiting the culture characteristics of E. coli were pure cultured and confirmed by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization–time of flight mass spectrometry. As a result, E. coli was isolated from 15 birds and further analyzed for antibiotic susceptibility.

Disk diffusion susceptibility tests (Kirby-Bauer method) were conducted for eight antibiotics: amoxicillin-clavulanic acid (20/10 μg), ampicillin (10 μg), cefotaxime (30 μg), imipenem (10 μg), tetracycline (30 μg), ciprofloxacin (5 μg), colistin (10 μg), and cefoxitin (30 μg). Antibiotic susceptibility results were interpreted following the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute guidelines.

The rehabilitation program at the Seoul Wildlife Center was conducted with the authorization of the Seoul Metropolitan Government and Ministry of Environment of Korea. All procedures in this study strictly followed the guidelines and ethical principles of the following South Korean legislation: the Wildlife Protection and Management Act, the Guidelines for the Operation of the Wildlife Rescue and Management Center by the Ministry of Environment of Korea, and the Cultural Heritage Protection Act by the Cultural Heritage Administration of Korea.

Sequence data from this study are deposited in the National Center for Biotechnology Information Short Read Archive database under accession number PRJNA814404.

Supplemental material is available online only.



