A Perspective on the Role of Microbiome for Colorectal Cancer Treatment

Colorectal cancer is the third most diagnosed cancer worldwide and contributes significantly to global mortality and morbidity. The gut microbiome, composed of the trillions of microbes endemic to the human gastrointestinal tract, has been shown to be implicated in colorectal cancer oncogenesis; however, the roles of microbiota and dysbiosis in CRC treatment remain poorly understood. This review sought to characterize this relationship and in doing so, identify how these interactions may inform future treatments in the form of synbiotics designed to alter the host microbiota to achieve optimized treatment outcomes.

In healthy hosts, trillions of microbes colonise the gut and oral cavity in a well-balanced state, maintaining a mutually beneficial relationship. Loss of this balance, termed dysbiosis, is strongly implicated in the pathogenesis of colorectal cancer (CRC). However, the roles of microbiota and dysbiosis in CRC treatment remain poorly understood. Recent studies suggest that the gut microbiota has the ability to affect the host response to chemotherapeutic agents by enhancing drug efficacy, promoting chemoresistance and mediating chemotherapy-induced toxicity and side effects via a variety of mechanisms. Several other studies have also proposed manipulation of the microbiota to optimise CRC treatment. In this review, we summarise the current advancement of knowledge on how microbiota and CRC treatments interact with each other and how this interaction may shed some light on the development of personalised microbiota manipulations that improve CRC treatment outcomes.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a major public health problem, being the third most commonly diagnosed malignancy and the second most common cause of cancer-related death worldwide in 2020 [1,2,3]. CRC is an aetiologically heterogenous disease that arises through three major pathways–the adenoma-carcinoma sequence, the serrated and the inflammatory pathways and is also associated with certain genetic factors [4]. However, most CRC cases are sporadic in nature, emerging from a complex interplay between modifiable environmental risk factors attributable to westernisation [4,5]. As such, the global burden is expected to further increase as a result of the growth and ageing of the population and the adoption of westernized behaviours and lifestyles [6]. A topical area in CRC research has emerged from recent studies demonstrating a state of imbalance or dysbiosis in CRC patients, implicating the gut microbiota in colorectal carcinogenesis [7,8]. There is wide geographical variation with over two-thirds of its incidence and approximately 60% of total deaths occurring in countries with a high or very high human development index [1]. The lifetime risk of developing CRC in many regions is roughly 5%, with deaths occurring in just under half (45%) of those diagnosed despite treatment [9]. There is a poor prognosis for patients with metastatic CRC with a median 5-year survival rate of 12.5% in the USA, underlining the necessity of developing more effective treatments [10].

The human body houses a vast and highly integrated microbial community of bacteria, fungi, viruses, archaea and parasites, collectively termed the microbiota. The bacteria are predominately represented by the phyla Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes and Actinobacteria [11]. The gastrointestinal tract (GIT) contains over 100 trillion microorganisms and is the site of principal communication between host cells, the immune system and the microbiota [11,12,13]. The gut microbiota has co-evolved with the host and plays an active role in regulating metabolism and immunity, and maintaining homeostasis and nutritional absorption [14,15]. The proposed causative role of the microbiota in carcinogenesis is through dysbiosis-related inflammation and biosynthesis of carcinogens, with shifts in the microbiome commencing as early as in precancerous adenomas [15,16,17]. Next-generation sequencing technologies have been used to study the microbiome composition [18]. Analysis of the microbiome entails sample collection and processing, next-generation sequencing and a bioinformatics analysis [19]. Many bodily samples can be collected and studied, such as saliva, faeces, tissue biopsies, intestinal fluids, buccal swabs, skin and the vaginal swab [19]. Nucleic acids of these samples can be sequenced by gene amplicon sequencing and whole-genome shotgun metagenomics sequencing [20]. Gene amplicon sequencing is used to identify microbial composition by sequencing the hypervariable regions of a target gene that are conserved among taxa in a particular kingdom of microorganisms. For example, the hypervariable region of 16S rRNA can be amplified and sequenced to determine the bacterial composition in the given samples. [20] This technique is mostly employed on DNA samples that have a high host to microbial DNA ratio. These samples include tissue biopsies and skin. Conversely, unlike 16S rRNA sequencing, metagenomics uses genome-wide shotgun sequencing, targeting the whole genome to provide a superior taxonomic resolution [20]. This technique is mostly employed on DNA samples that have a low host to microbial DNA ratio. These samples include faeces, intestinal fluid, buccal and vaginal swabs.

Despite being the most effective, surgical interventions are unable to completely cure CRC, and thus post-operative adjuvant chemotherapy has emerged as an essential therapeutic option to prevent recurrence and metastasis [21]. CRC is commonly treated with cytotoxic agents that interfere with DNA replication such as 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), capecitabine and oxaliplatin, as well as regimens such as FOLFOX (5-FU and oxaliplatin), FOLFIRI (5-FU and leucovorin and irinotecan) and XELOX (oxaliplatin and capecitabine) [21,22]. Most forms of chemotherapy target tissues that have a high rate of cell turnover and division, thereby affecting other normally dividing cells with a similar division rate. This may cause severe side effects such as gastrointestinal mucositis requiring dose reduction or deferral of treatment, resulting in poorer prognosis [23].

Recent studies have investigated the relationships between the microbiome and the outcome of cancer therapy such as efficacy and toxicity. Understanding the relationship between the microbiome changes before and after CRC treatment will hold the key to reducing toxicity and improving efficacy of the treatments. This review will attempt to address these aspects.

The gut microbiota has the ability to affect the host response to chemotherapeutic agents by facilitating drug efficacy, promoting chemoresistance and/or mediating chemotherapeutic toxicity and side effects [26,27]. The translocation, immunomodulation, metabolism, enzymatic degradation and reduced diversity and ecological variation (TIMER) mechanistic framework (Figure 1) has been proposed as a model to explain the variety of mechanisms that allow the gut microbiota to modulate chemotherapy agents [27]. These mechanisms are important in understanding chemotherapy success and failure in a variety of tumours and specifically in colorectal cancer (CRC).

The studies above demonstrate the diverse impact gut microbiota can have across a spectrum of antineoplastic treatment in CRC. The studies above have highlighted potential avenues to harness the microbiome by creating a microenvironment that is beneficial to increasing treatment efficacy; however, the challenge lies in replicating these results in human trials and documenting improved outcomes for these patients. Understanding the role of the gut microbiota in influencing the host response to anti-tumour treatments, including chemotherapy and new immunotherapeutic approaches, will be essential in developing personalised treatments to achieve optimal efficacy and tumour clearance. Using this knowledge as a basis to investigate the synergistic role of faecal microbiota transplantation or symbiotics with anticancer therapy is an exciting next step in combatting CRC resistance and mortality.

The cytotoxic effects of chemotherapy give rise to a wide range of toxicities, including the inflammatory condition of mucositis. Current drugs or other approaches to counteract chemotherapy-induced adverse effects are often incompletely effective, frequently do not address potential longer-term sequelae or may even induce other side-effects that only add to patient discomfort [51]. Chemotherapy drugs such as 5-FU and methotrexate are highly toxic for intestinal epithelial cells lining the gut mucosa and other cells with high proliferation rates [52]. These drugs cause neutropenia and weaken the integrity of the epithelial barrier, facilitating bacterial translocation across the gut mucosa, allowing for systemic infections and triggering of inflammatory processes [52,53]. Such processes are associated with mucositis, which affects up to 80% of patients depending on treatment regimen [54]. These toxicities increase the risk of infections and interfere with the provision of optimal cancer treatment [55].

It is likely that any chemotherapeutic agent that causes DNA damage may activate the bacterial SOS response system and increase bacterial mutagenicity. However, it is still unknown which agents potentiate the greatest mutagenic effect resulting in clinically significant antimicrobial resistance [61]. The studies above suggest that agents blocking thymidylate synthase may confer the greatest risk of creating de novo antimicrobial resistance, and thus future research should initially focus on chemotherapeutic agents that have this property, such as 5-FU and capecitabin.

The gut microbiota has been heavily implicated in the functioning of the immune system, as demonstrated by a multitude of GF pre-clinical studies. GF mice have been demonstrated to have poor immune functioning secondary to factors such as fewer and smaller goblet cells and Peyer’s patches, lack of lymphoid follicles in the lamina propria, reduced CD4+ T cells, plasma cells, and decreased IgA production, which can be reversed following colonisation with commensal bacteria [67]. As a result, studies have explored the role of the microbiota and its influence on immunotherapy efficacy.

Vetizou et al. [68] showed that the efficacy of the monoclonal antibody ipilimumab against anti-CTLA-4 relied on the presence of Bacteroides species—specifically B. thetaiotaomicron or B. fragilis in patients with melanoma. A novel study utilising 18 “bulk” RNA-seq datasets (n = 2269) and four single-cell RNA-seq datasets to generate a “Signature associated with FOLFIRI resistant and Microenvironment” (SFM) illustrated that SFM subtypes were associated with differing outcomes, including gut microbiome composition, and this impacted treatment response in colorectal cancer [69]. Specifically, SFM-C (a subtype of SFM based on SFM signature discriminating between the tumour microenvironment and drug sensitivity) increased abundance of Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, Fn, and B. fragilis, and was shown to be responsive to immunotherapy. Conversely, SMF-F was enriched with Corynebacterium aurimucosum and Pseudomonas putida and was not responsive to immunotherapy [69]. It was hypothesised that the tumour microenvironment (TME) of SFM-C was enriched with the MSI phenotype and so the immune suppression could be blocked by immune inhibitors, whilst the TME of SFM-F was enriched with a phenotype that could also cause immunosuppression but could not be reversed by immune inhibitors. These findings are significant as they demonstrate an avenue for microbiota modification to improve treatment response; however, further research on how this directly applies to CRC is warranted given the relative novelty of immunotherapy in this patient cohort.

Reported adverse outcomes following immunotherapy treatment include a lack of response, immune-related adverse events such as diarrhoea or colitis and acceleration of tumour progression [70,71]. It is thought that these unfavourable outcomes are due to dysbiosis.

Although there is a paucity of studies exploring the link between immunotherapy in CRC and the microbiome, current research has demonstrated a relationship between the microbiome and immunotherapy toxicity and efficacy in other cancers, in particular melanoma. This paucity highlights the need for a more systematic approach in analysis of specific disease processes studied and the sample types used.

Despite the improved efficacy and survival with modern treatments, both the adverse effects and sequelae of chemotherapy represent a major cause for concern amongst patients and clinicians [51]. A salient concept to consider is that pathological disease states or, conversely, medical therapies may promote dysbiosis, thereby influencing clinical outcomes [Figure 2] [27].

Chemotherapy causes a disturbance in microbial community structure and is associated with a reduction in microbiome diversity as well as a decrease in the richness and abundance of operational taxonomic units [76,77]. A pre-clinical study revealed an enrichment of predominantly Gram-negative bacteria following administration of 5-FU in rats [78]. This was validated in more recent clinical studies showing an enrichment, in faecal samples, of Proteobacteria, reduction of Firmicutes, Actinobacteria and taxa that impair inflammation through modulating the NF-kB pathway and producing short-chain fatty acids [77,79]. Similarly, Galloway-Peña et al. [80] unveiled statistically significant increases in Lactobacillus with significant decreases in primarily anaerobic genera including Blautia, Prevotella, and Leptotrichia in buccal and faecal samples. A decrease in anaerobic bacteria was induced in both adult and paediatric patients undergoing conditioning and high-dose chemotherapy regimens, respectively [77,81].

Various human and animal studies have illustrated that certain chemotherapy regimens result in dysbiosis. A recent study demonstrated a similar shift away from beneficial bacteria such as Actinobacteria and towards phyla with pro-inflammatory traits such as Bacteroidetes and Verrucomicrobia upon the administration of 5-FU in mice [52]. Such results are also seen with the administration of methotrexate in a rat model, which induced an absolute and relative decrease in anaerobes (13-fold) and Streptococci (296-fold) as well as a relative increase in Bacteroides [77]. Importantly, these changes were most prominent at the peak of mucositis severity clinically, and reduced bacterial presence was related to the presence of diarrhoea. Enrichment of inflammatory bacteria such as Bacteroides following chemotherapy has been shown in human faecal samples as well [81,82]. Chemotherapy-induced diarrhoea was recently found to be significantly associated with Klebsiella pneumoniae enrichment in patients with resected stage III CRC undergoing the CapeOX regimen [83]. A recent study demonstrated statistically significant differences in gut microbial abundance before and after chemotherapy with both XELOX and FOLFIRI regimens-including differences in the abundance of Peptostreoptococcus, Clostridiales, and Prevotella as well as altered gut fungi [21].

Furthermore, a pre-clinical study in Sprague-Dawley rats showed that irinotecan had a greater impact than 5-FU and oxaliplatin on the composition of faecal microbiota, but both chemotherapeutic drugs induced microbial and metabolic changes, activating inflammatory processes [86]. In particular, irinotecan was associated with an increased relative abundance of Fusobacteria and Proteobacteria. The latter has also been enriched in human studies [Table 1] [76,82]. There does not appear to be a specific bacterial community that is consistently altered following chemotherapy, most likely due to a lack of homogeneity of patient groups and sample types analysed, as well as a lack of standardization in laboratory protocols and computation methods. Nevertheless, various clinical and pre-clinical studies have demonstrated a shift away from the normal microbiota, emphasising that despite the heterogeneity in microbial shifts, chemotherapy does influence the gut microenvironment to cause dysbiosis. Future research with standardized protocols should be pursued to qualify and quantify this change accurately with a view to harnessing it to improve treatment outcomes and reduce adverse effects (Table 1 and Table 2).

Abbreviations: ↑, increased; ↓, decreased.

Abbreviations: ↑, increased; ↓, decreased.

The alterations of the oral microbiota in the context of chemotherapy are not well established. A systematic review by Napeñas et al. [89] and prospective study by de Mendonca et al. [90] demonstrated shifts in the oral microbiota towards pathological genera such as Streptococcus viridans, Neisseria spp. and Candida spp. during cancer therapy. These findings support the hypothesis of oral dysbiosis in the setting of chemotherapy [55]. Alterations in the oral bacteriome were detected in mucosal samples but of greater magnitude in salivary communities, and though they correlated with mucositis severity, they were universal in the mouth—constant in healthy, erythematous and ulcerated sites. These studies also highlighted the paucity of current, longitudinal, well-controlled studies using highly sensitive high-throughput sequencing to characterise the oral micro-environment throughout chemotherapy. Disruption of the indigenous microbial community with growth of pathobionts and reduction of beneficial commensals would impair the ability of the mucosa to remain intact during an antineoplastic challenge [55]. The plausibility of this hypothesis was suggested by Perales-Puchalt et al. [91] in a murine model of intestinal mucositis in the context of the antineoplastic agent cisplatin. 16S rRNA sequencing analysis of faecal DNA confirmed that cisplatin induced measurable dysbiosis. This dysbiosis was characterised by significant increases in bacteria of the Bacteroidaceae and Erysipelotrichaceae families, as well as in Bacteroides uniformis. In contrast, cisplatin caused a significant decrease in Ruminococcus gnavus, a trans-sialidase-expressing bacterial strain that acquires nutritional competitive advantage by degrading mucins. Furthermore, gavage of faecal pellets overturned cisplatin-induced increases in Bacteroidaceae and Erysipelotrichaceae family bacteria.

In a similar way, these studies highlight chemotherapy-induced oral microbial dysbiosis but are unable to clarify the significance of these shifts on treatment efficacy. Further research that seeks to address these questions is needed to optimize patient outcomes.

ICIs, specifically ipilimumab (anti-CTLA-4), tremelimumab (anti-CTLA-4) and nivolumab (anti-PD-1), have revolutionised cancer therapy [73]. Immunotherapy in CRC shows promise in improving patient outcomes, in particular nivolumab and pembrolizumab with metastatic dmmR-mSI-H CRC; however, the evidence to support its widespread use remains preliminary at this stage [10]. Nevertheless, it is prudent to characterise the effect immunotherapy has on the gut microbiome so that patient outcomes can be optimised when these agents become more commonly used.

Pre-clinical studies have demonstrated that immunotherapies cause a shift in the microbiota composition. The ground-breaking study by Vetizou et al. [68] analysing stool samples in recolonised GF and antibiotic-treated mice demonstrated that the microbiome composition following ipilimumab administration had enrichment of Clostridiales and reduced abundance of Bacteroidales and Burkholderiales. Furthermore, whilst the Bacteroides species was decreased in faeces, Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron and Bacteroides uniformis were enriched in mucosal samples from the small intestine, suggesting that the microbiome shifts following ICI treatment vary depending on samples studied. Analysis of stool samples following nivolumab treatment in patients with non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) demonstrated enrichment of Rikenellaceae, Prevotella, Streptococcus, Lactobacillus, Bacteroides plebeius, Oscillospira and Enterobacteriaceae compared to healthy controls [92]. Another study of 11 NSCLC patients demonstrated a positive correlation between increased Granulicatella abundance and improved treatment response to nivolumab [93]. It also demonstrated higher abundance of commensals such as Akkermansia muciniphila, Rikenellaceae, Bacteroides, Peptostreptococcaceae, Mogibacteriaceae and Clostridiaceae in the controls than those in the patients receiving nivolumab. However, future studies with greater sample sizes are required to reproduce statistically significant results.

Probiotics are defined by the World Health Organisation as “live microorganisms which when administered in adequate amounts confer a health benefit on the host” [94]. As a novel approach to augment cancer therapy, they are thought to improve the diversity profile of the intestinal microbiota and reduce the extent of chronic inflammation and production of carcinogenic material in dysbiosis [2,95,96]. Prebiotics are non-digestible food constituents that selectively alter the growth of certain host-beneficial bacteria [97]. The combination of probiotics and prebiotics is called synbiotics. Both prebiotics and probiotics have demonstrated ability to alter the commensal microbiota toward a beneficial composition and perhaps be used advantageously in patients with CRC [98]. Additionally, emerging evidence has shown their effects on the efficacy and toxicity of chemotherapy and immunotherapy.

Despite promising results being reported in some pre-clinical models, overall results for probiotics are largely inconsistent. For example, S. thermophiles TH-4 leads to attenuation of intestinal damage in non-tumour bearing rats treated with methotrexate and 5-FU [99,100]. However, a subsequent study in tumour-bearing rats treated with methotrexate was unable to demonstrate any beneficial effect [101]. Similarly, probiotic factors derived from E. coli Nissle 1917 and Lactobacillus fermentum (L. fermentum) BR11 partially protected the intestine from 5-FU-induced mucositis, and treatment with Lactobacillus acidophilus (L. acidophilus) improved the inflammatory and functional aspects of 5-FU-induced intestinal mucositis [102,103]. Additionally, oral probiotic Lactobacillus rhamnosus (L. rhamnosus) and Bifidobacterium infantis (B. infantis) prevented FOLFOX treatment-induced intestinal mucositis in a CRC-bearing mouse model and CRC-bearing rat model, respectively, thereby avoiding dose reduction caused by intestinal toxicity [2,104,105]. L. rhamnosus may also confer advantages in augmenting the anti-tumour response produced by immunotherapy. Owens et al. [106] showed that administration of L. rhamnosus GG (LGG) decreased tumour burden via increasing the CD8 T-cell response in a murine CRC model consistent with literature regarding immunotherapy for melanoma, suggesting that an absence of lactobacilli correlates with a poorer response to immunotherapy [107].

It is important to note that despite the generally accepted notion of probiotics being a safe food adjunct, with many probiotic products being granted a ‘generally regarded as safe’ status, probiotic bacteria can translocate from the gastrointestinal tract and result in clinically significant disease [113]. In healthy subjects, probiotic bacteria generally do not result in severe disease even when they do translocate. However, studies looking at immunocompromised populations suggest otherwise, with some reports of septic complications due to probiotics [113]. Additionally, there are a number of other challenges when conducting probiotic associated research. Most notably, humans exhibit individual, region and strain specific mucosal colonisation patterns resulting in an individualised impact on microbiota in response to probiotic administration [114]. Moreover, stool sample microbiome analysis only partially correlates with human gut mucosal microbiome, making predicting the individual response to probiotics especially challenging [114]. This notion challenges the application of a universal probiotic that can be applied to all patients with CRC and rather advocates for the research and development of personalised probiotic approaches to achieve optimal patient outcomes [114].

Administration of certain prebiotics demonstrates beneficial shifts in the microbiome. For example, fructo-oligosaccharide administration has been shown to increase Bifidobacteria spp. in both rat studies and human studies [115,116]. In addition, fructo-oligosaccharide is also linked to increased mucin production [116]. Butyrate, as discussed previously, has been identified as a potential antineoplastic agent in the colon [117]. It plays an essential role in mucosal regeneration and in the inhibition of pro-inflammatory cytokine production [118,119]. Glutamine, which is known to be an effective gut protectant during stressful conditions, reduces the incidence and severity of late-onset diarrhoea following CPT-11 treatment in rats [120,121]. Water-soluble polysaccharide extracted from the sporoderm-removed spores of Ganoderma Lucidum (GLP) was shown to reduce inflammation-induced tumorigenesis and microbiota dysbiosis in an azoxymethane/dextran sulfate sodium (AOM/DSS) mouse model through a variety of mechanisms including modulation of endotoxaemia induced by the TLR4/MyD88/NF-kB pathway, strengthening colonic epithelial integrity and goblet cell function and increasing short-chain fatty acid production amongst others [122]. Guo et al. [122] therefore postulate that GLP might be an effective prebiotic treatment to use to ameliorate AOM/DSS induced tumorigenesis in CRC.

Synbiotics have been shown to be able to augment the microbiome; however, the clinical utility of this in CRC treatment is yet to be established. It is possible that prebiotics and probiotics will become a novel adjunct to anti-cancer treatment in the future; however, for now, it is prudent for further research to be conducted, especially in human studies, to qualify and quantify their treatment benefit.

Substantial evidence shows that the gut microbiota influences the efficacy of chemotherapy and severity of toxicity and facilitates chemotherapy resistance. Several studies have demonstrated a direct relationship between an intact microbiome, immune functioning and chemotherapy efficacy. Contrastingly, others have suggested that certain microbes, such as Fn, may increase chemoresistance to 5-FU and that dysbiosis has a negative correlation with chemotherapeutic outcomes. Additionally, the TIMER framework that was previously proposed by Alexander et al. [27] can been used to understand pharmacomicrobiomics in the context of CRC. On the other hand, chemotherapy has been reported to induce a dysbiosis in both humans and animals, with microbial shifts extending beyond colonic mucosa and involving the oral microenvironment. This is characterised by a shift away from eubiosis and towards inflammatory phyla such as Bacteroidetes. Ultimately, whilst there is growing evidence in mouse models, there is a major discrepancy and lack of evidence within clinical trials that support the use of prebiotics and probiotics to improve chemotherapy and immunotherapy outcomes.

Though findings in current literature are promising, a greater understanding of the exact relationship between the gut microbiota, host response and outcomes of anti-cancer treatment is warranted to ensure an individualised, more effective approach in the treatment of CRC and a reduction of associated toxicities.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

