Maturation of the infant rhesus macaque gut microbiome and its role in the development of diarrheal disease

Diarrhea is the second leading cause of death in children under 5 years of age. Enhanced understanding of causal pathways, pathogenesis, and sequelae of diarrhea is urgently needed. Although the gut microbiota is believed to play a role in susceptibility to diarrheal diseases, our understanding of this association remains incomplete. Infant rhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta) are susceptible to diarrhea making them an ideal model to address this question.

The maturation of the infant rhesus macaque gut microbiome throughout the first 8 months of life occurs in a similar pattern as that described for human infants. Moreover, the microbiome of the captive reared infant rhesus macaque more closely resembles that of human infants in the developing world than in the western world. Importantly, prior to disease onset, the gut microbiome of infants that later develop diarrhea is enriched in pathways of immunomodulatory metabolite synthesis, while those of infants that remain asymptomatic are enriched in pathways for short-chain fatty acid production. We identify Prevotella strains that are more abundant at 1 month in infants that later develop diarrhea. At 8 months, the microbiomes of animals that experience diarrhea show increased abundance of Campylobacter and a reduction in Helicobacter macacae.

The composition of the microbial community could provide a phenotypic marker of an infant’s susceptibility to diarrheal disease. Given the significant physiological and immunological similarities between human and nonhuman primates, these findings provide potential markers of susceptibility to diarrhea that could be modulated to improve infant health, especially in the developing world.

The online version of this article (10.1186/s13059-019-1789-x) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

The human body is a host to a diverse microbial community collectively known as the gut microbiota that is composed of trillions of microbial cells. These microbes encode far more genetic diversity than the human genome and play an essential role in host physiology [1–3]. The gut microbial community ferments indigestible substrates yielding energy and vitamins previously inaccessible to the host [4, 5]. Commensal microbes also communicate with the host immune system, outcompete pathogens, and produce small molecules that modulate physiological functions locally or systemically. For example, butyrate is utilized locally in the gut, while tryptophan is converted to serotonin by gut enterochromaffin cells and acts systemically [6–9]. The gut microbial community is shaped by many host genetic and environmental factors such as diet, antibiotic use, social interactions, and sanitation practices. A prime example of this is humans living a modern western lifestyle have a distinct and less-diverse gut microbial community compared to individuals living in the developing world [10–12]. This variation emphasizes the difficulty in defining what a normal healthy community is [13, 14]. While the gut microbiome has been implicated in multiple chronic, acute, and infectious diseases [15–17], its potential as a therapeutic or biomarker for disease susceptibility is difficult to determine in humans.

Here, we characterize the maturation of the infant rhesus macaque gut microbiome over the first 8 months of life in a large group of captive outdoor-housed animals at the Oregon and California National Primate Research Centers (ONPRC and CNPRC respectively). Our data suggest that the gut microbiome of outdoor-housed infant rhesus macaques is similar to that of humans living in the developing world thereby providing a suitable model for the study of diarrheal diseases, which disproportionally affect these countries. We compared the gut microbiome of animals that developed diarrhea to those that did not at two time points: (1) 1 month of age (before the onset of disease) and (2) 8 months (after disease incidence and treatment). We report that at 1 month of age the microbial community in infants that later developed diarrhea were functionally different and harbored unique Prevotella strains compared to that of infants that remained asymptomatic. At 8 months of age, animals that experienced clinical diarrhea harbored a larger burden of Campylobacter despite case-specific treatment with antibiotics and probiotics. Both direct culture and shotgun metagenomics revealed the presence of several Campylobacter species in fecal samples obtained only from animals that experienced diarrhea. These data illustrate how the rhesus macaque model can enhance our understanding of diarrheal disease pathogenesis, and support improved diagnostics and treatments.

We characterized the maturation of the rhesus macaque gut microbiota by high-throughput amplicon sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene (V4 region) of 313 rectal swabs collected from 40 dam/infant pairs housed at the ONPRC and CNPRC (Fig. 1a). To test for differences in overall microbial community composition, we utilized both unweighted (binary) and weighted (abundance based) UniFrac, a taxonomically derived measurement of similarity between microbial communities. Dissimilarity matrices of both unweighted and weighted UniFrac metrics were created and plotted using principal coordinate analysis (PcoA) (Fig. 1b and Additional file 1: Figure S1A, respectively). Since we collected samples from animals at two different sites, we determined the contribution of age and location to the variation within UniFrac dissimilarity matrices using a PERMANOVA. This analysis revealed that age explained a much more significant amount of total variation (7.6–10.2%) compared to location (0.7–1.3%) or individual animal (0.5–0.7%) (Fig. 1c). This indicates that the microbiome of outdoor-housed captive macaques raised in a Northwest climate (Oregon) is similar to the microbiome of animals raised in a more arid Southwest climate (California).

Since age was the dominant factor driving variation, samples from both ONPRC and CNPRC were merged to increase power for detecting age-related trends. Over the course of 8 months, the microbiomes of infants became more similar to those of their dams (Fig. 1b, d). As reported in humans [10, 51], younger infants (1–3 months) showed larger intergroup differences than older infants (6–8 months) when compared to dams (Fig. 1b, d). Moreover, all infants showed more intragroup variation than the dams, but this variation decreased with age (Fig. 1d). Next, we used multiple alpha diversity metrics to assess changes in composition of this microbial community. We found that phylogenetic diversity increased with age, with the exception of a decrease in diversity at the 6-month time point (Fig. 1e) and similar patterns were observed in observed OTUs and Shannon evenness (Additional file 1: Figure S1B and C). The microbiomes of the dams exhibited higher phylogenetic diversity than infants at all time points, suggesting that the gut microbiome of infant macaque continues to develop beyond 8 months of age (Fig. 1e).

We next compared the gut microbiome of infant rhesus macaques to those of human infants and children living in developing and developed countries using previously published datasets [10, 11]. First, we compared the gut microbiome of pre-weaned 1-month-old macaques to that of human infants 6 months to 2 years of age from Malawi, Amerindians from Venezuela, and the USA (Fig. 2a). This analysis indicated that the gut microbiome of young infant macaques was more similar to that of human infants in developing countries (Fig. 2b). Second, we compared the gut microbiome of weaned 8-month-old infant macaques to that of children 2–6 years old from developing (Malawi, Burkina Faso, and the Amerindians from Venezuela) and developed countries (USA and Italy) (Fig. 2c). As described for 1-month-old samples, the gut microbiome of 8-month-old infant macaques was more similar to that of children living in developing countries than western countries (Fig. 2d). Interestingly, the gut microbiome of human children in developing countries was more similar to that of 8-month-old macaques than to that of children living in developed countries (Fig. 2d).

We next defined the taxonomic landscape of the rhesus macaque gut microbiome at different ages to identify the taxa driving differences in overall diversity over time. At the phyla level, regardless of age, the rhesus macaque microbiota was dominated by Bacteroidetes (primary genus Prevotella) and Firmicutes (Fig. 3a). The high prevalence of Prevotella in the microbiome of the captive macaque is likely due to the low percentage of animal fats in the monkey chow given the susceptibility of this species to bile acids secreted in response to meat consumption [52]. In contrast, Actinobacteria (primary genus Bifidobacteria) and Spirochetes (primary genus Treponema) displayed opposing age-dependent trends (Fig. 3b). Bifidobacterium plays a key role in the metabolism of breast milk oligosaccharides [53] and their disappearance at the 6-month time point coincides with when most infant macaques are weaned. Inversely, the relative abundance of Spirochetes increased steadily throughout the 8 months (Fig. 3b). We explored finer-scale taxonomy by pairwise age-group comparisons using LEfSe [54]. Comparing the microbiomes of all infants (1–8 months) to those of the dams identified 132 significantly different taxa (Additional file 2: Table S1). Of importance, the genera Fibrobacter, Treponema, and Lactobacillus were enriched in dams, most likely due to the consumption of a high-fiber chow [55]. On the other hand, Campylobacter, Bifidobacterium, Catenibacterium, Succinivibrio, and Helicobacter were more abundant in infants (Fig. 3c and Additional file 2: Table S1).

Over the course of the study, 18.75% (15/80) of infants were hospitalized with clinical diarrhea and required veterinary care including oral hydration, antibiotics, and probiotics administered on a case-by-case basis (Additional file 2: Table S2). Approximately 47% (7/15) of the diarrhea cases involved 2 or more episodes resulting in repeated hospitalization. Approximately 70% of the cases were initially diagnosed as Campylobacter coli-associated diarrhea (two cases were diagnosed with both C. coli and Shigella flexneri), 9% were diagnosed with Campylobacter lari-associated diarrhea, 4% were diagnosed with S. flexneri alone (one case), and 17% had no definitive diagnosis at the time of their first hospitalization.

In contrast, at the 8-month time point, the microbiomes of infants that experienced at least one episode of diarrhea and associated treatment were distinct from those of asymptomatic infants that did not develop diarrhea based on unweighted UniFrac dissimilarity but not weighted Unifrac or Phylogenetic diversity (Fig. 4b, c, Additional file 1: Figure S1D). Additionally, the intragroup variation between the 1- and 8-month time points as measured by 1-way ANOVA using Holm-Sidak’s multiple comparison test of Unifrac distance decreased within the asymptomatic group but not in the infant that experienced diarrhea (Fig. 4d). Moreover, at the 1-month time point, infants that would go on to experience diarrhea had higher intragroup variability than asymptomatic infants at the same time point (Fig. 4d). Additionally, at the 8-month time point, 30 taxa were differentially abundant between infants that remained asymptomatic and those that experienced at least one episode of diarrhea (Fig. 4e, Additional file 2: Table S3). Notably, the microbiomes of infants that experienced diarrhea were enriched for the genus Campylobacter, while those of asymptomatic animals were enriched in Helicobacter macacae (Fig. 4f). This is consistent with the detection of Campylobacter in the majority of the diarrhea in cases (Additional file 2: Table S2). Additional analysis showed that both of these genera were detected in 307 of 320 samples and at a relative abundance of greater than 2% in 104 samples. Interestingly, these two genera only co-occurred at a relative abundance of greater than 2% in only 3 out of 104 samples, suggestive of potential niche competition (Additional file 1: Figure S1E and F).

Shotgun sequencing provides higher strain level resolution than 16S amplicon sequencing and elucidates functional potential of the total gut microbial community. Therefore, to better assess the microbial shifts associated with diarrhea/treatment, we next used shotgun metagenomics to compare the microbiomes of the infants that developed diarrhea and a subset of those that remained asymptomatic both at the 1-month time point (prior to the onset of disease, 6 asymptomatic and 5 diarrhea) and at the 8-month time point (after disease resolution, 10 asymptomatic and 7 diarrhea). While the overall taxonomic composition was not found to be significantly different based on host status at either time point (Additional file 1: Figure S2A and B). Several bacterial species were differentially abundant between these two groups at both time points. At the 1-month time point, Mitsuokella spp. and Lachnospiraceae were more abundant in infants that remained asymptomatic, while abundance of Roseburia intestinalis was higher in those that later developed diarrhea (Additional file 1: Figure S2C). At the 8-month time points, the microbiomes of infants that remained asymptomatic were enriched for Helicobacter macacae, Lactobacilli johnsonii, Ruminococcus callidus, and Treponema succinifaciens species and other commensals (Additional file 1: Figure S2C). On the other hand, microbiomes of 8-month-old animals that experienced diarrhea were enriched in Acidaminococcus intestni, a bacterium associated with growth faltering in human children [57] and Lachnospiraceae (5163FAA) (Additional file 1: Figure S2D). In contrast to the culture-based results (Additional file 2: Table S2) and 16S data (Fig. 4e), this analysis did not identify Campylobacter as a differentially abundant genus. This is most likely due to the lack of rhesus macaque-specific Campylobacter genomes in the MetaPhlan2 database.

At the 8-month time point, 32 pathways were differentially abundant between infants that remained asymptomatics and those that experienced diarrhea (Fig. 5d and Additional file 2: Table S5). Notably, the fecal microbiomes of monkeys that did not experience diarrhea were enriched in pathways associated with homolactic fermentation and glycolysis. Conversely, the microbiomes of infant macaques that experienced diarrhea were enriched in pathways for aerobic respiration and the breakdown of the SCFA propionate via the methyl citrate cycle most commonly found in Proteobacteria (Fig. 5d, Additional file 2: Table S5).

Taxonomy assigned using only short reads from shotgun metagenomics libraries can miss organisms that do not have a match in a database, which could be particularly important for studies using samples from NHPs. To address this pitfall, we assembled metagenomic reads of fecal samples into contigs that were subsequently binned into putative genomes. At the 1-month time point, 45 genomes were assembled with a completeness > 80% and contamination < 2% from 11 samples (5 diarrhea, 6 asymptomatic, Additional file 2: Table S6). At the 8-month time point, 50 genomes were assembled with a completeness > 80% and contamination < 2% from 17 samples (7 diarrhea, 10 asymptomatic, Additional file 2: Table S6). Six Bifidobacterium genomes assembled from the 1-month samples were closely related to three known Bifidobacterium species, including two that are most closely related to Bifidobacteria kashiwanohense PV20-2 which was assembled from a human infant in Kenya [58] (Additional file 1: Figure S3A). The number of reads that aligned to the six assembled Bifidobacterium genomes significantly decreased between the 1- and 8-month time point, in line with the 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing data and the anticipated decreased in this taxon’s abundance after weaning (Additional file 1: Figure S3B).

Additionally, some of the genomes assembled from rectal swabs obtained from animals that experienced diarrhea are closely related to bacteria commonly associated with the human oropharyngeal microbiome. Specifically, three genomes were assigned to the Streptococcus genera and two genomes were identified as Lactobacillus salivarius [60–62] (Additional file 2: Table S6).

In this study, we leveraged the infant rhesus macaque animal model to investigate the role of the microbiome in mediating susceptibility to diarrheal diseases. Here we define the maturation of the infant rhesus macaque gut microbiome through the first 8 months of life, the window during which infant macaques are at the highest risk of developing chronic diarrhea [45, 56]. Additionally, we used shotgun metagenomics to functionally characterize the microbial communities in animals that developed diarrhea versus those that remained asymptomatic before disease onset in order to identify potential biomarkers of susceptibility.

Functionally, at 8 months, the gut microbiomes of healthy individuals were enriched in pathways for energy catabolism via fermentation indicative of an anaerobic environment that yields energy for the host. In contrast, the gut microbiomes of individuals that experienced diarrhea were enriched in pathways for sulfur metabolism and aerobic respiration indicative of a dysbiotic environment enriched in Proteobacteria able to metabolize sulfur [92, 93].

In summary, this study establishes maturation timeline of the infant rhesus macaque gut microbiome and its association with their adult mothers. Our key findings highlight similarities in development trajectories of the human and macaque infant microbiomes as well as homology of the adult and infant macaque microbiome to that of humans living in poor sanitary conditions and rural communities. Moreover, our data suggest that susceptibility to diarrhea may be impacted by the presence of a microbial community enriched in the potential to produce immunomodulatory products. Diarrhea results in lasting taxonomic and functional shifts in the gut microbiome. These results pave the way to identify potential microbial biomarkers of susceptibility to diarrheal illnesses and suggest novel diagnostic and vaccination strategies.

All rhesus macaque studies were overseen and approved by the OHSU/ONPRC and University of California-Davis/CNPRC Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees’ (IACUC) in accordance with the National Institutes of Health guide for the care and use of laboratory animals. Animals were housed in accordance with standards established by the US Federal Animal Welfare Act and The Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. All animals were tested annually for simian viruses (Simian Immunodeficiency Virus, Simian Retrovirus 2, Macacine herpesvirus 1, and Simian T lymphotrophic virus) and received a mammalian old tuberculin test semi-annually. Rectal swabs were collected from 80 infants (n = 40 from ONPRC, n = 40 from CNPRC) at 1 and 8 months of age (41 males and 39 females). A subset of 20 of the infants also had swabs collected at 3 and 6 months. At 1 month after birth, rectal swabs were also collected from the dams, who had an average age of 6.5 years (range of 3–19 years of age) at the time of birth (Fig. 1a). Rectal swabs and fecal samples were immediately snap frozen upon collection and stored at − 80 °C until DNA extraction.

Infant rhesus macaques are exclusively breastfed for the first 3 months of life, after which they begin to explore solid food that the dams are consuming, and are typically completely weaned by 6–7 months of age. This is only a generalized timeline, and we were unable to collect exact time of weaning for individual infants. Outdoor-housed rhesus macaques are fed twice daily with Lab Diet, Monkey Diet 5038 (Ralston Purina, St Louis, MO, USA). This diet is guaranteed to contain no more than 15% crude protein, 5% crude fat, 6% crude fiber, 9% ash, and 12% moisture. This diet is supplemented with seasonal fresh fruit and produce once daily. Municipal water was available ad libitum.

Total DNA was extracted from rectal swabs using the PowerSoil DNA Isolation Kit (MO BIO Laboratories, Carlsbad, CA, USA), and a 30-s bead beating step using a Mini-Beadbeater-16 (BioSpec Products, Bartlesville, OK, USA). This genomic DNA was used as the template to amplify the hypervariable V4 region of the 16S rRNA gene using PCR primers (515F/806R with the reverse primers including a 12-bp barcode) and reactions containing: 50 mM Tris (pH 8.3), 500 μg/ml bovine serum albumin (BSA), 2.5 mM MgCl2, 250 μM of each deoxynucleotide triphosphate (dNTP), 400 nM of each primer, 5 μl of DNA template, and 0.25 units of JumpStart Taq DNA polymerase (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA). Thermal cycling parameters were 94 °C for 5 min; 35 cycles of 94 °C for 20 s, 50 °C for 20 s, and 72 °C for 30 s, followed by 72 °C for 5 min. PCR products were purified using a MinElute 96 UF PCR Purification Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA). Libraries were sequenced (1 × 300 bases) using an Illumina MiSeq.

Raw FASTQ 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequences were uploaded and processed using the QIIME2 analysis pipeline [94]. Briefly, sequences were demultiplexed and the quality filtered using DADA2 [95], which filters chimeric sequences and generates sequence variants table equivalent to an operational taxonomic unit (OTU) table at 100% sequence similarity. Sequence variants were then aligned using the MAFFT [96] and a phylogenetic tree was constructed using the FastTree2 program [97]. Taxonomy was assigned to sequence variants using q2-feature-classifier [98] against SILVA database (release 119) [99]. To prevent sequencing depth bias, samples were rarified to 13,000 sequences per sample prior to alpha and beta diversity analysis. QIIME 2 was also used to generate the following alpha diversity metrics: richness (as observed taxonomic units), Shannon evenness, and phylogenetic diversity. Beta diversity was estimated in QIIME 2 using weighted and unweighted UniFrac distances [100].

16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing data obtained from fecal samples collected from children (6 months old to 6 years old) living in the USA, Malawi, and Venezuela (Amerindians) was obtained from MG-RAST (Accession number: qiime:850) [10]. Additional 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing data from fecal samples collected from children (2–6 years old) living in Italy and Burkina Faso were downloaded from the European Nucleotide Archive (Study ID: PRJEB2079) [11]. These samples were then imported to QIIME2 and rarified to 13,000 reads per sample. Taxonomy was assigned using the full-length SILVA database (release 119) at the 99% OTU cutoff. Genus level (L6) taxonomy tables were merged, and Bray-Curtis dissimilarity matrices were generated using QIIME2.

Shotgun metagenomic libraries were prepared for a subset of infants that developed diarrhea and a subset of those that remained asymptomatic both at the 1-month time point (prior to the onset of disease, 6 asymptomatic and 5 diarrhea) and at the 8-month time point (after disease resolution, 10 asymptomatic and 7 diarrhea). Libraries were prepared from 50 ng of gDNA using the Illumina Nextera library prep per the manufacturer’s recommended protocol and sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq 4000 2 × 100. Raw demultiplexed reads were quality filtered using Trimmomatic [101], and potential host reads were removed by aligning trimmed reads to the Macaca mulata genome (Mmul 8.0.1) using BowTie2 [102]. After quality filtering and decontamination, an average of 14.25 million reads (min 8.6, max 20.8 million reads) per sample were used for downstream analysis. Trimmed and decontaminated reads were then annotated using the HUMAnN2 pipeline using default setting with the UniRef50 database and assigned to MetaCyc pathways. Functional annotations were normalized using copies per million (CPM) reads prior to statistical analysis [103–105]. Species level taxonomy was assigned to quality-controlled short reads using Metaphlan2 [106].

Genome assemblies were generated for each sample individually. Trimmed and decontaminated reads were assembled into contigs using meta-SPAdes with default parameters [107] and binned into putative genomes using MetaBat [108]. Genome completeness/contamination was tested using CheckM [109], and all bins with a completeness > 80% and contamination < 2% were annotated using PATRIC [59]. Taxonomy of draft genomes was determined using PATRICs’ similar genome finder. Prevotella genomes were annotated and plotted using the Anvi’o pangenomic pipeline [110].

All statistical analyses were conducted using PRISM (V5) and the R package Vegan [111]. QIIME2 was used to calculate alpha-diversity metrics; observed OTUs, Shannon evenness, and beta diversity; and weighted/unweighted UniFrac distances [6]. Bray-Curtis dissimilarity matrices were constructed for both species-level relative abundance, and normalized gene annotations using the vegdist function in the R package Vegan for shotgun metagenomic data. Principal coordinate analysis (PcoA) was conducted using the R function cmdscale. PERMANOVAs were performed using the Vegan function ADONIS. Unpaired t-test and one-way and two-way ANOVA were implemented using PRISM where noted to generate p values, and utilizing the corresponding post hoc test when the initial ANOVA was significant. The LEfSe algorithm was used to identify differentially abundant taxa and pathways between groups with a logarithmic linear discriminant analysis (LDA) score cutoff of 2 [54].



Publisher’s Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

