Gut microbiome and plasma metabolome changes in rats after oral gavage of nanoparticles: sensitive indicators of possible adverse health effects

The oral uptake of nanoparticles is an important route of human exposure and requires solid models for hazard assessment. While the systemic availability is generally low, ingestion may not only affect gastrointestinal tissues but also intestinal microbes. The gut microbiota contributes essentially to human health, whereas gut microbial dysbiosis is known to promote several intestinal and extra-intestinal diseases. Gut microbiota-derived metabolites, which are found in the blood stream, serve as key molecular mediators of host metabolism and immunity.

Gut microbiota and the plasma metabolome were analyzed in male Wistar rats receiving either SiO2 (1000 mg/kg body weight/day) or Ag nanoparticles (100 mg/kg body weight/day) during a 28-day oral gavage study. Comprehensive clinical, histopathological and hematological examinations showed no signs of nanoparticle-induced toxicity. In contrast, the gut microbiota was affected by both nanoparticles, with significant alterations at all analyzed taxonomical levels. Treatments with each of the nanoparticles led to an increased abundance of Prevotellaceae, a family with gut species known to be correlated with intestinal inflammation. Only in Ag nanoparticle-exposed animals, Akkermansia, a genus known for its protective impact on the intestinal barrier was depleted to hardly detectable levels. In SiO2 nanoparticles-treated animals, several genera were significantly reduced, including probiotics such as Enterococcus. From the analysis of 231 plasma metabolites, we found 18 metabolites to be significantly altered in Ag-or SiO2 nanoparticles-treated rats. For most of these metabolites, an association with gut microbiota has been reported previously. Strikingly, both nanoparticle-treatments led to a significant reduction of gut microbiota-derived indole-3-acetic acid in plasma. This ligand of the arylhydrocarbon receptor is critical for regulating immunity, stem cell maintenance, cellular differentiation and xenobiotic-metabolizing enzymes.

The combined profiling of intestinal microbiome and plasma metabolome may serve as an early and sensitive indicator of gut microbiome changes induced by orally administered nanoparticles; this will help to recognize potential adverse effects of these changes to the host.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12989-022-00459-w.

The oral exposure to nanoparticles (NP) requires solid models for the assessment of potential hazards. This includes systemic effects due to nanoparticles absorbed from the intestinal tract as well as local effects on the intestine and the gut microbiota. While the systemic availability of NP is often low [1], local effects on the intestine may be more relevant. Effects of foodborne NP on the gut microbiota are not well-understood, much less the consequences of these changes to the host organisms [2]. Food grade Silica SiO2 NP (E551) are mainly used as an anticaking food additive to support the flowability of powdered products. In addition, they are also used in cosmetics and in medical products. The average human dietary exposure of amorphous silica was estimated to be 9.4 mg/kg body weight/day of which 1.8 mg/kg body weight/day seems to be nano-sized [3]. Silver NP are added as antimicrobial additives in medical products (e.g. wound dressings, hand gels, cavity filler), food packaging and kitchenware, but also as pearlescent pigments in coatings of confectionary and chocolates (E 174) [4–6]. The commercialization of these nanoparticle-based products is expanding with a global production of up to 1.5 million tons of SiO2 NP and more than 500 tons annually for Ag NP, thus increasing the potential for oral uptake [7]. Safety assessment of these NP should therefore increasingly focus on oral toxicity studies.

Here, we present data from a subacute oral toxicity study in accordance with OECD test guideline no. 407 with a daily administration of 1000 mg/kg body weight of SiO2 NP or 100 mg/kg body weight of Ag NP to male Wistar rats. We comprehensively assessed potential toxic effects of these nanoparticles based on clinical parameters and analyzed composition and abundance of the gut microbiome community. To address effectors of the microbial alterations, we additionally analyzed the levels of metabolites in the plasma of SiO2 and Ag NP-treated animals by liquid- and gas-chromatography coupled to mass-spectrometry.

The effect of ingested NP on classic toxicological in vivo endpoints and on the gut microbiome and microbiome-affected plasma metabolome was assessed by a 28-day oral uptake study in male Wistar rats following the OECD test guideline no. 407 (TG 407). Here, we performed a limit dose test, which is the preferred test when toxicity is expected to be low and lethality is unlikely at the limit dose. We used the suggested dose level of 1000 mg/kg body weight/day for SiO2 NP [49]. For Ag NP, with an expected higher toxic potential, 100 mg/kg body weight/day was used. The applied dose is well below the LD50 of 280 mg/kg body weight/day found for ionic silver in rats [25, 50], and therefore it seemed to be appropriate to follow TG 407.

All animals treated with Ag50 EO (herein referred to as Ag NP) showed black-discolored feces. The effect was assessed as being related to the test substance but not as being adverse. Food- and water-consumption of all animals were not affected, and the body weight development was not impaired (Additional file 1: Table S1).

Nearly all parameters measured in blood and urine samples of Ag NP-treated animals did not differ significantly from the values of the control animals. The following significant changes were observed but assessed not to be related to NP-treatment (see Table
1 and Additional file 1: Tables S2–S4).

In animals treated with Ag NP, red blood cell (RBC) counts were higher (8.4 Tera/L) and mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC; 20.41 mmol/L) as well as relative reticulocyte counts (1.7%) were lower compared to control animals. However, RBC and relative reticulocyte counts were within historical control ranges (RBC: 7.59–8.60 Tera/L, relative reticulocyte counts: 1.4–3.1%). The calculated MCHC value was slightly below the historical control range (MCHC: 20.43–23.73 mmol/L), but all measured red blood cell parameters in these individuals were either within the study control range (hematokrit and hemoglobin) or the historical control range (RBC) and were therefore regarded as incidental and not treatment-related.

In various locations of the digestive tract, a discoloration of the content was observed in Ag NP-treated animals. This discoloration was regarded to be caused by the test substance. We did not recognize discoloration of any tissue, i.e. of the mucosa of the organs of the gastrointestinal tract. We do not assume that this is a sign of argyria as observed for human skin [25]. Most likely, the presence of the silver particles in the lumen of the gastrointestinal tract themselves changed the color of its content. Macroscopically, no change of the color of the mucosa was noticed. Small particles of yellowish to dark color, however, were observed during microscopic examinations of the duodenum, i.e. in the submucosa of the villi tip and within macrophages.

In addition, all animals showed minimal to slight inflammatory cell infiltrates in the submucosa of the glandular stomach. No other treatment-related macroscopic and histopathological findings were observed. No treatment-related organ weight changes were detected in any of the animals (data not shown).

The clinical pathology results for SiO2_naked (herein referred to as SiO2 NP) had already been published by Buesen et al. [51]. No treatment-related changes regarding in life data, clinical pathology or histopathology had been reported. Data shown in Tables S1–S4 (Additional file 1) are provided only for comparison, for further details see Buesen et al. [51].

To determine if the oral exposure of nanoparticles affects the rat intestinal microbes, we performed a 16S rRNA microbial/taxonomic profiling of different feces samples. First, feces were collected from each animal one day before the beginning of the treatment (untreated control, UC). Second, feces were collected at day 25 after the daily gavage with either PBS + BSA (vehicle control group, VC), Ag NP (100 mg/kg body weight/day) or SiO2 NP (1000 mg/kg body weight/day). DNA from these samples was extracted followed by next generation sequencing (NGS) analysis and DNA sequences were analyzed with QIIME2 using the SILVA database.

The comparison of β-diversity between the treatment groups at day 25 was then performed in a separate analysis including only the samples after the gavage period (Additional file 1: Fig. S2b). The samples belonging to individual treatment groups, and in particular the vehicle controls, appeared to be less aggregated compared to the tight clustering of samples at day 0. Nevertheless, a clear separation between samples of the different treatment groups (VC, Ag NP, SiO2 NP) could be observed, although some limited overlapping between vehicle control samples and the Ag NP group was noted. All samples after SiO2 NP treatment were completely separated from VCs and from samples after gavage with Ag, indicating that the individual rats had been developed into differentiated treatment groups, each with common characteristics of their gut microbiota.

To assess effects of Ag NP on the rat intestinal microbiome, we analyzed the ASVs after taxonomic assignment from level 2 (phylum) to 6 (genus). As expected from the results of the β-diversity analysis, the inter-animal variability was relatively high in many cases. The enhanced variability likely arises from individual differences during the development and sexual maturation of the rats within the 25-day period of treatment, compared to the relatively small differences in diversity determined at day 0 (for further details see Additional file 1: Fig. S2a). Similar individual variabilities in rodent gut microbiota have been reported before [53]. As shown in Fig. 1a, gavage of Ag NP (at 100 mg/kg body weight/day) led to structural changes in the gut microbiota at the level of phyla. In total, four different predominant phyla were identified with a relative proportion of more than 1%. The two most abundant phyla, Firmicutes and Bacteroidota, together represented about 81% of the total ASVs in vehicle treated animals, and more than 91% in rats after NP treatments. After gavage with Ag NP, the level of Bacteroidota increased from 23.5% in the controls (VC) towards 30.4% (p = 0.087), whereas Firmicutes stayed nearly at the same level (60.8% vs. 57.5% in VC, Fig. 1a, for further details see Additional file 1: Table S7). This led to a decrease of the Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio (2:1 vs. 2.5:1 in VC). In addition, the phylum Verrucomicrobia was reduced in abundance from 1.26% (VC) to 0.04%, and the level of Proteobacteria decreased from 16.8% (VC) to 7.8% (changes not significant; Fig. 1a, Additional file 1: Table S7).

The changes in the order Lactobacillales further originated from a reduction of genus Lactobacillus (10.5% vs. 17.4% in VC, not significant; Fig. 2, Additional file 1: S11, S12), which was the most abundant genus in control rats. The observed elevation of the order Oscillospirales (Fig. 1c) was mainly determined by a significant increase of the family Ruminococcaceae (9.0% vs. 6.4% in VC; p = 0.038) and Oscillospiraceae (7.9% vs. 5.8% in VC, not significant; Fig. 1d, Additional file 1: Table S10). The associated genera responsible for the significant increase in abundance of the two families, Prevotellaceae (5.6% vs. 1.9% in the controls, p = 0.024) and Ruminococcaceae could not be identified in this analysis.

The results from rats orally exposed to 1000 mg/kg body weight/day SiO2 NP compared to those treated with vehicle control disclosed that SiO2 treatment also induced several structural alterations in the gut microbiota. At the level of phyla, we found a significant increase in Firmicutes (69.6% vs. 57.5% in controls, p = 0.008), whereas virtually no change was observed in the abundance of Bacteroidota (25.2% vs. 23.5% in VC) (Fig. 1a, Additional file 1: Table S7). Opposing to the effect determined for Ag, this rearrangement led to a slight increase in the Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio (2.8:1 vs. 2.5:1 in controls). The alterations determined for the phylum Verrucomicrobia also differed clearly from those induced by Ag (Fig. 1a). The abundance of Verrucomicrobia and the subordinated genus Akkermansia raised to 2.4% after the gavage of SiO2 (vs. 1.3% in VC, p = 0.087).

Similar to the findings after oral treatment with Ag, the significant increase in Clostridia observed in SiO2-treated rats was mediated by a significant elevation of the two families Oscillospiraceae (11.2% vs. 5.8% in controls, p = 0.038) and Ruminococcaceae (13.4% vs. 6.4% in controls, p = 0.008; Fig. 1d, Additional file 1: Table S10). Genera accounting for these shifts could not be clearly identified. Other alterations within the class Clostridia differed from those observed for Ag treatment. In rats treated with SiO2 NP, a clear increase in the order Lachnospirales and the family Lachnospiraceae (18.5% vs. 10.1% in control, p = 0.038) was observed (Fig. 1c, 1d, Additional file 1: Table S9, S10). We also found the level of Prevotellacea being significantly increased after SiO2 NP exposure (4.5% vs. 1.9% in controls, p = 0.014; Fig. 1d, Additional file 1: Table S10). Similar increases in abundance of the family Prevotellacea were shown for Ag treatment, however, our analysis could not identify the associated genera.

A potential impact of the gut microbiome on the host’s health and the prevention or progression of diseases is mediated most likely by microbiota-derived small molecules. The detection and analysis of these molecules within metabolome studies is therefore crucial for understanding microbiome effects. A summary of qualitative changes in the plasma metabolome of rats after the 28-day oral exposure of SiO2 NP has been published before by Buesen et al. [51]. Here, we analyzed the metabolomic changes in male rats orally exposed to Ag NP and SiO2 NP in more detail, including effects of the microbiota on the metabolome. We also compared the metabolome changes induced by the nanoparticles with the metabolome profiles of eight previously investigated antibiotics [40, 48] (Additional file 1: Table S13).

In the class of amino acids and related, SiO2-treated rats display significantly reduced levels of trans-4-hydroxyproline (0.85-fold compared to the controls). Most importantly, we found gut microbiota-derived indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) to be significantly reduced in the plasma of both, Ag NP- (0.57-fold of control levels) and SiO2 NP-treated (0.78-fold of control levels) rats (Table
2). Compared to the metabolomic data from recent studies addressing the effects of relevant antibiotics (Doxycycline, Gentamicin, Levofloxacin, Moxifloxacin and Neomycin) [40, 48], a similar or stronger decline in the level of IAA after treatment with most of the antibiotics could be confirmed (Additional file 1: Table S13).

In this work, we provide toxicological, microbial and metabolomics data regarding the impact of orally applied Ag (100 mg/kg body weight/day) and SiO2 NP (1000 mg/kg body weight/day) to male Wistar rats. Dosing for both NP was clearly higher than the human daily oral intake of these NP (0.3–0.8 mg/kg body weight/day for SiO2 [56] and 0.005 mg/kg body weight /day [57–59] for Ag). Since the individual unintended uptake of NP (e.g. during an accidental scenario or in a working place situation) or the intended uptake as a dietary supplement or medicine can be much higher, testing the limit dose is of relevance for these exposures and could also provide general hazard information. The OECD test guideline no. 407, however, may benefit from updating and adapting for future testing of nanomaterials.

Altogether, our results from a limit dose test suggest that oral exposure of rats to either Ag NP or SiO2 NP led to changes in the gut bacterial communities that, in turn, can alter the metabolic profile with possible long-term adverse health effects (Table
3). Dose-response studies in the future should be conducted to assess the potential health risks of doses based on the estimated average human dietary intake.

In this study, the effects of an oral exposure of two well-characterized nanoparticles, SiO2 NP and Ag NP, were investigated in male Wistar rats. We did not find any treatment-related signs of toxicity in histopathology and clinical pathology, but we observed significant changes in gut microbiota, which have been related to adverse health effects, and changes in plasma metabolites, which are associated with microbiome changes. Our results demonstrate that an oral uptake of SiO2 NP or Ag NP can affect gut microbiota in vivo. The resulting changes of the intestinal microbiome were specific for each type of NP. Some of the bacterial families and genera, which are known to play important roles in keeping individuals healthy, were found to be reduced in the NP-treated animals. Table
4 summarizes the most important findings from this study (Table
4).

Albeit no signs of toxicity were found in the rats after 28 days of NP exposure, our results suggest that long-term effects are conceivable and should be taken into consideration. Future studies with a combined analysis of gut microbiota and plasma metabolome over protracted periods of nanomaterial exposure and dose ranges, reflecting more the average dietary intake of humans will help to understand the relevance of the altered metabolic profiles.

The test substances were selected from the set of the nanoGEM study [98, 99] i.e. SiO2 NP (SiO2.naked NP without different surface modifications; Levasil® 200) and Ag NP (Ag50 EO NP). SiO2 was supplied by BASF SE, Ludwigshafen, Germany, Ag NP by Bayer Material Sciences, Leverkusen, Germany. The test substances were delivered as dispersions and were characterized in detail in accordance with the physico-chemical endpoints described in the guidance on information requirements for nanomaterials [100] to EU regulation No. 1907/2006 on the Registration, Evaluation, Authorization and Restriction of Chemicals [101]. The following test substance properties were determined making use of the indicated methodologies [98, 102, 103].

An overview of the primary and secondary physico-chemical properties of both test substances is provided in Table S14 (Additional file 1), which has been adapted from [102, 103]. Further information on the preparation and characterization of the set of nanoGEM test substances is available from [98].

The original test suspensions, as provided by the suppliers, were shaken and mixed for 2 min using a vortex mixer to ensure a homogeneous distribution of particles. Next, the desired amount of test substance was weighed and then filled up with the test substance vehicle PBS + BSA to obtain uniform test substance solutions of 10 %wt solutions. Test substance preparations were produced daily and were kept homogenous until administration by continuous stirring with a magnetic stirrer.

Since nanoparticles can agglomerate and sediment quickly in suspensions and this can considerably affect the final effective dosage reaching the target organism, it is essential to assess the homogeneity of test substances and to verify the effective concentration in the test substance preparations. Therefore, at the onset of the administration period, homogeneity and concentration control analyses of all test substance suspensions (‘as delivered’ and ‘as prepared’ in PBS + BSA) were performed by inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometry (ICP–OES). For this purpose, three separate samples of the test substance preparations were taken from the bottom, middle, and top layers of the vials (which would necessarily have the same test substance concentrations in homogenous suspensions). The content of the metallic element of the respective test substances (i.e. silicon in the case of the SiO2) was measured and the mass of the entire test substance molecule derived from these measurements. The mass of the substances used for surface functionalization was considered to be negligible [104].

Both test substances were well dispersed in water and had average agglomeration numbers (AAN, i.e., the average number of primary particles in the agglomerate) of 1. SiO2 remained stable in PBS + BSA with only minimal agglomeration, but also here BSA adsorption was recorded. When diluted in DMEM + FCS, SiO2 was moderately agglomerated (AAN = 28). The iso-electric point of SiO2 was at a pH value below 1.

When diluted in DMEM + FCS, Ag remained well dispersed (AAN = 1); the particle size in PBS + BSA was not determined. The iso-electric point of Ag was at a pH value of 2.5.

The 28-day oral toxicity studies were performed with male Wistar rats (Crl:WI(Han), Charles River Laboratories, Sulzfeld, Germany). The animal facility, in which all animal work was performed, holds a certificate from the International Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care (AAALAC). The animal studies were performed with approval of the local authorizing agency for animal experiments (Landesuntersuchungsamt Rheinland-Pfalz, Koblenz, Germany) on 30th of January 2009, as referenced by the approval number 23 177-07/G 08-3-007, and study protocols complied with the respective guidelines. For SiO2, the experiment was performed as limit test, applying a single dose level of 1000 mg/kg body weight/day (cf. paragraph 18 of OECD TG 407) [49]. Ag was applied at a dose level of 100 mg/kg body weight/day. The test substance preparations were administered daily by oral gavage over a period of four weeks to groups of five male rats. Control groups of 5 male animals received only the vehicle PBS + BSA. Animals were regularly subjected to detailed clinical observations, assessment of food and water consumption and the body weight; hematological and clinical chemical examinations were performed toward the end of the administration period. Upon completion of the administration period, all animals were subjected to a full, detailed gross necropsy and histopathological examinations were performed on all organs listed in OECD test guideline no. 407, paragraph 43 [49].

As described by van Ravenzwaay et al. and Kamp et al. [45, 46], EDTA-K3 blood samples of all rats taken on day of sacrifice were analyzed in regard to their metabolite profiles upon metabolite extraction by a proprietary method: GC–MS and LC–MS/MS were applied for broad profiling and hormone measurement. The method resulted in 225 semi-quantitative analytes, 171 of which were chemically identified and 54 were structurally unknown. Analysis of the recorded metabolite profiles was performed making use of the MetaMap® Tox database [105], (cf. Information box MetaMap® Tox methodology).

The data were analyzed by univariate and multivariate statistical methods. The day-stratified heteroscedastic t-test ("Welch test") was applied to compare metabolite levels of NP-treated groups with respective controls. For all metabolites, changes were calculated as the ratio of the mean of metabolite levels in individual rats in a treatment group relative to mean of metabolite levels in rats in a matched control group. The p values, t-values, and ratios of corresponding group medians were collected as metabolic profiles and fed into the MetaMap®Tox database [106]. In the database, all treatment groups were compared to the controls of the corresponding study. The profile strength of the metabolic profile was addressed. This parameter represents the rounded down average of absolute medians of t-values and does not only include the absolute number of significantly changed metabolites, but also the magnitude of the respective changes. The best balance for finding the maximum number of truly regulated metabolites, while minimizing the number of false positive regulated metabolites, was obtained at a p value of 0.15. Therefore, for pattern recognition p values up to 0.2 were used in the database for plasma. For a detailed description on the use of statistics in MetaMap®Tox see van Ravenzwaay et al. [106].

For this purpose, the animals were transferred into metabolism cages (no food or drinking water provided) in the afternoon preceding the day fixed sampling. On the following morning, urine samples were taken for the scheduled urine analysis, whereas feces were directly frozen. All feces samples were stored at − 80 °C for further analyses.

Feces of male rats were collected towards the end of the administration period, i.e. on day 25 of the study and stored at − 80 °C. DNA isolation from rat feces was performed using the innuSPEED Stool DNA Kit (analytikjena, Jena, Germany) according to the instructions of the manufacturer. In particular, we used samples of 300 mg feces, added 1 mL of lysis solution (provided in the innuSPEED stool kit DNA kit) and homogenized it for about 30 min. After sample cleanup, binding and washing according to protocol 2 of the innuSPEED stool DNA Kit manual, DNA was eluted from the column using 2 × 100 µl of elution buffer, and subsequently stored at − 20 °C. Quality and purity of the isolated genomic DNA was confirmed by agarose gel-electrophoresis and spectrophotometry on the NanoDrop 2000 device (Fisher Scientific, Schwerte, Germany). DNA concentration was estimated with the Qubit 2.0 instrument applying the Qubit dsDNA HS Assay (Life Technologies, Invitrogen division, Darmstadt, Germany).

For NGS library preparation, the recommended protocol for preparing 16S ribosomal RNA gene amplicons for the Illumina MiSeq system was used (Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA, USA). The suggested universal bacterial primers (Bakt_341F:5′-CCTACGGGNGGCWGCAG-3′ and Bakt_805r:5′-GACTACHVGGGTATCTAATCC-3′) were utilized for amplifying the V3 and V4 hypervariable regions of the bacterial 16S rRNA gene with polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using the KAPA Hifi HotStart Ready Mix (Roche Diagnostics Deutschland, Mannheim, Germany). Purity and exact fragment size of amplicons were determined with the Caliper GX system using the HT DNA High Sensitivity LabChip Kit (PerkinElmer, Rodgau, Germany). In a second PCR, sample-specific “barcode”-primers and adapter sequences were attached. All libraries were normalized and pooled for an Illumina MiSeq sequencing run using the MiSeq Reagent Kit version (v.) 3 (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) with marginally overlapping 300 base pairs (bp) paired end reads.

The quality of the 16S rRNA gene sequencing data was analyzed using FastQC v0.11.5 [107]. The reads were quality trimmed using Sickle v1.33 (https://github.com/najoshi/sickle) and analyzed with Qiime2 (2020.11) [108]. Briefly, the reads were imported into the Qiime2 pipeline and demultiplexed. The included DADA2 pipeline was then used to denoise the 18,305,252 paired sequence reads, remove chimeric sequences, and infer the amplicon sequence variants (ASV) [109]. Taxonomy classification of ASVs was then performed against the full-length Silva database (v138, 99% identity cutoff) using the q2-feature-classifier [110, 111]. The PCoA of Bray–Curtis distance was calculated using the ASV data. Qiime2 view (https://view.qiime2.org/) was used for visualization. Relative abundance of ASVs from level 2 (phylum) to 6 (genus) were used for further analysis. The differences in the relative abundance between the three groups were analyzed at each level with the Mann–Whitney U test (alpha = 0.05). Alpha diversity (i.e. richness and evenness) was calculated ASV-based with the Shannon–Wiener and the Inverse Simpson Index for biodiversity using Microsoft Excel®, and evaluated by Student’s t-test with significance defined as p < 0.05. Rarefaction curves generated from the ASVs suggested adequate sampling coverage was achieved in all samples (Additional file 1: Fig. S5). Beta-diversity was calculated with Bray–Curtis distance values, and Principal Coordinates Analysis (PCoA) was visualized using R v4.0.2 [112].



Publisher's Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Robert Landsiedel, Daniela Hahn, Bennard van Ravenzwaay and Juergen Schnekenburger: Equally contributing first and senior authors, respectively

