Seasonal shifts in the gut microbiome indicate plastic responses to diet in wild geladas

Adaptive shifts in gut microbiome composition are one route by which animals adapt to seasonal changes in food availability and diet. However, outside of dietary shifts, other potential environmental drivers of gut microbial composition have rarely been investigated, particularly in organisms living in their natural environments.

Here, we generated the largest wild nonhuman primate gut microbiome dataset to date to identify the environmental drivers of gut microbial diversity and function in 758 samples collected from wild Ethiopian geladas (Theropithecus gelada). Because geladas live in a cold, high-altitude environment and have a low-quality grass-based diet, they face extreme thermoregulatory and energetic constraints. We tested how proxies of food availability (rainfall) and thermoregulatory stress (temperature) predicted gut microbiome composition of geladas. The gelada gut microbiome composition covaried with rainfall and temperature in a pattern that suggests distinct responses to dietary and thermoregulatory challenges. Microbial changes were driven by differences in the main components of the diet across seasons: in rainier periods, the gut was dominated by cellulolytic/fermentative bacteria that specialized in digesting grass, while during dry periods the gut was dominated by bacteria that break down starches found in underground plant parts. Temperature had a comparatively smaller, but detectable, effect on the gut microbiome. During cold and dry periods, bacterial genes involved in energy, amino acid, and lipid metabolism increased, suggesting a stimulation of fermentation activity in the gut when thermoregulatory and nutritional stress co-occurred, and potentially helping geladas to maintain energy balance during challenging periods.

Together, these results shed light on the extent to which gut microbiota plasticity provides dietary and metabolic flexibility to the host, and might be a key factor to thriving in changing environments. On a longer evolutionary timescale, such metabolic flexibility provided by the gut microbiome may have also allowed members of Theropithecus to adopt a specialized diet, and colonize new high-altitude grassland habitats in East Africa.

Video abstract video file.(53M, mp4)

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s40168-020-00977-9.

Obtaining sufficient nutrients is a fundamental challenge for most animals. Yet, the availability and nutritional content of food can vary temporally and spatially in response to changes in climate and geography. Nutritional demands further vary in response to thermoregulatory needs and life history processes, such as growth and reproduction [1, 2]. Animals have evolved a variety of behavioral and physiological strategies to cope with these shifting demands, including altered feeding and activity patterns and increased mobilization of stored fat to fuel energetic demands [3–6]. Recently, the gut microbiome has been proposed as an additional avenue by which animals can cope with changing dietary landscapes and energetic challenges [7–9]. The gastrointestinal tract of animals harbors a dense microbial community that helps to break down and ferment plant structural carbohydrates, producing short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) that can be used as an energy source by hosts [10–12]. The absorption of SCFAs in the gut may be particularly important for herbivorous species, such as foregut and hindgut fermenters, which obtain as much as 40-90% of their energy requirements from bacterial degradation of complex plant polysaccharides [13–16]. Additionally, variation in gut microbiome composition affects the efficiency of caloric harvest and the metabolic programming of the host [11, 17–20]. For instance, in mice (Mus musculus) and humans, obese and lean individuals have strikingly different gut microbiota composition, with obese phenotypes being associated with higher energy extraction from diet and increased lipogenesis [21–23].

We analyzed the gut microbiome composition and predicted microbiome function in 758 fecal samples across 5 years from 48 adult male and 86 adult female geladas living in the Ethiopian highlands in the Simien Mountains National Park. The Simien Mountains Gelada Research Project (SMGRP) has been collecting detailed climatologic, demographic, and behavioral data from this study population since 2006, allowing us to examine how ecological (rainfall and temperature) and individual (group membership, sex, reproductive status, and age) factors influence gelada gut microbiome composition. We hypothesized that ecological factors would be more strongly associated with variation in the gelada microbiome than individual factors, and that rainfall and temperature would have independent effects. In particular, we expected that rainfall, which is a good proxy for grass availability [35], would have the strongest effect on the gelada gut microbiome. We predicted that the taxonomic changes associated with rainfall would mainly reflect a shift to grass-based versus underground food-based diet, in order to allow individuals to maximize energy extraction from those seasonal foods. We found that the gelada microbiome exhibited drastic shifts related to climatological variables; but individual variables, like age and sex, had minimal effects. Rainfall and temperature exerted independent effects on the microbial composition and predicted function—with rainfall having a stronger effect on the gelada gut microbiome. High rainfall, which is correlated with grass availability [35], was associated with more cellulolytic and fibrolytic bacterial taxa, when graminoid leaves were the main food source. Dry periods, when geladas consume more underground foods [35], were associated with more amylolytic and methanogenic taxa. Cold periods were further characterized by more amylolytic taxa, and hot periods by more methanogenic taxa. In both drier and colder periods, the gut microbiome shifted to predicted functions that suggested increased digestive efficiency, including energy, amino acid, and lipid metabolism. Overall, gelada gut microbial composition covaried with diet and temperature in a pattern that suggests plastic but distinct responses to dietary and metabolic challenges.

We identified 3295 amplicon sequence variants (ASVs) in 758 fecal samples (mean ± SD = 813 ± 243 ASVs per sample, range = 92-1730) using deep 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing. Most ASVs could be taxonomically assigned to the phylum (100%), class (99%), and order level (99%), but assignments decreased substantially at the family (85%) and genus (61%) levels. These 3295 ASVs came from 16 different phyla, 65 families, and 200 genera (Table S1, Fig.
1, Figures S1-S2). Of the 3295 ASVs, 170 (5%) were present in at least 90% of samples and form what can be considered the “core microbiota” of geladas (Table S2). The four most abundant bacterial phyla were Firmicutes (32%), Kiritimatiellaeota (formerly called Verrucomicrobiota subdivision 5; 26%), Bacteroidetes (23%), and Spirochaetes (5%) (Table S1, Fig.
1a). All microbes assigned to Kiritimatiellaeota were part of the RFP12 family and represent almost one quarter of the gelada gut microbiome (mean 26%, range 0.02-70%, Fig.
1b). Despite the abundance of RFP12, the 78 ASVs belonging to this group could not be assigned below the family level. We therefore queried these sequences against the NCBI database using BLAST [46, 47]. These RFP12 sequences were most similar (~ 97%) to bacterial sequences previously found in the feces of hindgut herbivorous species (Asiatic elephant, domesticated horse, Somali wild ass, zebra, and black rhinoceros) [48] and, to a lesser extent, the rumen of several foregut fermenters (cattle, yak, red kangaroo; Table S3). Taken together, this indicates that the RFP12 family is a key microbe for herbivorous species, particularly hindgut fermenters, and likely plays an important fermentative role in plant digestion in geladas. Other taxa found at high frequency in the guts of ruminants and herbivorous hindgut fermenters were also prevalent in the gelada gut, including many cellulolytic/fibrolytic (13% Ruminococcaceae, 6% Lachnospiraceae, 4% Clostridiales vadinBB60 group, 1.5% Fibrobacteraceae) and fermentative families (5.3% Rikenellaceae, 5% Prevotellaceae, 4.1% Bacteroidales F082) (Table S1, Fig.
1b and S1). The Spirochaetes phylum was mostly composed of Treponema (3.5%), a genus involved in lignocellulose degradation [49].

To examine how seasonal variation in rainfall and temperature was associated with changes in the gelada gut microbiome, we used measures of true climatic conditions, including monthly cumulative rainfall (an appropriate proxy of grass availability in the Simiens: [35]) and average monthly minimum temperature (a proxy of thermoregulatory constraint: [41, 44]). At the level of within-sample community diversity (“alpha diversity”), we found that cumulative rainfall was positively associated with Shannon evenness (Table
1, Fig.
2a, c) but had no effect on bacterial richness or Faith’s phylogenetic diversity (Table S4, Figure S3). Thus, rainfall was associated with the relative abundance of ASVs within a sample but not the absolute number of ASVs or their phylogenetic diversity.

Note, however, that the average weighted Nearest Sequence Taxon Index (NSTI) value across all samples (a measure of how similar bacteria from a sample are to reference genome sequences) was relatively high in our sample (mean ± SD = 0.60 ± 0.13) compared to other mammals [50]. Our results should therefore be interpreted with caution, in that they provide a general idea of the predicted gene family profiles based on bacteria that were functional characterized in previous studies.

Compared to rainfall, minimum temperature had a much smaller impact on the gut microbiome. Average minimum temperature did not influence any metric of alpha diversity (Table
1 and S4, Figure S6A), and explained only 0.33% of the variation in beta diversity (Table
2, Figure S6B). Changes in temperature were significantly associated with the relative abundance of 5% of the families (5-22% at other taxonomic levels; Fig.
3; pBH < 0.05). More specifically, colder temperatures were characterized by a greater abundance of two amylolytic genera (Lactobacillus and Streptococcus); in several sugar-fermenting (Hydrogenoanaerobacterium, Clostridium sensu stricto 1, Coprococcus 1) and cellulose-degrading bacteria (Marvinbryantia and two genera from the Ruminococcaceae family) (Table S7, Figure S7). By contrast, hotter temperatures were associated with an increase in Verrucomicrobia, in the methane-producer Methanobrevibacter, and in several cellulolytic/fibrolytic genera from the Ruminococcaceae and Lachnospiraceae families (Table S7, Figure S7).

Similar to our taxonomic analysis, we found that temperature had a much smaller effect on the predicted function of the gelada gut microbiome (Tables S8-S9, Figure S8). During colder periods, we found a predicted increase in bacterial pathways involved in lipid metabolism and energy production (notably in oxidative phosphorylation pathway; Figure S8). Other pathways that increased during colder periods involved DNA repair and recombination and the bacterial secretion system. During hotter weather, pathways were more poorly characterized and less specific, with predicted increases in methane metabolism and ABC transport (a membrane transporter).

The gut microbiome of females exhibited higher alpha diversity compared to males, regardless of the metric (richness, evenness, and Shannon index) (Table
1 and S4, Figure S9A). Across samples, however, sex explained little between-sample variation (i.e., < 1%) (Table
2, Figure S9B). We detected only a handful of bacterial taxa that were differentially abundant according to sex (Table S7, Fig.
3). At the phylum level, females harbored more Verrucomicrobia and Proteobacteria (particularly from class Gammaproteobacteria, Deltaproteobacteria, and Alphaproteobacteria). At the family and genus levels, females had more taxa involved in lactic acid metabolism (Lactobacillaceae, Anaerovibrio), cellulolysis (Saccharofermentans), and regulation of glucose and fat transport (Erysipelatoclostridium). Males, on the other hand, only harbored more Pirellulales. No predicted metabolic pathway differed in abundance between males and females (Tables S8-S9).

Female reproductive state did not influence any alpha diversity metric (Table S10, Figure S10A) and was not a significant factor influencing beta diversity between samples (Table S11, Figure S10B). Very few taxa were differentially abundant according to female reproductive state (Table S12 and S13). Pregnant females harbored more Verrucomicrobiota (class Verrucomicrobiae) and Epsilonbacteraeota than cycling and lactating females (Table S13). In particular, the genus Helicobacter (within the family Epsiolonbacteroaeto)—a presumed pathogen—was highly prevalent in pregnant females (Table S13). No predicted metabolic pathways were found to differ based on reproductive state (Table S14-S15). Age did not influence any metric of alpha diversity (Table
1 and S4, Figure S11A) or beta diversity (Table
2, Figure S11B), and no bacterial taxa (Table S7) or predicted metabolic pathways (Table S8-S9) were differentially abundant between young and old adults.

Our findings are consistent with the hypothesis that changes in the gelada gut microbiome may help animals cope with seasonal changes in food availability and thermoregulatory demands. First, the gelada gut microbiome was highly plastic and responded rapidly to seasonal fluctuations in climate—particularly rainfall (a proxy for available foods). Second, an increase in predicted bacterial functions involved in energy, amino acid, and lipid metabolism during both drier and colder periods suggested increased production of SCFAs, and more efficient digestion during energetically and thermoregulatory challenging periods. We further found that individual identity and social group explained nearly a third of the variation of the gelada microbiome, while other individual traits such as sex, reproductive state, and age had little effect on gut microbiome composition and function.

Overall, the gut microbiome of geladas seems to be highly plastic and can respond rapidly to changes in host diet and thermoregulatory demands. Stimulation of bacteria cellular activity could allow geladas to maintain adequate or even improved energetic balance during dry and cold periods. Our study adds to an increasing body of literature suggesting that the gut microbiota is an important system providing dietary and metabolic flexibility for the host and might be a key factor influencing the acclimatization to changing environments [8, 48, 97, 98]. In addition to fostering phenotypic plasticity, the gut microbiome is increasingly hypothesized to contribute to host evolution and speciation [97–99] given the strong host phylogenetic signal in mammalian microbiome composition and function [100, 101] and evidence of microbiome heritability [102–104]. To the extent that microbiomes affect host phenotypes under selection, they will also affect host evolutionary trajectories. In the case of geladas, a shift in gut microbiome composition was probably an important adaptive mechanism that allowed members of the Theropithecus genus to adopt a specialized dietary niche and diversify rapidly from Papio ~ 5 million years ago [105]. Contrary to host adaptive genetic mutations, which occur over the course of many generations, the gut microbiota can shift in response to changes in host diet in a matter of days [9]. Given that the common ancestor of Theropithecus and Papio was omnivorous [106, 107], dietary flexibility provided by the gut microbiome may have been an important first step allowing members of Theropithecus to exploit new grassland habitats in East Africa, leading to the evolution of a specialized diet and, ultimately, further genetic and phenotypic adaptation.

The gut microbiome of geladas is plastic and responds rapidly to changes in host diet and thermoregulatory demands. These shifts appear to help geladas cope with seasonal fluctuations in nutrient intake and energy homeostasis, potentially allowing them to maintain energy balance in challenging seasonal environments. Our study adds to an increasing body of literature suggesting that the gut microbiota is an important system that provides metabolic flexibility for the host, and is key to helping hosts adapt and shift to fluctuating environments. Future research in geladas and other animals will further uncover how the gut microbiota allows hosts to occupy unique dietary niches, potentially allowing host lineages to expand into new habitats, and facilitating speciation.

We collected fecal samples from a wild population of geladas living in the Simien Mountains National Park, in northern Ethiopia (13° 15′ N, 38° 00′ E). Samples were collected over a 4-year period between Jan. 2015 and Feb. 2019. Geladas live in multi-level societies, where reproductive units (comprising a leader male, several adult females, their offspring, and occasionally 1–2 follower males) and bachelor groups (comprising between 1 and 10 adult males) form the smallest levels of the society that forage and sleep together in a “band” sharing the same home range [108]. Since Jan. 2006, the Simien Mountains Gelada Research Project (SMGRP) has collected demographic and behavioral data on over 200 individuals from two bands. All individuals are habituated to human observers on foot and are individually recognizable. Dates of birth of individuals were established using a combination of known (N = 42) and estimated (N = 89) birth dates. Estimated birth dates were calculated by using the mean individual age at major life-history milestones in our population (e.g., sexual maturation or first birth for females and canine eruption for males) [109, 110]. Birth dates of unknown immigrant males were estimated using an established protocol based on body size and other age-related morphological characteristics [110]. Here, we focused only on samples from adult males and females. Adult males were included when they reached 7 years of age. At this age, males have reached adult body size in stature but not in weight [110, 111], and most males have dispersed into a non-natal group (i.e., 96% of our male samples, males could thus be leaders, followers, bachelors, or natals). Adult females were included after they had experienced their first sex skin swelling, a marker of reproductive maturation (which is around 4.65 years old in our population [109]).

The reproductive state of females at the date of sample collection was assigned based on daily monitoring of individuals for the status of sex skin swellings and the birth of infants. We assigned the three reproductive states as follows: (1) Cycling began at the first sign of postpartum sex skin swelling and ended when a female conceived—with conception defined as 183 days (mean gestation length) before the birth of a subsequent infant [109]. (2) Pregnancy started on the date of conception and ended the day before parturition. (3) Finally, lactation started on the day of parturition and ended the day before the female’s first postpartum swelling. Lactating females were further categorized as being in early lactation (infant < 1 year old) or late lactation (infant > 1 year old). When testing the effect of reproductive state, late lactating females were removed from the lactating category to include only females that were still nursing at the time of sample collection (females resume cycling when infants are ~ 1.5 years old in our population, which is presumably accompanied by infant weaning around the same time [109]). Furthermore, because pregnant females can abort their fetus during male takeover of their reproductive unit [114], some pregnancies might have been misidentified as cycling based on our method of back-calculating from the date of birth. We therefore removed cycling females that experienced a takeover in the previous 6 months before the date of sample collection (N = 55 samples) to avoid any misclassification of reproductive state in our analyses.

The study area is located at 3200 m above sea level and is characterized as an Afroalpine grassland ecosystem, consisting of grassland plateaus, scrublands, and Ericaceous forests [115]. Fecal samples were collected across the year, with roughly equal coverage across seasons (244 in cold-dry, 298 in cold-wet, and 216 in hot-dry season as defined above). As part of the long-term monitoring of the SMGRP, daily cumulative rainfall and minimum and maximum temperature are recorded on a near-daily basis. We used the total cumulative rainfall over the 30 days prior to the date of fecal sample collection as a proxy for grass availability at the time of sample collection [35]. In addition, we used the average minimum daily temperatures in the 30 days preceding the date of sample collection as a proxy of thermoregulatory constraints. The average minimum temperature is less correlated with cumulative monthly rainfall than the average maximum temperature in the previous 30 days (correlation coefficient: 0.25 versus −0.56) and, more importantly, is more likely to reflect the physiological effect of thermoregulation on the body [41, 44].

We prepared 16S sequencing libraries using the protocols developed and optimized by the Earth Microbiome Project and the University of Minnesota Genomics Core (UMGC [116];). We extracted microbial DNA from the fecal samples using Qiagen’s PowerLyzer PowerSoil DNA Isolation kit (Qiagen #12855) following the standard protocol. We amplified the hypervariable V4 region of the 16S rRNA gene using PCR primer set 515F (TCGTCGGCAGCGTCAGATGTGTATAAGAGACAGGTGYCAGCMGCCGCGGTAA) and 806R (GTCTCGTGGGCTCGGAGATGTGTATAAGAGACAGGGACTACNVGGGTWTCTAA

We analyzed the resulting data using the Quantitative Insights Into Microbial Ecology 2 (QIIME2) platform [117, 118]. After trimming low-quality bases from the de-multiplexed reads, we merged overlapping paired-end reads, and denoised the sequencing data by filtering and correcting Illumina amplicon sequencing errors using the Divisive Amplicon Denoising Algorithm 2 (DADA2: [119]) plugin incorporated in QIIME2. DADA2 infers sequences exactly resulting in amplicon sequence variants (ASVs). Forward and reverse reads were trimmed to 220 and 180 bases, respectively, to remove the low-quality portion of the sequences. The forward and reverse reads were then merged together and chimeric sequences were removed. Only samples with more than 20,000 reads were retained for analyses (following observation of rarefaction curves, Figure S12). After filtering, trimming, merging, and chimera removal, we retained a total of 348,390,395 reads across the 758 fecal samples (459,618 ± 815,020 reads per sample, range = 20,109-10,735,588). ASVs were taxonomically assigned using the q2-feature classifier in QIIME2 against version 132 of the SILVA database (updated December 2017) [76] based on 100% similarity. Uninformative taxonomic assignments of ASVs found in SILVA (e.g., “wallaby metagenome,” “unassigned bacteria,” etc.) were converted to “NA” to simplify analyses at higher taxonomic levels. All ASVs belonging to the order WCHB1-41 (phylum Kiritimatiellaeota) were not assigned at the family level in the SILVA classification. However, in the Greengene classification (version 13_8) [77], all ASVs from this order in the gelada gut were assigned to the RFP12 family. Thus, we attribute the family RFP12 to all ASVs from the order WCHB1-41 in SILVA classification. The 78 ASVs from the RFP12 family were found in particular high proportion in the gelada feces, but we did not have taxonomic information about those bacterial sequences below the family level. We thus mined previously published data to identify bacterial sequences most similar to the 78 RPF12 ASVs in geladas by using the NCBI BLAST search engine [46, 47]. For each of those 78 ASV, we searched for the most similar nucleotide sequences previously published, extracted its top five hits (i.e., most similar sequences based on the E value), and summarized the distribution of those top hits per ASV across the 78 ASVs (including in which animal species those hits were found, see Table S3). The five top hits had an average of 97% nucleotide similarity (range, 93-100%) with their respective similar gelada ASVs.

The count and taxonomy files generated by QIIME2 were imported into R version 3.5.2 [120] using the qiime2R package [121] and analyzed using the phyloseq package [122]. The majority of the 19,606 ASVs in our dataset were found at very low frequency or only in one sample (71% of ASVs were found in only one sample and 6.2% of ASVs were not assigned at the phylum level). Thus, we further filtered the count table to retain only ASVs that had at least 500 reads in total in the dataset (i.e., 0.00014% relative abundance) to eliminate potentially artifactual sequences. With this filtering criteria, only 3295 ASVs remained, with all of them assigned at the phylum level and most (97%) observed in at least two samples (Figure S13). The use of rarefaction (i.e., subsampling of the read count in each sample to a common sequencing depth) has been discouraged due to the loss of information and precision [123], as well as the use of count normalization methods from the RNA-seq field (e.g., DESeq2 or edgeR). However, microbiome datasets are more sparse (zero-inflated) and more asymmetrical than genetic expression datasets [124, 125]. Thus, we used a compositional approach when possible (e.g., centered-log-ratio normalization of the counts and Aitchison distance for beta diversity analysis) [125, 126], controlling for sample sequencing depth in multivariate analyses to account for repeated samples from the same individual.

All mixed models described below were run using either the lmer (for linear mixed models, LMMs) or glmer (for binomial and negative binomial generalized linear mixed models, GLMMs) functions of the lme4 package [127]. All quantitative variables (i.e., cumulative rainfall, averaged temperature, and age) were z-transformed to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one to facilitate model convergence. The significance of the fixed factors was tested using a likelihood ratio test, LRT (assuming an asymptotic chi-square distribution of the test statistic) via the drop1 function. To test for significant pairwise differences between levels of multilevel categorical variables (i.e., reproductive state), post hoc Tukey’s Honest Significant Difference tests were carried out using the multcomp package in R [128].

We calculated three measures of alpha diversity: observed richness (the total number of different ASVs in a sample), Shannon diversity index (accounts for both richness and evenness of ASVs in a sample), and Faith’s phylogenetic diversity (accounts for phylogenetic distance between bacterial species, using the picante package [129]). We modeled each alpha diversity metric using linear mixed models: (i) as a function of age, sex, cumulative monthly rainfall, average monthly minimum temperature, and sequencing depth of the sample (N = 758 samples), and (ii) as a function of reproductive state (cycling, early lactating, and pregnant), age, cumulative monthly rainfall, and average monthly minimum temperature in samples collected from females (N = 439). Individual identity and unit membership were included as random effects to control for individual and unit repetition across samples. We also ran the same models on the rarefied dataset (Table S16).

We then assessed how the same predictors were associated with between-sample community dissimilarity. To account for differences in sequencing depth between samples, the counts were normalized using the centered-log-ratio (CLR) method (and using a pseudo count of 0.65 for zero counts) from the “compositions” package [130]. We then calculated the Aitchison distance between samples (i.e., simply the Euclidean distance between samples after clr transformation of the counts) [131] and conducted a Principal Component Analysis (PCA) (function “prcomp”) to visually represent between-samples dissimilarity according to the predictors. This approach has been recommended for microbiome datasets [125] and allows for the projection of each sample onto individual principal components (PCS) and the variable loadings of ASVs onto each PC. While the first axis of variation correlated mostly with rainfall (Fig.
2b), the second PCA axis was correlated with sequencing depth and explained 11% of the variation (Figure S14). We used Permutational Multivariate Analysis of Variance (PERMANOVA) tests to assess the effect of the predictors on the Aitchison distance between samples (using 10,000 permutations and the “adonis2” function from the “vegan” package [132]). We ran three different models: (1) including all samples where we tested only the effect of individual identity and sequencing depth, (2) including all samples where we tested the effect of unit, age, sex, cumulative monthly rainfall, average monthly minimum temperature, and sequencing depth of the sample, and (3) including only female samples where we tested the effect of unit, reproductive state, age, cumulative monthly rainfall, and average monthly minimum temperature. In models 2 and 3, individual identity was included as a blocking factor (“strata”) to control for repeated sampling. We also replicated beta diversity analysis on the rarefied dataset. We ran PERMANOVA tests using three complementary pairwise dissimilarity metrics (Bray-Curtis distance, unweighted and weighted UniFrac distances) to assess between-sample variation according to the same predictors (the same three models). Beta diversity results remained qualitatively similar (Table S17).

We examined how our predictors were associated with differential abundance of bacteria (at the phylum, class, order, family, and genus levels) using negative binomial GLMMs. Compared to LMMs, negative binomial mixed models are better equipped to handle over-dispersed and zero-inflated distributions that often characterize microbiome datasets [133]. They also facilitate tests of several independent predictors while taking into account longitudinal designs including random effects. We first aggregated the counts (i.e., the number of reads per taxa and per sample) at the taxonomic level of interest. Only taxa that had an average relative abundance across samples ≥ 0.01% were tested. Then, for a given taxa, the count per sample was modeled as a function of (1) age, sex, cumulative monthly rainfall and averaged monthly minimum temperature (all samples), or (2) female reproductive state, age, cumulative monthly rainfall, and averaged monthly minimum temperature (female samples only). The log-transformed number of reads per sample was included as an offset term to control for variation in sequencing depth across samples. Individual identity and unit membership were included as random effects in all models. When negative binomial models failed to converge in some taxa, we converted the counts in presence/absence and modeled them with binomial GLMMs. Benjamini-Hochberg corrected p-values < 0.05 were considered statistically significant.

We estimated the bacterial and archaeal genes present in the metagenomes of each sample using Phylogenetic Investigation of Communities by Reconstruction of Unobserved States version 2 (PICRUSt2) [50]. In brief, ASVs were aligned to reference sequences using HMMER [134] and placed into a reference tree using EPA-NG [135] and Gappa [136]. PICRUSt2 normalizes for multiple 16S gene copies in bacteria using castor, a hidden state prediction tool [137]. The normalized data were used to predict gene family profiles, and mapped onto gene pathways using MinPath [138]. We followed the default protocols outlined on the PICRUSt2 GitHub page (https://github.com/picrust/picrust2/wiki). We investigated the predicted gene families using the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) Orthology (KO) database. The accuracy of the PICRUSt2 predictions for each sample was assessed by calculating the weighted Nearest Sequence Taxon Index (NSTI) score, a measure of how similar the bacteria from the sample are to reference genome sequences. Five ASVs (out of 3295) had a NSTI score > 2 and were removed from our final predictions. The association between the relative abundance of functional categories as estimated by PICRUSt2 and the predictors (on all samples or female samples only) were examined using LMMs. Only functional pathways that had ≥ 0.1% relative abundance across samples were tested. Individual identity and unit membership were included as random effects in all models.



Publisher’s Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Amy Lu and Noah Snyder-Mackler contributed equally to this work.

