The gut microbiome in tuberculosis susceptibility and treatment response: guilty or not guilty?

Although tuberculosis (TB) is a curable disease, it remains the foremost cause of death from a single pathogen. Globally, approximately 1.6 million people died of TB in 2017. Many predisposing factors related to host immunity, genetics and the environment have been linked to TB. However, recent evidence suggests a relationship between dysbiosis in the gut microbiome and TB disease development. The underlying mechanism(s) whereby dysbiosis in the gut microbiota may impact the different stages in TB disease progression, are, however, not fully explained. In the wake of recently emerging literature, the gut microbiome could represent a potential modifiable host factor to improve TB immunity and treatment response. Herein, we summarize early data detailing (1) possible association between gut microbiome dysbiosis and TB (2) the potential for the use of microbiota biosignatures to discriminate active TB disease from healthy individuals (3) the adverse effect of protracted anti-TB antibiotics treatment on gut microbiota balance, and possible link to increased susceptibility to Mycobacterium tuberculosis re-infection or TB recrudescence following successful cure. We also discuss immune pathways whereby the gut microbiome could impact TB disease and serve as target for clinical manipulation.

Tuberculosis (TB) is an infectious disease caused by the non-motile, acid fast bacillus Mycobacterium tuberculosis (M.tb). TB is spread when infectious aerosol droplets containing the bacilli are released from an infected individual, typically through sneezing or coughing [1]. Although only 5–10% of the estimated 1.7 billion people infected with M.tb will progress to active TB disease during their lifetime, approximately 1.6 million people died of the disease in 2017 alone [1]. TB is currently ranked as the foremost cause of death from a single pathogen. Several underlying immune, environmental and host genetic predisposing factors have been associated with TB including diabetes, infection with HIV, malnutrition and deficiency in interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) encoding genes [1]. However, one emerging host factor that may be associated with TB disease is the gut microbiota (microbial community inhabiting the gut) [2, 3]. It is known that at birth, the gut becomes colonized by commensal microbes that make up the gut microbiota. These gut microbes closely interact with components of the immune system and accordingly, the composition and metabolic activities of these gut bacterial networks shape and participate in the development and proper functioning of both adaptive and innate immunity [4]. Typically, these interactions between the microbiota and immune system are homeostatic and tightly regulated. Therefore, any disturbance in this finely turned balance could influence host immunity [4]. Recent literature has linked dysbiosis (a state of microbial imbalance) in microbiota community to compromised immune protection against M.tb infection, leading to increased susceptibility or recurrence of TB disease [2, 3]. In this review, we summarize emerging data describing the association between the gut microbiome and lung immunity during TB disease. We also discuss possible mechanisms by which the gut microbiota may impact TB immunity and/or treatment response and outcome.

Many studies investigating perturbations in the gut microbiome during TB disease and the profound effect of anti-TB drug therapy on the gut microbiome composition are currently emerging. A recent study reported a decline in the alpha diversity of the gut microbiome after pulmonary M.tb infection. However, these alterations were minimal and were mainly observed in the comparative abundance of species within the genus Bacteroides [5]. In contrast, many species from the genus Bacteroides increased in abundance during anti-TB antibiotics treatment, including Bacteroides fragilis, whereas, the population of members within the Clostridiales order, declined significantly [5]. An earlier study suggests that the overall microbiome diversity during TB drug therapy does not differ from those of uninfected humans [6]. However, substantial decline in specific gut microbiota taxa was reported in individuals undergoing anti-TB antibiotics treatment compared to both latently infected and uninfected humans [6]. Individuals on anti-TB drug therapy had an enrichment of Erysipelatoclostridium, Fusobacterium and Prevotella, whereas, depletion of Blautia, Lactobacillus, Coprococcus, Ruminococcus and Bifidobacterium was observed in comparison to the latent TB group. Furthermore, after more than 1 year of stopping treatment, the intestinal microbiome of the individuals cured of TB (through 6 months anti-TB drug treatment), was clearly distinguishable from the latent TB cohorts, indicating that treatment for TB has a long-lasting effect on microbiome composition [6]. A similar study investigated this outcome using mouse model [7]. The result showed that infection of mice with H37Rv M.tb strain caused distinct changes in the diversity of the gut microbiome especially in the order Clostridiales. Furthermore, many genera within the class Clostridia such as Ruminococcus, Butyricicoccus, Acetivibrio, Alkaliphilus and Peptococcus declined in their relative population during treatment. Interestingly, only the gut composition of members of the genus Erysipelatoclostridium increased during treatment [7].

In another study, the gut microbiome composition of individuals presenting with recurrent TB (previously declared as cured) contrasted with those of healthy controls [8]. Microbiota within the phylum Bacteroidetes were depleted in recurrent TB cohorts when compared with healthy individuals. On the contrary, the population of members of the phyla Actinobacteria and Proteobacteria, containing numerous diseases causing bacterial species was increased in recurrent TB cases. Furthermore, compared to healthy individuals, there was a decline in the population of the genus Lachnospira and Prevotella in individuals newly diagnosed with active TB and in those presenting with recurrent TB [8]. The authors reasoned that preserving a normal and balanced composition of gut microbiome, could play a crucial role in the prevention of TB recurrence and in host recovery from the disease [8]. These reports bring to the fore the yet unanswered questions namely; (1) are alterations in the gut microbiome a cause or consequence of immune dysfunction attributable to disease states such as TB? (2) are anti-TB drugs alone sufficient to treat the disease, to enable sterilizing cure, at least in all patients? This is important given recent findings that patients who had successfully undergone standard TB treatment and were clinically cured still had positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET/CT) imaging patterns that were consistent with active TB. Furthermore, M.tb mRNA was detected in bronchoalveolar lavage and sputum samples collected from these patients, with TB disease recurring in some of the patients within 2 years from treatment completion and presumed cure [9].

Although anti-TB antibiotics are effective in killing M.tb, recent literature have taken into account the profound gut microbiome dysbiosis induced by anti-TB drug therapy [6–8]. Whereas isoniazid, ethambutol and pyrazinamide purportedly have a narrow spectrum activity against mycobacteria, rifampicin has a broad-spectrum effect [10]. A worrisome outcome of this anti-TB drug-induced gut microbiome perturbation is the possibility of increasing susceptibility to subsequent re-infection or recrudescence of TB disease after being cured. More so, a study by Verver et al. [11] which showed that the prevalence rate of TB ascribable to re-infection after successful treatment was four times that of new TB cases, gives credence to this possibility. However, studies investigating this potential adverse effect of anti-TB antibiotics on the immune response to M.tb are scarce.

Another striking finding from the study was that adoptive transfer of M.tb-infected alveolar macrophages from the isoniazid/pyrazinamide-treated animals significantly increased M.tb load in recipient mice [3]. How this anti-TB-drug-induced dysbiosis alters alveolar macrophage function is presently unknown. However, the authors speculated that changes in peripheral circulation of metabolites produced by gut microbiota following isoniazid/pyrazinamide treatment could possibly have influenced alveolar macrophage metabolism [3, 12]. Altogether, the study suggests that narrow-spectrum anti-TB antibiotics has profound effect on the gut microbiome which in turn negatively impacts macrophage immune defense against M.tb. By interpreting these data we could infer that upon successful TB treatment and cure (1) gut microbiome community is perturbed (2) this gut microbiota dysbiosis impact negatively on macrophage metabolism (3) as a result macrophage mycobactericidal activity is impaired upon subsequently M.tb infectious challenge, leading to successful re-infection (4) balance in gut microbiome composition is vital to sustain alveolar macrophage response against M.tb. However, studies detailing these associations are only emerging and would require further validation. Future studies could investigate the involvement of other functional and phenotypic immune markers. In addition, such studies may include compositional and functional analysis of gut microbiota metabolites, e.g., short chain fatty acids (SCFAs) in peripheral circulation during anti-TB antibiotics treatment.

Recently, there has been an intensified search for biomarker signatures that could accurately diagnose TB, predict progression from latent to active TB, assist in monitoring the response to anti-TB therapy and prediction of treatment outcome. In the wake of emerging literature on gut microbiota dysbiosis associated with TB and anti-TB drug treatment, developing gut microbiota biosignatures for TB disease and treatment response could be a promising area for investigation. Hu et al. [13] in a recent report profiled the gut microbiota community of patients with pulmonary TB versus healthy controls and identified significant changes in the microbiota composition and associated metabolic pathways. Differential abundance of 25 microbiota was identified between the TB and control cohorts. Two bacterial species were enriched in TB patients, whereas 23 were abundant in healthy controls. Among the bacterial species that were abundant in the control cohorts, nine were gut microbiota that produce SCFAs such as propionate, butyrate, acetate and lactate. They include; Ruminococcus obeum, Bifidobacterium longum, Roseburia intestinalis, Roseburia inulinivorans, Coprococcus comes, Akkermansia muciniphila, Eubacterium rectale, Bifidobacterium adolescentis and Roseburia hominis [13]. In addition, ascorbate and biotin biosynthesis were abundant in healthy controls, whereas flavin, folate, vitamin B6 and thiamine biosynthetic pathways were conspicuous in TB patients.

Notably, Hu et al.’s [13] study demonstrated the potential for the use of microbiota biosignatures for the diagnosis or discrimination of active TB cases from health individuals. Three microbiota biosignature comprising of Roseburia hominis, Roseburia inulinivorans and Hemophilus parainfluenzae were selected after five repeated experiments and cross validation using a training set consisting of 31 healthy controls and 30 TB patients [13]. The area under curve (AUC) when using these three bacterial species for discriminating active TB from healthy individuals was 84.6%. An independent test set consisting of 16 TB patients and 30 healthy controls likewise indicated that the model performs well with an AUC of 76.7% [13]. In addition, analysis of metagenome-wide single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) for Bacteroides vulgatus identified 46 SNPs that were differentially distributed between the two groups. In a related earlier study, an increase in gut microbiota that produces butyrate was reported in TB patients when compared to close household contact as healthy controls [23]. These gut bacteria include Eubacterium rectale, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, and Roseburia inulinivorans [23]. Taken together, these studies underpin the likely involvement of SCFAs and their pathways in TB and the possibility of developing gut microbiota biosignatures that delineate the disease stages. Nevertheless, more detailed metabolomic studies involving larger participant sizes from different geographical settings and designed to include the different transition points in the life cycle of TB disease are needed.

Commensal microbiota regulates both adaptive and innate immunity directly or indirectly by producing small molecules (metabolites) which influence the threshold of immune activation following pathogen stimulations. In line with this role, although epithelial cell barrier supposedly restricts microbes to the gut, microbial metabolites can infiltrate epithelial cell boundary. These metabolites then aggregate in host circulation and are sensed by circulating immune cells [24]. Therefore, the release of metabolites by gut microbiome species rather than the direct communication between gut bacteria and immune cells is more likely to modulate host immune defense during disease. In addition to providing signals for immune cells, these metabolites also exert direct microbicidal effect on pathogens. For example, the gut microbiota Clostridium sporogenes produce indole-3-propionic acid (IPA) from the metabolism of tryptophan. IPA readily percolates gut barrier and accumulate in human circulation [25]. In one study, IPA reduced M.tb burden in a mouse model and the molecule was well tolerated showing adequate pharmacokinetic properties [26]. Although the mechanism by which IPA exerts this effect is still under investigation, preliminary evidence suggests that IPA mirrors tryptophan, the physiological allosteric inhibitor of the enzyme (anthranilate synthase), which catalyzes the primary step in tryptophan biosynthesis. Consequently, regardless of intracellular tryptophan levels, IPA switches off tryptophan production in M.tb [27].

Another consideration is that immune cells mounting a challenge against infection by M.tb, are pre-polarized by responses generated against other infections, including gut microbiota-associated infections. For example, infection by Helicobacter hepaticus significantly influenced TB subunit-vaccine-induced protection through an IL-10 dependent pathway [44]. H. hepaticus infection increased colonic IL-10 mRNA expression and mice susceptibility following M.tb challenge [44]. In addition, human adenovirus type 5 immunization of H. hepaticus-infected mice resulted in reduced protection against M.tb. Nevertheless, the protective impact of the subunit vaccine was reestablished following treatment with anti-IL-10 receptor antibody [44]. In a similar report, it was observed that individuals harbouring Helicobacter pylori infection were less likely to progress from latent to active TB when compared to H. pylori seronegative individuals. This was due to enhanced Th1 responses to TB antigens, and the outcome was the same even in individuals concurrently harbouring helminth infections [45]. This impact was speculated to be because of the collaboration between infections that modifies Th1 responses in addition to the reciprocal regulatory pathways prompted in individuals with high burden of infectious disease [45]. Reports of this nature emphasize the need for additional studies investigating the mutualistic or pathogenic interactions between Helicobacter species and the immune response in the gut. Important questions arising from these studies include; (1) how an unhealthy gut microbiome could be manipulated to restore its positive immune-response modulating effects on TB immunity, (2) the specific pathways implicated in the translation of the immune responses generated in the gut to protective lung immunity, (3) which specific microbiome species or cocktail of gut microbiota promote the expansion of immune cell phenotypes with specific roles in limiting TB disease. A summary of recent literature on gut microbiome and TB is provided in Table 1.

Bacterial peptidoglycan, polysaccharide, lipoteichoic acid and lipopolysaccharide (LPS) are known to stimulate toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling [46]. In addition, bacterial metabolites often find their way into the lymphatic system linking the gut–lung axis [47–49]. This bidirectional movement of metabolites could trigger innate immune cell activation such as macrophages and neutrophils [50] which are central in the elimination or control of M.tb infection [51]. Furthermore, lymphocytes express specific chemokine and adhesion receptors which enable them to be trafficked into tissues expressing their corresponding cognate ligands [52]. For example, dendritic cells (DCs) enhance the expression of chemokine receptor 4 (CCR4) on T cells which enables already polarized T cells to home into the lungs expressing increased levels of chemokine ligand 17 (CCL17) [53]. A study by Ichinohe et al. [54] showed that a single dose of LPS delivered intrarectally, restored lung immune responses of mice infected with influenza virus, mainly through gut-initiated TLR signaling pathway. A similar report corroborated this link between gut bacteria and lung immunity. In this study, depletion of Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus with neomycin was associated with altered immune response to influenza A virus infection with concomitant increase in lung damage in a mouse model [55]. This antibiotic-induced dysbiosis inhibited TLR7 signaling, the event of which reduced the secretion of the downstream pro-inflammatory cytokines IFN-γ and IL-17, with a simultaneous increase in the levels of IL-4 and IL-10. However, after Bifidobacterium probiotic reconstitution of the gut microbiota, TLR7 response improved and restored the production of IFN-γ and IL-17 but remarkably inhibited IL-4 and IL-10 induction [55]. Lung damage was also reduced [55]. These data plainly suggest the involvement of TLR activation in immune crosstalk along the gut–lung axis. Understanding and maintaining this communication along the gut-pulmonary axis are especially important considering emerging literature linking gut microbiome dysbiosis and TB disease.

Therefore, studies aimed at unraveling which gut microbiota species or metabolites are necessary to sustain a normal gut microbiome-TLR signaling cascade and validation of gut-initiated T cell homing during M.tb infectious challenge will be a novel area for investigation. In addition, studies involving M.tb infection models of altered gut microbiome aimed at reconstituting the gut with specific gut microbiome species or cocktail of gut microbiota, may prove innovative for the identification of gut bacterial species whose immunomodulatory roles could positively impact TB immunity or limit disease severity.

Gut microbiota play a role in the pharmacokinetics (PK) of drugs. Although the synthesis of primary bile acids and metabolism of drugs essentially occurs in the liver, secondary bile acids are mostly produced by the gut microbiota [60]. In addition, there is evidence supporting the role of the gut microbiome in modifying the expression levels of transporters and enzymes that metabolize drugs [60]. Gut microbiota could impact the bioavailability, efficacy and toxicity of drugs through different mechanisms such as: (1) producing drug activating or inactivating enzymes; for example, the conversion of sulfalazine to its active derivative, 5- amino 5-salicyclic acid by enzymes produced by gut microbiota [61] (2) binding directly to drugs thereby impacting their bioavailability; for instance, the bioavailability of l-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (L- DOPA) is altered by binding of H. pylori [62, 63].

In the case of the cancer-targeting drug ipilimumab (a human monoclonal antibody targeting CTLA-4), the effectiveness of the drug was shown to be reliant on specific Bacteroides species [70]. In this report, germ-free and antibiotic-treated mice which were non-responsive to ipilimumab, were overturned by B. fragilis gavage, inoculation with B. fragilis polysaccharides, or by adoptive immunotherapy with B. fragilis-specific murine T cells [70]. This underscores the significance of a microbiota composition dominated by Bacteroidales during ipilimumab treatment. On the contrary, anti-PD-1 blockade treatment was not effective in patients with high comparative richness of Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, while Faecalibacterium and Clostridiales enriched gut microbiota-favoured treatment efficacy [71]. Similarly, a mixture of Bifidobacterium and anti-PD-L1 monoclonal antibody treatment improved tumor control in mice when compared to the immunotherapeutic intervention alone in another study [72]. Likewise, a study conducted on human kidney transplantation patients suggests that gut microbiota could impact on the PK of the immunosuppressive drug tacrolimus [73]. As the drug has a narrow therapeutic spectrum, patients require monitoring to make certain that the optimum therapeutic dose is reached. Investigation of the gut microbiota community profile in patients reaching high doses of tacrolimus showed an abundance of Faecalibacterium prausnitzii [73]. Faecalibacterium prausnitzii is a butyrate-producing microbiota. Accordingly, the authors opined that tacrolimus drug metabolism could be connected to butyrate availability. These reports demonstrate that commensal microbiota could be manipulated for clinical advantage. This methodology could be explored during TB treatment using probiotics directed not at cure, but to dampen the effect of anti-TB antibiotics on gut microbiota community.

Reports investigating whether alterations in the gut microbiome contribute to bias in inter-individual levels of susceptibility to M.tb infection or response to TB drug treatment are still emerging. Equally important is establishing whether gut microbiome dysbiosis induced by the protracted anti-TB antibiotics treatment is linked to increased susceptibility to M.tb re-infection or TB recrudescence after successful cure. This could change the way TB disease is currently treated and may translate into the development of new therapeutic approaches. Future directions may include:

Publisher's Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

