Gut Microbiome Profiles and Associated Metabolic Pathways in HIV-Infected Treatment-Naïve Patients

The normal composition of the intestinal microbiota is a key factor for maintaining healthy homeostasis, and accordingly, dysbiosis is well known to be present in HIV-1 patients. This article investigates the gut microbiota profile of antiretroviral therapy-naive HIV-1 patients and healthy donors living in Latin America in a cohort of 13 HIV positive patients (six elite controllers, EC, and seven non-controllers, NC) and nine healthy donors (HD). Microbiota compositions in stool samples were determined by sequencing the V3-V4 region of the bacterial 16S rRNA, and functional prediction was inferred using PICRUSt. Several taxa were enriched in EC compared to NC or HD groups, including Acidaminococcus, Clostridium methylpentosum, Barnesiella, Eubacterium coprostanoligenes, and Lachnospiraceae UCG-004. In addition, our data indicate that the route of infection is an important factor associated with changes in gut microbiome composition, and we extend these results by identifying several metabolic pathways associated with each route of infection. Importantly, we observed several bacterial taxa that might be associated with different viral subtypes, such as Succinivibrio, which were more abundant in patients infected by HIV subtype B, and Streptococcus enrichment in patients infected by subtype C. In conclusion, our data brings a significant contribution to the understanding of dysbiosis-associated changes in HIV infection and describes, for the first time, differences in microbiota composition according to HIV subtypes. These results warrant further confirmation in a larger cohort of patients.

In 2020, according to UNAIDS (The Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS), around 37 million people were living with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and there were 940,000 deaths from acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) [1]. Although a substantial depletion of CD4+ T cells is a hallmark of HIV infection, this is followed by a disruption in the intestinal epithelial barrier, gut microbiota dysbiosis, and chronic activation of the immune system [2]. Various patterns of HIV-1 disease progression are described in clinical practice. Remarkably, a state of apparent durable control of HIV replication occurs in a very small group of individuals, which are designated as “elite controllers’’ (EC). EC represent an extremely rare population of HIV-positive individuals where the viral load is naturally controlled, remaining at low or undetectable levels over a long period in the absence of antiretroviral treatment [3]. This group corresponds to less than 1% of the total HIV infected population [4], and have been extensively studied as a model for the natural control of HIV. Understanding the mechanisms of HIV control in these individuals could contribute to the development of novel therapeutic agents against HIV, providing insights for vaccine development.

In this study, we performed the first microbiota analysis on HIV-1 patients who are born and live in Latin America. Several differences were observed in microbiota composition of HIV-1 infected individuals according to RNA viral load levels and the route of infection, and we describe for the first time that patients display a distinct microbiota profile according to HIV-1 subtype. The results suggest potential lines of further research for the identification of new molecular targets in the development of complementary therapeutics against HIV infection.

This study was conducted with a cohort of 13 individuals with documented HIV-1 infection (HIV+) for over five years and who maintain CD4+ T cell counts >500 cells/mm3 and RNA viral loads <20,000 copies/mL without antiretroviral therapy (ART). These subjects were classified in two groups: (i) Elite controllers (EC) with (100%) plasma viral load (VL) determinations undetectable (<50 copies/mL, n = 6), and (ii) HIV non-controllers (NC) with most (≥70%) VL determinations between 2,000 and 20,000 copies/mL (n = 7). We also included nine healthy donors (HD) as controls.

Volunteers were recruited at Hospital Regional Homero de Miranda Gomes, Hospital Nereu Ramos, and at Blood Bank from the Hospital Universitário, Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina (UFSC), all located in the greater Florianópolis area, Santa Catarina, Brazil. The UFSC Ethics Committee (Comitê de Ética em Pesquisa com Seres Humanos, CEPSH-UFSC) approved the study under protocol number 1.622.458, and all volunteers provided written informed consent according to the guidelines of the Brazilian Ministry of Health.

Stool samples were collected in a sterile plastic container either at the volunteers’ residence or at the hospital. DNA was extracted using the commercial kit QIAamp DNA Stool Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) and stored at −20 °C. As a negative control, a sample of sterile water was used. Data on CD4+ and CD8+ T cells count and plasma HIV-1 VL were accessed via medical records and measured according to the Brazilian Ministry of Health guidelines [12].

To identify the viral subtype, total DNA was extracted from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs), and the HIV-1 env gene was amplified by nested PCR and sequenced as previously described [13]. The chromatograms were assembled using SeqMan 7.0 software (DNASTAR Inc., Madison, WI, USA), and consensus env sequences covering positions 7,008–7,650 relative to the HXB2 reference genome were generated. The env sequences were aligned with subtype reference sequences downloaded from the Los Alamos HIV Sequence Database (http://www.hiv.lanl.gov/ accessed on 11 July 2017) using ClustalW and then manually edited and subtyped by maximum-likelihood (ML) phylogenetic tree reconstructions with the PhyML 3.0 program as described previously [13].

DNA was quantified using the Qubit dsDNA HS kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The targeted V3-V4 region of the bacterial 16S rRNA gene from the extracted DNA was PCR-amplified using the Illumina primers S-D-Bact-0341-b-S-17 (forward) and S-D-Bact-0785-a-A-21 (reverse) [14]. The polymerase chain reactions were performed as described by Machiavelli et al. [15]. DNA sequencing was performed using a V2 reagent kit 2 × 250 bp (500 cycles) (MS-102–2003, Illumina Inc, San Diego, CA, USA) at the Illumina MiSeq platform. Raw reads were quality filtered using Trimmomatic v0.38 [16] according to sequence size and Phred score. The three first nucleotides in all sequences presented a Phred score below 20 and were removed. Sequences with less than 200 or more than 259 nucleotides were also excluded. Paired-end joining, determination of amplicon sequence variants (ASVs), and removal of chimeric sequences were performed using the DADA2 [17] R package v1.15.5. Taxonomy was assigned with the DECIPHER R package v2.10.2 IDTAXA [18] algorithm and the SILVA_SSU_r138_2019 [19]. Finally, the assigned taxonomy was organized in a BIOM-formatted ASV table and imported into R and ATIMA (Agile Toolkit for Incisive Microbial Analyses, https://atima.research.bcm.edu/ accessed on 11 June 2020) software for statistical analysis. The functional prediction was performed using PICRUST v2.1.4-b, (http://picrust.github.io/picrust/ accessed on 12 August 2020) [20] based on the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG, https://www.genome.jp/kegg/ accessed on 16 August 2020). Counts were normalized by considering the 16S rRNA gene copy number. The sequence data supporting the results of this study are available in the NCBI repository (Bioproject accession number: PRJNA682416; https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/ accessed on 8 December 2020).

Statistical analyses were performed using R software v3.6.0 and ATIMA v3.0. Characteristics between groups were compared using a Kruskal–Wallis and Mann–Whitney test. Gut microbiome taxa abundance was assessed using the phyloseq R package, and alpha diversity indices were assessed using ATIMA software. Kruskal–Wallis and Mann–Whitney tests were applied to compare the differences in the number of observed ASVs, alpha diversity richness (Chao1), and diversity (Shannon and Simpson) by groups. Beta diversity was evaluated using the Principal Coordinate Analysis (PCoA) on Bray-Curtis, weighted Unifrac, and unweighted Unifrac distances to determine significant differences between groups. Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) effect size (LefSe) [21] algorithm was used to identify differentially abundant bacterial taxa between the study groups, using the online version of Galaxy. LDA was performed using a one-against-all strategy and a score of >2.0. LefSe uses the Kruskal–Wallis and Wilcoxon rank-sum test to detect features with significantly different abundances between assigned taxa and LDA to estimate the effect size of each feature. The functional prediction was analyzed using ATIMA software applying the Mann–Whitney test to compare the relative abundance between groups. KEGG pathways with P values below 0.05 were considered significant after multiple-comparison correction using the false discovery rate (FDR) method.

This was a cross-sectional study, and detailed information regarding demographic and clinical characteristics of participants (13 HIV+ and nine healthy donors, HD) is displayed in Table 1. HIV+ individuals were separated into two groups: Elite controllers (EC, n = 6) and non-controllers (NC, n = 7) according to the plasma VL. There were no significant differences in age and BMI among HD, EC, and NC groups (Kruskal–Wallis test with Dunn’s as post-hoc test). All EC showed undetectable plasma viral load without blips at all measurements, while the median level of plasma viremia for NC was 4,203 copies/mL. EC and NC had documented HIV-1 infection for a median of 5.6 (IQR 5.0–9.3) years and 6.4 (IQR 5.8–6.9) years, respectively. The median of CD4+ T cell counts in EC and NC was 1190 (IQR 605.5–1370) and 726 (IQR 521–866) cells/µL, respectively. As for CD8+ T cells, the median was 1057 (IQR 810–1356) cells/μL for EC and 1295 (IQR 798–1527) cells/μL for NC. Phylogenetic analysis using env sequences showed that our cohort included two HIV-1 subtypes: B (n = 6, 46%) and C (n = 7, 54%). The distribution according to exposure categories was as follows: Heterosexual (HET; subtype B = 1; subtype C = 5); men who have sex with men (MSM; subtype B = 5; subtype C = 0); injecting drug users (IDU; subtype B = 0; subtype C = 2). None of the participants used antibiotics within the three months preceding enrollment in the study. Four EC, one NC, and one HD, declared the use of antibiotics before this period.

Results were presented in median (interquartile range, IQR). Abbreviations: HET, heterosexual; MSM, men who have sex with men; IDU, injecting drug users.

The gut microbiota characterization was analyzed using 16S rRNA sequencing of stool. A total of 2,399,610 reads with an average of 99,983 reads per sample were generated after data processing and quality check, resulting in a final count of 1001 ASVs. In terms of microbial composition, 14 main phyla were found, regardless of the HIV status. The Firmicutes, Bacteroidota, Proteobacteria, and Actinobacteriota phyla were the most abundant (Figure 1A). There was no statistical difference between HIV+ and HD in beta and alpha diversity (Figure S1). To determine and distinguish differentially abundant ASVs associated with HIV-1, we compared the gut microbiota composition between HIV+ and HD using the LefSe algorithm, which showed significant bacterial differences between HIV+ and HD. The family Atopobiaceae, and genera Acidaminococcus, Libanicoccus, Lachnospiraceae NK3A20 group were enriched in HIV+, whereas the order Verrucomicrobiales, class Verrucomicrobiae, families Barnesiellaceae and Akkermansiaceae and genera Angelakissela, Oscillospira, Turicibacter, Bilophila, Barnesiella, Akkermansia were enriched in HD (Figure 1B,C). The relative abundance of taxa identified in LefSe as differentially abundant between HIV+ and HD was compared using the Mann–Whitney test, which revealed statistically significant differences between groups in seven of the nine identified genera (p < 0.05) (Figure 1D).

LefSe analysis was used to compare the gut microbiota of EC, NC, and HD groups. Figure 2A,B show differences in the abundance of taxonomic clades of LDA score >2.0 among EC, NC, and HD individuals. The gut microbiota of the EC group was dominated by taxa Acidaminococcus, Clostridium methylpentosum group, Barnesiella, Eubacterium coprostanoligenes group, and Lachnospiraceae UCG-004, whereas the NC group showed high scores for the family Atopobiaceae, and genera Libanicoccus and Lachnospiraceae NK3A20 group. The features identified by LefSe as being differentially abundant were confirmed by standard statistical analysis using Kruskal–Wallis test (Figure S2). PICRUSt analysis was performed to determine whether the taxonomic differences between the groups’ microbiota corresponded to functional changes, but we found no significant differences between HD and EC groups or between EC and NC groups (data not shown). However, we identified 30 KEGG pathways as significantly different between NC and HD groups (Figure 2C). PICRUSt analyses demonstrated that the NC group’s microbiota exhibits increased S-adenosyl-L-methionine cycle, methylerythritol phosphate pathway, and biosynthesis of threonine, acetylmuramoyl pentapeptide, peptidoglycan, CoA, and CDP-diacylglycerol. Conversely, the microbiota of NC subjects was depleted for sucrose and glycogen degradation, biosynthesis of thiamine, folate, fatty acids, unsaturated fatty acids and lipopolysaccharides, B12 Salvage from cobinamide and sulfur metabolism (p < 0.05).

HIV+ patients were divided into three groups according to exposure category: HET (n = 6), MSM (n = 5) and IDU (n = 2). Receptive anal intercourse (r.a.i.), was declared by 2 HET, 5 MSM, and 1 IDU patients. Beta diversity with Principal Coordinates Analysis of Bray-Curtis distances indicated differences in the gut microbiota between HET, MSM, and IDU groups, (R = 0.36, p = 0.011) (Figure 3A). We carried out LEfSe analysis to determine the taxa most associated with the route of HIV-1 transmission and found significant differences in the abundance of 27 taxa among HET, MSM, and IDU groups were found. Bacteroidaceae, Bacteroides, Alistipes, Holdemania, Unclassified lactobacillales, Subdoligranulum, DTU089, UBA1819, Unclassified Clostridium methylpentosum group, Clostridium methylpentosum group, Eisenbergiella, and Odoribacter were enriched in feces of HET group, whereas Aeromonodales, Succinivibrionaaceae, VadinBE97, Prevotella, Succinivibrio, Megasphaera, Unclassified vadinBE97, Allisonella, Libanicoccus, and Mitsuokella were enriched in the MSM group (Figure 3B,C). When differences in microbiota functions were assessed, 20 pathways were found to be strengthened, and 30 pathways weakened in MSM in relation to the HET group (Figure 3D). Alanine biosynthesis, metabolic regulators, sulfur oxidation, and biosynthesis of arginine carbohydrates, biotin, fatty acid, and tryptophan were among the enriched pathways in the MSM group compared to the HET group, while biosynthesis of valine, histidine, phospholipid, acetylmuramoyl pentapeptide, as well as purine, glycogen and sucrose degradation, were depleted (p < 0.05).

Next, we explored whether changes in the gut microbiota can be detected between HIV-1 subtypes and found clear differences in the composition of gut microbiomes among patients infected with subtype B (HIV-1B) or C (HIV-1C). Figure 4A,B show increased abundance in HIV-B group for Lentisphaeria class, Aeromonadales, Victivallales order, Succinivibrionaceae and VadinBE97 family, and Succinivibrio, Megasphaera, Prevotellaceae UCG-003, Mitsuokella, Solobacterium, Unclassified vadinBE97, Asteroleplasma, Parvimonas, Unclassified Parvimonas, Anaerovibrio, and Alissonela genus. For the HIV-C group Lactobacillales order, Selenomonadaceae, Streptococcaceae and Enterococcaceae family, Streptococcus, Atopobium, Eggerthella, Veillonella, Christensenella, and Enterococcus genus were more abundant. Differences in bacterial abundance at a genus level between these two groups can be seen in Figure 4C,D.

Our study is the first to analyze gut microbiota composition in HIV-1 infected patients who are born and live in Latin America (more specifically in Brazil), including a group of EC individuals. Along with other reports [7,8], our data did not reveal differences in microbiota alpha and beta diversity between HIV+ and HD. This finding contrasts with other studies where such differences have been identified [10,11]. Together, these data indicate not only a lack of consensus about differences in alpha and beta diversity in HIV+ in relation to HD, but also that microbiome alterations in HIV+ may vary across populations. This is likely to be due to factors that have not always been considered, such as genetic background, different types of nutritional habits, ART, the clinical differences among HIV+ patients, and even HIV subtype.

As far as we know, the present report is the first to associate differences in microbiota composition with HIV subtypes. Dang et al. [43] indirectly associated higher colonization of Streptococcus species in oral microbiota of HIV-1 patients on ART when compared to HD and ART-naive HIV+ patients, all infected by HIV-1 subtype B. Our results showed Succinivibrio, Mitsuokella, Solobacterium, Anaerovibrio, and Allisonella associated with HIV-1B, while Streptococcus, Eggerthella, Veillonella, Christensenella, and Enterococcus genus were more abundant in individuals infected by subtype C. Taken together, these data highlight the importance of our findings regarding the difference in the gut microbiota profile according to HIV-1B and HIV-1C infection. Although HIV-1 does not target bacteria, it is worth considering what effects viral subtypes could exert on the immune system and subsequently impact on the gut microbiota. Moreover, our results open the possibility to consider targeting microbiota as a way to improve the response to HIV-1 infection through the effects of viral subtypes on dysbiosis.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

