Captivity Influences the Gut Microbiome of Rhinopithecus roxellana



Ex situ (captivity in zoos) is regarded as an important form of conservation for endangered animals. Many studies have compared differences in the gut microbiome between captive and wild animals, but few have explained those differences at the functional level due to the limited amount of 16S rRNA data. Here, we compared the gut microbiome of captive and wild Rhinopithecus roxellana, whose high degree of dietary specificity makes it a good subject to observe the effects of the captive environment on their gut microbiome, by performing a metagenome-wide association study (MWAS). The Chao1 index was significantly higher in the captive R. roxellana cohort than in the wild cohort, and the Shannon index of captive R. roxellana was higher than that of the wild cohort but the difference was not significant. A significantly increased ratio of Prevotella/Bacteroides, which revealed an increased ability to digest simple carbohydrates, was found in the captive cohort. A significant decrease in the abundance of Firmicutes and enrichment of genes related to the pentose phosphate pathway were noted in the captive cohort, indicating a decreased ability of captive monkeys to digest fiber. Additionally, genes required for glutamate biosynthesis were also significantly more abundant in the captive cohort than in the wild cohort. These changes in the gut microbiome correspond to changes in the composition of the diet in captive animals, which has more simple carbohydrates and less crude fiber and protein than the diet of the wild animals. In addition, more unique bacteria in captive R. roxellana were involved in antibiotic resistance (Acinetobacter) and diarrhea (Desulfovibrio piger), and in the prevention of diarrhea (Phascolarctobacterium succinatutens) caused by Clostridioides difficile. Accordingly, our data reveal the cause-and-effect relationships between changes in the exact dietary composition and changes in the gut microbiome on both the structural and functional levels by comparing of captive and wild R. roxellana.

The golden snub-nosed monkey (Rhinopithecus roxellana) is an endangered colobine species endemic to China (Kirkpatrick and Grueter, 2010), and this species is highly folivorous and exploits a diet composed principally of leaves, seeds, bark, and lichen (Zhou et al., 2014). At present, R. roxellana habitats in some isolated mountains, such as the Qionglai, Minshan, Qinling, and Daba Mountains of Central China, have more than 25,000 individuals (Luo et al., 2012; Zhou et al., 2016). As an iconic endangered species and flagship species for tourism in China due to its golden coat, blue facial coloration, snub nose and specialized life history, the Chinese government launched many conservation strategies, such as in situ (natural reserves) and ex situ strategies (captivity in zoos), to protect this species. Currently, more than 400 individuals of R. roxellana are being raised in captivity (Xiang et al., 2017).

Captivity and loss of dietary fiber in non-human primates are associated with loss of native gut microbiome and convergence toward the modern human microbiota (Clayton et al., 2016). Therefore, we sequenced the metagenomic data from 28 individuals, including captive R. roxellana, wild R. roxellana, and captive Macaca mulatta, using whole-genome shotgun sequencing, and downloaded the metagenomic data for humans from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) database (Qin et al., 2012). We compared the differences between captive and wild R. roxellana cohorts at both taxonomic and functional levels by performing a metagenome-wide association study (MWAS) (Kishikawa et al., 2020) to investigate the loss of native gut microbiome of captive cohorts. We further look for the similar traits in microbiome of captive R. roxellana, captive M. mulatta and human cohorts to explore whether convergence toward the modern human microbiome occurred in the gut microbiome of captive primates.

We collected fecal samples from 9 R. roxellana individuals (CRr) from Shanghai Wild Animal Park and 10 M. mulatta individuals (CMm) from Beijing Wildlife Park (Supplementary Table 1A) as our two captive cohorts. We further collected fecal samples from 9 R. roxellana individuals (WRr) from Baihe National Nature Reserve, Sichuan Province (Supplementary Table 1A) as the wild cohort. Because R. roxellana is endangered and has a small population, samples are difficult to obtain. Therefore, we used shotgun metagenomes with more information than 16S rRNA data to explore the gut microbiome. Each cohort in our study contained at least 9 samples which can generally represents a group well (Quince et al., 2017; Knight et al., 2018). All fresh feces were collected in 3 ml of RNAlater immediately after defecation (Vlckova et al., 2012; Blekhman et al., 2016). These samples were transported on ice within 1 week and then stored at −80°C until DNA extraction at the Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS). For the human cohort (Hum), we downloaded fecal microbiome information, which includes both genus info and K-numbers info, of nine healthy Chinese individuals as controls from published articles (Qin et al., 2012) (Supplementary Table 1A). We added human (Hum) and captive M. mulatta (CMm) samples as supplementary cohorts to verify the effects of the captive environment on the gut microbiome. In our study, we postulated that captive environmental factors include diet changes, human contact, the use of antibiotics, and other factors.

Microbial DNA was extracted from the fecal samples using the QIAamp DNA stool mini kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, United States) according to the standard protocol. The quality and quantity of the DNA were determined with a Nanodrop (ND-1000) spectrophotometer (Nanodrop Technologies, Wilmington, DE, United States) and agarose gel electrophoresis. DNA samples were stored at −20°C untill use. Shotgun sequencing was performed using an Illumina NovaSeq 6000, with at least 10 Gb per sample. We filtered the raw data using Trimmomatic v0.36 (Bolger et al., 2014) to trim low-quality reads: 3′ tailing sequences were removed when the average quality over a 4-b sliding window was less than 20, and reads less than 70 bp were discarded. Then, we used the genomes of R. roxellana (assembly ASM756505v1) and Homo sapiens (assembly GRCh38.p13) to remove contamination and obtain clean data with bowtie2 v2.3.5 (Langmead and Salzberg, 2012). After the removal of low-quality and contaminating reads, an average of 11.6 Gb of high-quality non-host sequences were obtained from each sample in the CRr, WRr, and CMm cohorts (Supplementary Table 1B).

Taxonomic profiles at the species level were generated using the (MG)-based operational taxonomic units (mOTUs) profiler (v2.0.0) (Milanese et al., 2019) with the following parameters: −l 75; −g 2; and −c. mOTUs profiles were first converted to relative abundance to account for the library size. Afterward, the relative abundance at the genus, family, order, class, and phylum levels was determined by mOTUs using the parameter −k. Then, taxonomic terms that did not exceed a maximum relative abundance of 1 × 10–4 were excluded from further analysis, together with taxonomic terms accounting for less than 20% of the samples in each cohort (Wirbel et al., 2019). After selection, we assessed 396 taxonomic terms (13 phyla, 20 classes, 27 orders, 37 families, 61 genera, and 238 species) for CRr and WRr.

We applied single-sample metagenomic assembly and functional annotation to compare the gut microbiome at the gene level and functional level between the captive-wild cohorts. Briefly, assemblies were produced with MEGAHIT software (v1.2.6) (Li et al., 2015), and gene identification was performed on contigs longer than 300 bp using MetaGeneMark (Zhu et al., 2010). Next, we annotated the contigs with Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG, v50) (Kanehisa et al., 2016) via DIAMOND (v0.9.24) with the parameters −d −q −e 1e−5 −k 1 (Buchfink et al., 2015). We further calculated the relative abundance of K-numbers (level 3 pathways) and removed the K-numbers detected (i) in less than 20% of the samples from each cohort or (ii) in no sample from either cohort. Specifically, K-numbers that did not exceed a maximum relative abundance of 1 × 10–6 were excluded from further analysis (Wirbel et al., 2019). After gene selection, we assessed 261,182 genes annotated by the KEGG gene database and 4,895 K-numbers (Supplementary Table 3) for CRr and WRr.

We calculated the correlations among the four cohorts using the R “vegan” package based on ANOSIM. Then, we used the abundance/relative abundance at the genus level to calculate the alpha diversity, beta diversity and a hierarchical tree. Two estimators of the alpha diversity index, Chao1, and Shannon indices, for the four cohorts were calculated using the R package “vegan” (Oksanen et al., 2019). The Shannon diversity index accounts for the richness and evenness of species distribution, whereas the Chao1 index extrapolates the number of rare taxa that may have been accounted for with deeper sampling. We further compared each estimator by performing the Wilcoxon rank sum test with the R “coin” package (Hothorn et al., 2006), and the p-values were adjusted using the Benjamini–Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR) method (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995). We performed principal component analysis (PCoA) based on Bray–Curtis dissimilarities using the R “vegan” package for all cohorts (Oksanen et al., 2019), which was visualized with the “ggplot2” package.

We constructed a hierarchical tree of the gut microbiome for the four cohorts and a phylogenetic tree for the three hosts to compare the effect of environmental and phylogenetic factors on the gut microbiome. We used the R “vegan” package (Oksanen et al., 2019) to calculate divergences among the four cohorts based on Bray–Curtis dissimilarity to build the hierarchical tree. The phylogenetic tree was constructed based on the time tree available at http://timetree.org/ (Kumar et al., 2017).

Captive–wild association tests at both the taxonomic and functional levels were performed using the generalized linear model (GLM) in the R package “glm2” (v1.2.1) (Kishikawa et al., 2020), and p-values were adjusted using the Benjamini–Hochberg FDR method (Gao et al., 2019). Twenty-five taxonomic terms that were significantly different [p(FDR) < 0.005] between wild-captive R. roxellana were visualized in a heatmap using the R “pheatmap” package (Kolde, 2018) (Supplementary Table 4 and Figure 2D). Forty K-numbers that were significantly different between wild and captive R. roxellana [p(FDR) < 1e-5] were visualized in a volcano plot using the R “ggrepel” package (Supplementary Table 3 and Figure 3A). In the volcano plot, the x-axis indicates the beta value of the GLM as the effect size. The y-axis indicates the observed −log10 (FDR-corrected p-values). We further visualized the KEGG pathways enriched in the 40 K-numbers in a stem diagram using the R “graphlan” package (v1.1.3) (Asnicar et al., 2015). Ten pathways were identified in the enrichment analysis based on the KEGG database. In addition, all pairwise comparisons in this study were calculated using the Wilcoxon rank sum test with a FDR correction for multiple testing correction, except for the GLM analysis.

We performed whole-genome shotgun sequencing of a total of 18 R. roxellana fecal samples (9 CRr and 9 WRr), 10 captive M. mulatta (CMm) samples and 9 samples from healthy Chinese individuals (Hum), for which the taxonomy and KEGG annotation information was downloaded from NCBI (Qin et al., 2012) (Supplementary Table 1A). The average size of the whole-genome shotgun sequencing data from the three monkey cohorts was greater than 11.16 Gb, and all samples passed stringent quality control (Supplementary Table 1B). Thirteen phyla, 20 classes, 27 orders, 37 families, 61 genera, and 238 species were identified by MOTUs2 from 18 metagenomes of R. roxellana (Supplementary Table 2). The two most abundant phyla were Firmicutes (WRr: 70.7 ± 0.11%; CRr: 27.1 ± 0.1%) and Bacteroidetes (WRr: 5.9 ± 0.07%; CRr: 37.6 ± 0.09%) in both captive and wild R. roxellana (Supplementary Figure 1 and Figure 1A).

We further calculated significant differences in community richness based on the abundance at the genus level across all cohorts (Figure 1D), as estimated by Chao1 and Shannon index. Microbial diversity based on both Chao1 (accounts for rare species) and Shannon (accounts for species richness and evenness) indices was significantly increased in captive R. roxellana compared with the wild cohort [Figure 1D; Chao1: p(FDR) < 0.005; Shannon: p(FDR) < 0.1]. In addition, the Shannon index, but not Chao1 index, of captive R. roxellana was significantly increased compared with human cohorts [Figure 1D; p(FDR) < 0.01]. No significant differences in the Chao1 and Shannon diversity indices were observed between captive R. roxellana and captive M. mulatta. Thus, more rare species were present in the gut microbiome of captive monkeys and human than in the wild cohort.

We used a GLM (Kishikawa et al., 2020) to identify the key bacteria responsible for the differences in the relative abundances at each taxonomy level between captive and wild R. roxellana. The results indicated differences in the abundance of 48 taxa between captive and wild R. roxellana [Supplementary Table 4A; overall p(FDR) < 0.005]. At the phylum level, an increase in Bacteroidetes and a decrease in Firmicutes abundance in the gut microbiome were observed in captive R. roxellana [Figures 2A,D; both p(FDR) < 0.0001]. Bacteroidetes are considered primary degraders of polysaccharides (Lapebie et al., 2019), and Firmicutes are known to utilize xylose (Gu et al., 2010), such as the crude fiber present in the diet of R. roxellana.

For bacteria (5 genera and 3 species) that were only present in captive R. roxellana compared to the wild cohort, heatmaps of the 4 cohorts (WRr, CRr, Hum, and CMm) were established to show the effect of the human environment on gut microbiome (Supplementary Figure 4 and Figures 2C,D). Among those bacteria, Phascolarctobacterium (P. succinatutens), Acinetobacter, and Desulfovibrio (D. piger) were identified in the CRr, Hum, and CMm cohorts but not in the WRr cohort. P. succinatutens was reported to effectively inhibit the colonization of Clostridioides difficile (Nagao-Kitamoto et al., 2020), which can cause severe, potentially life-threatening intestinal inflammation (Britton and Young, 2014). Therefore, we compared the abundance of C. difficile between WRr and CRr (Figure 2E). C. difficile was more abundant in WRr [p(FDR) = 0.24] than in CRr, indicating that captive R. roxellana may be less likely to have diarrhea caused by C. difficile than the wild cohort. In addition, Acinetobacter, which is known for its broad-spectrum antibiotic resistance (Towner, 2009; Fishbain and Peleg, 2010), and D. piger, which is related to inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) (Loubinoux et al., 2002), were more abundant in CRr than WRr, showing that captive R. roxellana may have higher resistance and a higher risk of diarrhea caused by D. piger. These bacteria, which were not detected in the WRr cohort but were observed in the CRr, Hum, and CMm cohorts, were probably transplanted into the gut microbiome of captive R. roxellana through the captive environment.

We annotated 261,182 genes and 4,895 K-numbers (Supplementary Table 3) from both captive and wild R. roxellana using the KEGG database (Kanehisa and Goto, 2000). Forty K-numbers (level 3 pathways) [Figure 3A; overall p(FDR) < 0.00001] were significantly different between the wild and captive R. roxellana cohorts, according to the GLM analysis (Kishikawa et al., 2020). Twenty-eight of the 40 K-numbers were enriched in 18 KEGG orthology (KO) (level 2 pathways) terms and 10 pathways (level 1 pathways) (Figure 3B). Of the level 1 pathways, the top 4 enriched pathways were signaling and cellular processes (9 K-numbers), amino acid metabolism (4 K-numbers), carbohydrate metabolism (4 K-numbers), and energy metabolism (3 K-numbers).

In the energy metabolism pathway, genes related to glutamate (Glu) metabolism were significantly more abundant in the gut microbiome of captive R. roxellana than in wild R. roxellana (K05601, 1.7.99.1; K00265, 1.4.1.13; K03385, 1.7.2.2). The main function of these genes is to synthesize Glu (Figure 3C). Our results suggest that the gut microbiome of captive monkeys has the potential to synthesize more Glu than that of wild monkeys. Glu is among the most abundant amino acids (8–10%) found in dietary proteins (Rangan, 2008). In the gut, Glu is derived from dietary proteins, free Glu in food additives and bacterial synthesis (Mazzoli and Pessione, 2016; Tome, 2018). Additionally, Glu is an important fuel for intestinal tissue, is involved in gut protein metabolism, and is the precursor of different important molecules produced within the intestinal mucosa (Mazzoli and Pessione, 2016; Tome, 2018).

This study is the first to reveal the characteristics of the gut microbiome of R. roxellana by analyzing metagenome data. Our findings indicated that changes in the R. roxellana gut microbiome may help animals cope with changes in the composition of the diet in captivity and different habitats in captive environments. First, we found that captivity significantly altered the components and community structure of the gut microbiome in R. roxellana. Second, an increased P/B ratio and abundance of genes involved in Glu metabolism in captivity suggested that the structure and function of the gut microbiome in R. roxellana were altered according to the diet. Finally, we further identified bacteria that might be related to diarrhea, but specific strains may help prevent diarrhea.

Although captivity seems to make captive R. roxellana to have more unique bacteria that could be harmful to the host, we found there were some bacteria that might be beneficial to the host. We found bacteria exist in the gut microbiome of captive R. roxellana which might help the host suppress diarrhea which caused by C. difficile. Studies have elucidated that C. difficile causes severe, potentially life-threatening intestinal inflammation (Britton and Young, 2014), but P. succinatutens prevents C. difficile growth (Nagao-Kitamoto et al., 2020). The abundance of P. succinatutens has been found to be lower in individuals with diarrhea than in healthy individuals (Morgan et al., 2012; Jian et al., 2015). However, in this study, we observed a higher abundance of P. succinatutens and a lower abundance of C. difficile [p(FDR) = 0.24] in captive R. roxellana than in wild R. roxellana (Figures 2C–E), which was also abundant in humans and captive Macaca, showing the positive effects of captivity on the gut microbiome of captive NHPs.

In summary, the gut microbiome of R. roxellana was more substantially affected by the captive environment than phylogenetic factors, especially diet changes. We compared the gut microbiome of captive and wild cohorts at both the taxonomic and functional levels. We found that the gut microbiome of captive R. roxellana tended to have a weaker ability to digest crude fiber, a strengthened ability to digest simple carbohydrates and an increased ability to synthesize amino acids. This phenomenon might be due to the changes in the dietary composition in the captive environment, which contains more simple carbohydrates and less crude fiber and protein than the natural diet. In addition, we found that captive R. roxellana had more unique bacteria in their gut microbiome, which were associated with not only antibiotic resistance (Acinetobacter) and diarrhea (D. piger), but also the prevention of certain types of diarrhea (P. succinatutens). In our study, we observed the positive role of gut microbiome in host diet adaptation in captivity, as well as the substantial negative and positive effects of captivity on the gut microbiome, showing the complex interactions between gut microbiome and the environment.

The datasets presented in this study can be found in online repositories. The names of the repository/repositories and accession number(s) can be found below: NCBI, PRJNA718160.

The animal study was reviewed and approved by the Committee for Animal Experiments of the Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS).

ML designed the research. XW performed the experiments. XW, ZW, HP, and JQ analyzed the data. XW, DL, and ZX collected samples. YS was responsible for the samples. XW, ZW, HP, and ML wrote the manuscript. All authors critically reviewed and approved the manuscript.

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

The study was supported by the Strategic Priority Research Program of Chinese Academy of Sciences (XDB31000000), National Natural Science Foundation of China (31821001 and 32070404), and National Key R&D Program of China (2016YFC0503200).

The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fmicb.2021.763022/full#supplementary-material

