Alterations in Gut Microbiota of Patients With COVID-19 During Time of Hospitalization



Although severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infects gastrointestinal tissues, little is known about the roles of gut commensal microbes in susceptibility to and severity of infection. We investigated changes in fecal microbiomes of patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection during hospitalization and associations with severity and fecal shedding of virus.

We performed shotgun metagenomic sequencing analyses of fecal samples from 15 patients with Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Hong Kong, from February 5 through March 17, 2020. Fecal samples were collected 2 or 3 times per week from time of hospitalization until discharge; disease was categorized as mild (no radiographic evidence of pneumonia), moderate (pneumonia was present), severe (respiratory rate ≥30/min, or oxygen saturation ≤93% when breathing ambient air), or critical (respiratory failure requiring mechanical ventilation, shock, or organ failure requiring intensive care). We compared microbiome data with those from 6 subjects with community-acquired pneumonia and 15 healthy individuals (controls). We assessed gut microbiome profiles in association with disease severity and changes in fecal shedding of SARS-CoV-2.

Patients with COVID-19 had significant alterations in fecal microbiomes compared with controls, characterized by enrichment of opportunistic pathogens and depletion of beneficial commensals, at time of hospitalization and at all timepoints during hospitalization. Depleted symbionts and gut dysbiosis persisted even after clearance of SARS-CoV-2 (determined from throat swabs) and resolution of respiratory symptoms. The baseline abundance of Coprobacillus, Clostridium ramosum, and Clostridium hathewayi correlated with COVID-19 severity; there was an inverse correlation between abundance of Faecalibacterium prausnitzii (an anti-inflammatory bacterium) and disease severity. Over the course of hospitalization, Bacteroides dorei, Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, Bacteroides massiliensis, and Bacteroides ovatus, which downregulate expression of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) in murine gut, correlated inversely with SARS-CoV-2 load in fecal samples from patients.

In a pilot study of 15 patients with COVID-19, we found persistent alterations in the fecal microbiome during the time of hospitalization, compared with controls. Fecal microbiota alterations were associated with fecal levels of SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19 severity. Strategies to alter the intestinal microbiota might reduce disease severity.



SARS-CoV-2 infects gastrointestinal tissues. The authors investigated changes in fecal microbiomes of patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection during hospitalization and associations with severity and fecal shedding of virus.

Fecal microbiomes from patients with COVID-19 had depletion of symbionts and enrichment of opportunistic pathogens, which persisted after clearance of SARS-CoV-2. Baseline microbiome composition associated with COVID-19 severity. Multiple species from the Bacteroidetes phylum correlated inversely with fecal shedding of SARS-CoV-2.

This was a pilot exploratory study of 15 patients with COVID-19; further studies are needed of alterations in intestinal microbiomes of these patients over time.

These findings indicate the prolonged effect of SARS-CoV-2 infection on the gut microbiomes of patients with COVID-19. Strategies to alter the gut microbiome might be developed to manage gastrointestinal effects of the virus in these patients.

In this pilot study, we hypothesize that the intestinal microbiota is altered in SARS-CoV-2 infection and is associated with susceptibility to severe disease. We prospectively included 15 hospitalized patients with COVID-19 admitted between February 16, 2020, and March 2, 2020, in Hong Kong, China, followed from hospital admission until discharge. Through the application of deep shotgun metagenomics, we investigated longitudinal changes of the gut microbiome in COVID-19.

This prospective study involved 15 patients with COVID-19 hospitalized with laboratory-confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection, 6 patients hospitalized with community-acquired pneumonia (pneumonia controls), and 15 healthy individuals (healthy controls) (Table 1 , Supplementary Table 1, Figure 1 ). SARS-CoV-2 infection was confirmed by 2 consecutive reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) tests targeting different regions of the RdRp gene performed by the local hospital and Public Health Laboratory Service. Pneumonia controls were patients admitted with community-acquired pneumonia tested negative for SARS-CoV-2 PCR on 2 respiratory samples. Patients with COVID-19 and pneumonia controls were admitted to the Prince of Wales Hospital or the United Christian Hospital, Hong Kong. Healthy controls were individuals with no past medical history or history of antibiotic intake in the past 3 months recruited via advertisement from the general population and tested negative for SARS-CoV-2. All subjects were recruited between February 5 and March 17, 2020. Severity of COVID-19 infection was categorized as (1) mild, if there was no radiographic evidence of pneumonia; (2) moderate, if pneumonia was present along with fever and respiratory tract symptoms; (3) severe, if respiratory rate ≥30/min, oxygen saturation ≤93% when breathing ambient air, or PaO2 / FiO2 ≤300 mm Hg (1 mm Hg = 0.133 kPa); or (4) critical, if there was respiratory failure requiring mechanical ventilation, shock, or organ failure requiring intensive care.23 This study was approved by the Joint Chinese University of Hong Kong–New Territories East Cluster Clinical Research Ethics Committees (2020.076). All patients provided informed consent to participate in this study. Data including demographics, laboratory results, imaging results, and medical therapy were extracted from the electronic medical records in the Hong Kong Hospital Authority clinical management system. Fecal samples from patients with COVID-19 were collected serially 2 to 3 times per week until discharge. This study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.

NOTE. Values are expressed in number (percentage) and median (interquartile range).

SARS-CoV-2 viral loads in stool were measured using real-time RT-PCR assay. Viral RNA from stool samples was extracted using QIAamp Viral RNA Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany); 0.1g of stool was suspended in 1 mL of viral transport medium (in 1:10 dilution) and centrifuged for 20 minutes at 4000g. A 140-μL aliquot of the filtrate was used as starting material following the manufacturer’s protocol. SARS-CoV-2 RNA was quantified using real-time RT-PCR. The primer-probe set N1 (2019-nCoV_N1-F: 5ʹ-GAC CCC AAA ATC AGC GAA AT-3ʹ, 2019-nCoV_N1-R: 5ʹ-TCT GGT TAC TGC CAG TTG AAT CTG-3ʹ, and 2019-nCoV_N1-P: 5ʹ-FAM-ACC CCG CAT TAC GTT TGG ACC-BHQ1-3ʹ) designed by US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention were purchased from Integrated DNA Technologies (Coralville, IA). The 1-step real-time RT-PCR reaction contained 10 μL of the extracted preparation, 4 μL TaqMan Fast Virus 1-Step Master Mix (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) in a final reaction volume of 20 μL. The primer and probe concentration were 0.5 μM and 0.125 μM, respectively. The cycling conditions, 25°C for 2 minutes, 50°C for 15 minutes, 95°C for 2 minutes, followed by 45 cycles of 95°C for 15 seconds, and 55°C for 30 seconds, were performed with the StepOnePlus Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems). The cycle threshold values of real-time RT-PCR were converted into viral RNA copies based on a standard curve prepared from 10-fold serial dilutions of known copies of plasmid containing the full N gene (2019-nCoV_N_Positive Control; Integrated DNA Technologies). Samples were considered as negative if the cycle threshold values exceeded 39.9 cycles. The detection limit of real-time RT-PCR was 347 copies/mL.

An approximately 0.1 g fecal sample was prewashed with 1 mL double-distilled H2O and pelleted by centrifugation at 13,000g for 1 minute. The fecal DNA was subsequently extracted from the pellet using Maxwell RSC PureFood GMO and Authentication Kit (Promega, Madison, WI) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, the fecal pellet was added to 1 mL of CTAB buffer and vortexed for 30 seconds, then the sample was heated at 95°C for 5 minutes. After that, the samples were vortexed thoroughly with beads at maximum speed for 15 minutes. Then, 40 μL of proteinase K and 20 μL of RNase A was added to the sample and the mixture was incubated at 70°C for 10 minutes. The supernatant was then obtained by centrifuging at 13,000g for 5 minutes and was added into the Maxwell RSC machine for DNA extraction. Extracted DNA was subject to DNA libraries construction, completed through the processes of end repairing, adding A to tails, purification and PCR amplification, using Nextera DNA Flex Library Preparation kit (Illumina, San Diego, CA). Libraries were subsequently sequenced on our in-house sequencer Illumina NextSeq 550 (150 base pairs paired-end) at the Center for Microbiota Research, The Chinese University of Hong Kong. Raw sequence reads were filtered and quality-trimmed using Trimmomatic v0.3624 as follows: (1) trimming low-quality base (quality score <20); (2) removing reads shorter than 50 base pairs; (3) removing sequencing adapters. Contaminating human reads were filtering using Kneaddata (Reference database: GRCh38 p12) with default parameters. Profiling of bacterial communities was performed using MetaPhlAn2 (V2.9) by mapping reads to clade-specific markers.25

Relative abundance data from MetaPhlAn2 were imported into R v3.5.1. Nonmetric multidimensional scaling analyses were performed on all baseline fecal microbiomes between groups, and serial fecal microbiomes in each COVID-19 case during the disease course, based on Bray-Curtis dissimilarities using vegan package (v2.5–3). Differential bacterial taxa between patients with COVID-19 (with or without antibiotics treatment at inclusion), patients with community-acquired pneumonia, and healthy controls were identified using Multivariate Association with Linear Models (MaAsLin).26 Spearman correlation analyses were conducted to associate baseline microbiome profiles of 7 antibiotics-naïve patients at baseline with COVID-19 severity, and to associate longitudinal fecal SARS-CoV-2 loads with timepoint-matched bacterial profiles across all 15 patients with COVID-19, while adjusting for confounding factors.

Metagenomics Sequencing dataset was deposited to the National Center for Biotechnology Information Sequence Read Archive under BioProject accession number PRJNA624223.

Among the 15 patients with COVID-19, 7 were antibiotics-naïve (COVID-19[abx−]) and 8 received empirical antibiotics (COVID-19[abx+]) at baseline (defined as date of the first stool collection after hospitalization). The median ages of patients with COVID-19, pneumonia controls, and healthy controls were 55, 50, and 48 years, respectively; 40% and 100% of patients with COVID-19 and pneumonia controls, respectively, had underlying comorbidities (Table 1, Supplementary Table 1). All patients with COVID-19 presented with respiratory symptoms but only 1 had diarrhea at presentation. None of the patients developed GI symptoms during hospitalization. Median duration of hospitalization was 21 ± 2.4 days (mean ± SE) in COVID-19 and pneumonia cases.

We next explored whether recovery from SAR-CoV-2 infection was associated with restoration of gut microbiome to a community level similar to that of healthy individuals. Overall, the gut microbiome of all patients with COVID-19 remained stable but were markedly disparate from that of healthy controls, both during the disease course and after clearance of SARS-CoV-2 (Figure 2 C). Although the microbiome of 5 patients with COVID-19 (CoV1, 4, 7, 11, 15) showed closer proximity to healthy microbiomes over time, patients CoV3, 5, 8, 10, and 12 became more disparate from healthy microbiomes over time (Supplementary Figure 7). At the last follow-up, the gut microbiome of these 10 patients remained substantially different from that of healthy controls, despite clearance of SARS-CoV-2 infection as defined by negative SARS-CoV-2 tests on nasopharyngeal swab or deep throat saliva (Figure 2 C, Supplementary Figure7). Of note, patient CoV4 was discharged on day 5 but his gut microbiome on day 22 was persistently different from that of healthy individuals.

To understand whether baseline gut microbiome affects the severity of COVID-19, we assessed association between baseline fecal microbiome and COVID-19 severity (mild, moderate, severe, or critical) in 7 antibiotic-naïve COVID-19 cases. A total of 23 bacterial taxa were found to be significantly associated with COVID-19 disease severity, most of which (15 of 23) were from the Firmicutes phylum (Table 3 ). Among them, 8 and 7 Firmicutes members, respectively, showed positive and negative correlation with disease severity. These data are in line with a report showing that different Firmicutes bacteria have diverse roles in upregulating or downregulating ACE2 expression in the murine gut.21 Our finding of the association of gut Firmicutes bacteria with COVID-19 severity highlights the potential importance of bacterial membership in modulating human response to SARS-CoV-2 infection.

Three bacterial members from the Firmicutes phylum, the genus Coprobacillus, the species Clostridium ramosum and C. hathewayi, were the top bacteria positively associated with COVID-19 disease severity (Spearman correlation coefficient Rho >0.9, P < .01, Table 3). Both C. ramosum and C. hathewayi have been associated with human infection and bacteremia.27 , 29 Importantly, Coprobacillus bacterium has been shown to strongly upregulate colonic expression of ACE2 in the murine gut.21 In contrast, 2 beneficial species, Alistipes onderdonkii and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, were top bacterial species to show a negative correlation with COVID-19 severity (Table 3). Alistipes species are indole positive, involved in the serotonin precursor tryptophan metabolism and in maintaining gut immune homeostasis,30 , 31 whereas F. prausnitzii has anti-inflammatory properties.32 Although we cannot assign a causative or preventive role of these bacteria in disease pathogenesis or severity, our data underscore a potential role for bacteria in determining response to SARS-CoV-2 infection and intensity of the infection in the host.

Eleven of the 15 patients had SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid detected in feces at hospitalization (median 3.86 × 103 copies per mL inoculum, as determined by RT-PCR) and 5 of them cleared the SARS-CoV-2 virus over time (Figure 3 A). We investigated whether gut bacteria were associated with fecal SARS-CoV-2 load over the course of hospitalization. A total of 14 bacterial species were identified to be significantly associated with fecal viral load of SARS-CoV-2 across all fecal samples (Figure 3 B). Among them, 6 species were from the Bacteroidetes phylum. Four Bacteroides species, including Bacteroides dorei, Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, Bacteroides massiliensis, and Bacteroides ovatus, showed significant inverse correlation with fecal SARS-CoV-2 load (all Spearman correlation coefficient Rho <−0.2, P < .05, Figure 3 B). Interestingly, all these 4 species were associated with downregulation of ACE2 expression in the murine colon.21 Taken together, these data suggest that Bacteroides species may have a potential protective role in combating SARS-CoV-2 infection by hampering host entry through ACE2. In contrast, Erysipelotrichaceae bacterium 2_2_44A, a Firmicutes species, showed the strongest positive correlation with fecal SARS-CoV-2 load (Spearman correlation coefficient Rho = 0.89, P = .006, Figure 3 B). Erysipelotrichaceae has been implicated in inflammation-related disorders of the GI tract.33 Considering the strong association of baseline abundance of Erysipelotrichaceae with COVID-19 severity (Spearman correlation Rho = 0.89, P = .006, Table 3), gut Erysipelotrichaceae may play a role in augmenting SARS-CoV-2 infection in the host gut.

We showed for the first time that the gut microbiome was disturbed in patients with COVID-19. The alterations, observed even in patients with COVID-19 naïve to antibiotic therapy, were characterized by enrichment of opportunistic pathogens and depletion of beneficial commensals (Figure 4 ). Loss of salutary species in COVID-19 persisted in most patients despite clearance of SARS-CoV-2 virus, suggesting that exposure to SARS-CoV-2 infection and/or hospitalization may be associated with a more long-lasting detrimental effect to the gut microbiome.

In conclusion, our study provides evidence of prolonged gut microbiome dysbiosis in COVID-19 and its association with fecal SARS-CoV-2 virus shedding and disease severity. These data highlight a new concept that novel and targeted approach of modulation of the gut microbiota may represent a therapeutic avenue for COVID-19 and its comorbidities.

Tao Zuo, PhD (Formal analysis: Lead; Investigation: Equal; Methodology: Lead; Writing – original draft: Lead; Writing – review & editing: Lead). Fen Zhang, PhD (Formal analysis: Equal; Methodology: Equal). Grace C.Y. Lui, Dr (Conceptualization: Equal; Resources: Lead; Writing – review & editing: Equal). Yun Kit Yeoh, PhD (Writing – review & editing: Lead). Amy Y.L. Li, Bachelor (Data curation: Lead). Hui Zhan, PhD (Investigation: Supporting). Yating Wan, PhD (Methodology: Supporting). Arthur Chung, PhD (Methodology: Supporting). Chun Peng Cheung, Bachelor (Project administration: Lead). Nan Chen, Master (Investigation: Supporting). Christopher K.C. Lai, PhD (Writing – review & editing: Supporting). Zigui Chen, PhD (Writing – review & editing: Equal). Eugene Y.K. Tso, MD (Resources: Equal). Kitty S.C. Fung, MD (Resources: Equal). Veronica Chan, MD (Resources: Equal). Lowell Ling, MD (Resources: Equal). Gavin Joynt, PhD (Supervision: Supporting). David S.C. Hui, MD (Supervision: Supporting). Francis K.L. Chan, MD (Supervision: Lead). Paul K.S. Chan, PhD (Project administration: Lead). Siew C. Ng, PhD (Conceptualization: Lead; Funding acquisition: Lead; Resources: Lead; Supervision: Lead; Writing – review & editing: Lead).

Conflict of interest The authors disclose no conflicts.

Funding This study was funded by D. H. Chen Foundation and Health and Medical Research Fund, Hong Kong.

Author names in bold designate shared co-first authorship.

Note: To access the supplementary material accompanying this article, visit the online version of Gastroenterology at www.gastrojournal.org, and at https://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2020.05.048.

LLZ, left lower zone; LMZ, left middle zone; N/A, not applicable.

