Short- and long-read metagenomics of urban and rural South African gut microbiomes reveal a transitional composition and undescribed taxa

Human gut microbiome research focuses on populations living in high-income countries and to a lesser extent, non-urban agriculturalist and hunter-gatherer societies. The scarcity of research between these extremes limits our understanding of how the gut microbiota relates to health and disease in the majority of the world’s population. Here, we evaluate gut microbiome composition in transitioning South African populations using short- and long-read sequencing. We analyze stool from adult females living in rural Bushbuckridge (n = 118) or urban Soweto (n = 51) and find that these microbiomes are taxonomically intermediate between those of individuals living in high-income countries and traditional communities. We demonstrate that reference collections are incomplete for characterizing microbiomes of individuals living outside high-income countries, yielding artificially low beta diversity measurements, and generate complete genomes of undescribed taxa, including Treponema, Lentisphaerae, and Succinatimonas. Our results suggest that the gut microbiome of South Africans does not conform to a simple “western-nonwestern” axis and contains undescribed microbial diversity.

Comprehensive characterization of the full diversity of the healthy human gut microbiota is essential to contextualize studies of the microbiome related to diet, lifestyle, and disease. To date, substantial resources have been invested in describing the microbiome of individuals living in the global industrialized “west” (United States, northern and western Europe; also sometimes referred to as the “Global North”), including efforts by large consortia such as the Human Microbiome Project1 and MetaHIT2. Though these projects have yielded valuable descriptions of human gut microbial ecology, they survey only a small portion of the world’s citizens at the extreme of industrialized, urbanized lifestyle. It is unclear to what extent these results are generalizable to nonwestern and non-industrialized populations across the globe.

Taken together, the results herein offer a more detailed description of gut microbiome composition in understudied transitioning populations, and present complete and contiguous reference genomes that will enable further studies of gut microbiota in nonwestern populations. Importantly, this study was developed with an ethical commitment to engaging both rural and urban community members to ensure that the research was conducted equitably (additional details in Supplementary Information). This work underscores the critical need to broaden the scope of human gut microbiome research and include understudied, nonwestern populations to improve the relevance and accuracy of microbiome discoveries to broader populations.

We enrolled 190 women aged between 40 and 72, living in rural villages in the Bushbuckridge Municipality (24.82°S, 31.26°E, n = 132) and urban Soweto, Johannesburg (26.25°S, 27.85°E, n = 58) and collected a one-time stool sample, as well as point of care blood glucose and blood pressure measurements and a rapid HIV test. As HIV status and exposure to antiretroviral medications can alter the microbiome and potentially confound analyses, only samples from HIV-negative individuals were analyzed further (n = 118 Bushbuckridge, n = 51 Soweto). Participants spanned a range of body mass index (BMI) from healthy to overweight; the most common comorbidity reported was hypertension, and many patients reported taking anti-hypertensive medication (18 of 118 (15%) in Bushbuckridge, 15 of 51 (29%) in Soweto) (Table 1 and Supplementary Table 1). Additional medications are summarized in Supplementary Table 1. We extracted DNA from each stool sample and conducted 150 base pair (bp) paired-end sequencing on the Illumina HiSeq 4000 platform. A median of 34.6 million (M) raw reads were generated per sample (range 11.4–100 M), and a median of 14.9 M reads (range 4.2–33.3 M) resulted after preprocessing including de-duplication, trimming, and human read removal (Supplementary Data 2).

We taxonomically classified sequencing reads against a comprehensive custom reference database containing all microbial genomes in RefSeq and GenBank at “scaffold” quality or better as of January 2020 (177,626 genomes total). Concordant with observations from 16S rRNA gene sequencing of the same samples30, we find that Prevotella, Bacteroides, and Faecalibacterium are the most abundant genera in most individuals across both study sites (Fig. 1a and Supplementary Fig. 1, Supplementary Data 3; species-level classifications in Supplementary Data 4). Additionally, in many individuals we observe taxa that are uncommon in western microbiomes, including members of the VANISH (Volatile and/or Associated Negatively with Industrialized Societies of Humans) taxa (families Prevotellaceae, Succinovibrionaceae, and Spirochaetaceae) such as Prevotella, Treponema, and Succinatimonas, which are higher in relative abundance in communities practicing traditional lifestyles compared to western industrialized populations8,35 (Fig. 1b and Supplementary Data Files 3 and 4). The mean relative abundance of each VANISH genus is higher in Bushbuckridge than Soweto, though the difference is not statistically significant for Paraprevotella or Sediminispirochaeta (Fig. 1b, two-sided Wilcoxon rank-sum test). Within the Bushbuckridge cohort, we observe a bimodal distribution of the genera Succinatimonas, Succinivibrio, and Treponema (Supplementary Fig. 2a). While we do not identify any clinical or demographic features that associate with this distribution, we observe that VANISH taxa are weakly positively correlated with one another in metagenomes from both Bushbuckridge and Soweto (Supplementary Fig. 2b, c).

Intriguingly, we observe that an increased proportion of reads aligned to the human genome during preprocessing in samples from Soweto compared to Bushbuckridge (Supplementary Fig. 3, two-sided Wilcoxon rank-sum test p = 1.66e−12). This could potentially indicate higher inflammation and immune cell content or sloughing of intestinal epithelial cells in the urban Soweto cohort compared to rural Bushbuckridge.

We hypothesized that lifestyle differences of participants residing in rural Bushbuckridge vs. urban Soweto might be associated with demonstrable differences in gut microbiome composition. Bushbuckridge and Soweto differ markedly in their population density (53 and 6357 persons per km2 respectively as of the 2011 census) as well as in lifestyle variables including the prevalence of flush toilets (6.8 vs. 91.6% of dwellings) and piped water (11.9 vs. 55% of dwellings) (additional site demographic information in Supplementary Table 2)36. Soweto is highly urbanized and has been so for several decades, while Bushbuckridge is classified as a rural community, although it is undergoing rapid epidemiological transition37,38. Bushbuckridge also has circular rural/urban migrancy typified by some (mostly male) members of a rural community working and living for extended periods in urban areas, while keeping their permanent rural home39. Although our participants all live in Bushbuckridge, this migrancy in the community contributes to making the boundary between rural and urban lifestyles more fluid. Comparing the two study populations at the community level, we find that samples from the two sites have distinct centroids (PERMANOVA p < 0.001, R2 = 0.037) but overlap (Fig. 2a), though we note that the dispersion of the Soweto samples is greater than that of the Bushbuckridge samples (PERMDISP2 p < 0.001). Across the study population we observe a gradient of Bacteroides and Prevotella relative abundance (Supplementary Fig. 4). This may be the result of differences in diet across the study population at both sites, as Bacteroides has been proposed as a biomarker of westernized lifestyles while Prevotella has been proposed as a biomarker of nonwestern lifestyles5,40,41.

To determine if medication usage was associated with gut microbiome composition, we included each participant’s self-reported concomitant medications (summarized in Supplementary Table 1) to re-visualize the microbiome composition of samples in MDS by class of medication (Supplementary Fig. 5a, b). We find that self-reported medication is not significantly correlated with community composition in this cohort after multiple hypothesis correction (PERMANOVA FDR q > 0.05, Supplementary Fig. 5c), though two drug classes are nominally significant before controlling the false discovery rate: proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) (p = 0.036) and anti-hyperglycemics (p = 0.041). We note that both drug classes have previously been found to associate with changes in gut microbiome composition42–44; as only two participants self-report taking PPIs at the time of sampling, additional data are required to evaluate whether PPIs associate with microbiome composition in these South African populations.

Gut microbiome alpha diversity of individuals living traditional lifestyles has been reported to be higher than those living western lifestyles9,11,40. In keeping with this general trend, we find that alpha diversity (Shannon) is significantly higher in individuals living in rural Bushbuckridge vs. urban Soweto (Fig. 2b; two-sided Wilcoxon rank-sum test, p = 0.042). Using DESeq2 to identify microbial genera that are differentially abundant across study sites, we find that genera including Bacteroides, Bifidobacterium, and Streptococcus are more abundant in individuals living in Soweto (Fig. 2c and Supplementary Data 5, species shown in Supplementary Fig. 6). Interestingly, we find microbial genera enriched in gut microbiomes of individuals living in Bushbuckridge that are common to both the environment and the gut, including Streptomyces and Paenibacillus (Supplementary Data 5). Typically a soil-associated organism, Streptomyces encode a variety of biosynthetic gene clusters and can produce numerous immunomodulatory and anti-inflammatory compounds such as rapamycin and tacrolimus, and it has been suggested that decreased exposure to Streptomyces is associated with increased incidence of inflammatory disease and colon cancer in western populations45. In addition, we find enrichment of genera in Bushbuckridge that have been previously associated with nonwestern microbiomes including Succinatimonas, a relatively poorly-described bacterial genus with only one type species, and unclassified species of the phylum Elusimicrobia, which has been detected in the gut microbiome of rural Malagasy12. Additionally, Bushbuckridge samples are enriched for Cyanobacteria as well as Candidatus Melainabacter, a phylum closely related to Cyanobacteria that in limited studies has been described to inhabit the human gut46,47.

Our custom reference database of GenBank genomes paired with the Kraken 2 classifier optimizes for sensitivity; thus, this approach was selected as the initial tool for classification of the sequencing data given the genomic novelty anticipated in this cohort. We note that broadly similar microbiome profiles are obtained using MetaPhlAn3, a marker-gene based tool with high specificity, as well as classifications obtained using Kraken 2 and a publicly available build of the Genome Taxonomy Database (GTDB) release 9550,51 (Supplementary Fig. 7a, b). Notably, we observe higher Shannon diversity with the GTDB compared to both MetaPhlAn3 and our custom database, likely due to the fact that clades containing a large amount of genomic diversity (e.g., Escherichia coli) are split into separate clades in the GTDB (Supplementary Fig. 7c).

Recognizing that functional annotations are likely biased toward well-studied organisms, we sought to identify differentially abundant functions in the gut microbiome of participants in Bushbuckridge and Soweto. We functionally profiled unassembled metagenomic reads to detect antibiotic resistance genes in these communities. Tetracycline resistance genes (tetO, tetQ, tetW, tetX, tet32, tet40) are broadly prevalent in both populations (Supplementary Fig. 8a) as is the CfxA6 beta-lactamase. We find that Soweto and Bushbuckridge differ in the distribution of relative abundance of 30 of 113 antibiotic resistance genes (27%) with a model coefficient greater than 0.5 (Supplementary Fig. 8b). Several multidrug efflux pump components and regulators (mdtB, mdtC, mdtF, mdtG, mdtL, mdtP, CRP) are enriched in participants in Bushbuckridge, whereas genes including SAT-4, which is a plasmid-encoded streptothricin resistance determinant, and CblA-1, which encodes a class A beta-lactamase, are enriched in Soweto participants (Supplementary Fig. 8b).

In general, HUMAnN was only able to ascribe functions to taxonomy for a few well-studied genera including Escherichia and Klebsiella (Supplementary Fig. 9b). We hypothesize that this is due to gaps in reference genome collections as well as dissimilarity between strains of species that are common to reference collections and metagenomic data from this cohort.

All participants in this study were recruited based on their participation in the first phase of the Africa Wits-INDEPTH partnership for Genomic Studies (AWI-Gen) study, which evaluated genomic and environmental risk factors for cardiometabolic disease in sub-Saharan African populations56. This study included human genome profiling of all participants using the Human Heredity and Health in Africa (H3Africa) single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array. While we have a very small sample size to assess interaction between human genetic variation and microbiome population, our study is one of the relatively few to characterize both human and microbiome DNA. Therefore, we performed association tests between key microbiome genera abundance levels and human SNPs. After correcting for multiple testing there were only a few human genomic SNPs with borderline statistically significant association with microbial genera abundance levels (Supplementary Table 3). These SNPs occur in genomic regions with no obvious connection to the gut microbiome (additional details in Supplementary Information). Additionally, we observe that microbiome samples do not cluster by self-reported ethnicity of the participant (Supplementary Fig. 10).

To place the microbiome composition of South African individuals in global context with metagenomes from healthy adults living in other parts of the world, we compared publicly available data from five cohorts (Fig. 3a and Supplementary Table 4) comprising adult individuals living in the United States1, northern Europe (Sweden)57, agriculturalists living in Burkina Faso28 and rural Madagascar12, and the Hadza hunter-gatherers of Tanzania7. We grouped these datasets by lifestyle into the general categories of “nonwestern” (Tanzania, Madagascar, Burkina Faso), “western” (USA, Sweden), and South African (Bushbuckridge, Soweto). We note the caveat that these samples were collected at different times using different approaches, and that there is variation in DNA extraction, sequencing library preparation and sequencing, all of which may contribute to variation between studies. Recognizing this limitation, we observe that South African samples cluster between western and nonwestern populations in MDS (Fig. 3b) as expected, and that the first axis of MDS correlates well with geography and lifestyle (Fig. 3c). The relative abundance of Spirochaetaceae, Succinivibrionaceae, Bacteroidaceae, and Prevotellaceae are most strongly correlated with the first axis of MDS (Spearman’s ρ >0.75): Bacteroidaceae decreases with MDS 1 while Spirochaetaceae, Succinivibrionaceae, and Prevotellaceae increase (Fig. 3b). We observe a corresponding pattern of decreasing relative abundance of other VANISH taxa across lifestyle and geography (Supplementary Fig. 11). These observations suggest that the gut microbiome of South African cohorts is to some extent “intermediate” in composition when compared to cohorts at the extremes of western and nonwestern lifestyle.

The two South African cohorts also have distinct differences from both nonwestern and western populations, as evidenced by displacement along the second axis of MDS (Fig. 3b, c). To identify the taxa that drive this separation, we used DESeq2 to identify microbial genera that differed significantly in the South African cohort compared to both nonwestern and western categories (with the same directionality of effect in each comparison, e.g., enriched in South Africans compared to both western and nonwestern groups) (Supplementary Fig. 12). We observe that taxa including Lactobacillus, Lactococcus, and Eggerthella are lower in relative abundance in South Africans compared to both western and nonwestern groups. Conversely, Klebsiella and unclassified Christensenellaceae are enriched in South Africans.

Having observed taxonomic differences at the species level between South Africans and other global populations, as well as between Soweto and Bushbuckridge, we hypothesized that strains of some species may differ between populations. We annotated the pangenome of the top six most abundant species on average across our cohorts and assessed whether pangenome content is significantly different between study sites (Supplementary Fig. 13). Interestingly, we find that F. prausnitzii, B. vulgatus, and E. siraeum indeed differ in pangenome content between Bushbuckridge and Soweto (PERMANOVA FDR-adjusted q < 0.05). Prevotella copri strains exhibit visible heterogeneity, but PERMANOVA is not significant after false discovery rate correction.

Given previous observations that gut microbiome alpha diversity is higher in individuals practicing traditional lifestyles3,6,58 and that immigration from Southeast Asia to the United States is associated with a decrease in gut microbial alpha diversity13, we hypothesized that alpha diversity would be higher in nonwestern populations, including South Africans, compared to western populations. We observe that Shannon diversity of the Tanzanian hunter-gatherer cohort is uniformly higher than all other populations (Fig. 3d; q < 0.05 for all pairwise comparisons; FDR-adjusted two-sided Wilcoxon rank-sum test) and that alpha diversity is lower in individuals living in the United States compared to all other cohorts (Fig. 3d; q < 1.2e−05 for all pairwise comparisons; FDR-adjusted two-sided Wilcoxon rank-sum test). Surprisingly, we observe comparable Shannon diversity between Madagascar and Sweden (q > 0.05, two-sided Wilcoxon rank-sum test). However, this could be an artifact of incomplete representation of diverse microbes in existing reference collections.

These observations are critically important to our understanding of beta diversity in the gut microbiome in western and nonwestern communities. In summary, we find evidence to challenge the existing dogma of an inverse relationship between alpha and beta diversity, and note that in some cases this existing generalization represents an artifact of limitations in reference databases used for sequence classification.

Classification of metagenomic sequencing reads can be improved by assembling sequencing data into metagenomic contigs and grouping these contigs into draft genomes (binning), yielding metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs). Notably, MAGs enable investigation of the genomes of uncultivatable organisms. While MAGs can suffer from incompleteness and contamination due to limitations of assembly and binning, software tools exist for evaluating MAG quality63. The majority of publications to date have focused on creating MAGs from short-read sequencing data12,59,64, but generation of high-quality MAGs from long-read data from stool samples has recently been reported65. To better characterize the genomes present in our samples, we assembled and binned shotgun sequencing reads from South African samples into MAGs. We generated 2419 MAGs (39 high-quality, 2038 medium-quality, and 342 low-quality)66 from 169 metagenomic samples (Supplementary Fig. 15a). Applying the criteria for near-complete genomes proposed by Nayfach et al. (≥90% completeness, ≤5% contamination, N50 ≥10 kb, average contig length ≥5 kb, ≤500 contigs, ≥90% of contigs with ≥5X read depth), 832 of these genomes (34%) are designated near-complete. Filtering for completeness greater than 75% and contamination less than 10% and de-replicating at 99% average nucleotide identity (ANI) yielded a set of 1342 nonredundant medium-quality or better representative strain genomes. This de-replicated collection includes VANISH taxa genomes, including 94 Prevotella, 41 Prevotellamassilia, 39 Succinivibrio, and 10 Spirochaetota (4 Treponema_D, 6 UBA9732) (Fig. 5a and Supplementary Data 7).

We compared assembly statistics between all MAGs and nMAGs, and find that while nMAGs are typically less complete when evaluated by CheckM, the contiguity of nanopore medium- and high-quality MAGs is an order of magnitude higher (mean nMAG N50 of 260.5 kb compared to mean N50 of medium- and high-quality MAGs of 15.1 kb) at comparable levels of average coverage (Supplementary Figs. 17 and 18). We expect that CheckM under-calculates the completeness of nMAGs due to the homopolymer errors common in nanopore sequencing, which result in frameshift errors when annotating genomes. Indeed, we observe that nMAGs with comparable high assembly size and low contamination to short-read MAGs are evaluated by CheckM as having lower completeness (Supplementary Fig. 18).

When comparing the de-replicated medium- and high-quality nMAGs with the corresponding short-read MAG for the same organism, we find that nMAGs typically include many mobile genetic elements and associated genes that are absent from the short-read MAG, such as transposases, recombinases, phages, and antibiotic resistance genes (Fig. 5c). Additionally, a number of the nMAGs represent highly contiguous genomes for their clades. For example, we assembled two single-contig, megabase-scale genomes from the genus Treponema, a clade that contains various commensal and pathogenic species (Fig. 5b). Notably, Treponema is a genus within the Spirochaetes phylum, which contains VANISH taxa and is often considered to be completely lost with industrialization9,11. While some Treponema species are known pathogens (T. pallidum), Treponema in non-industrialized communities is thought to serve as a mutualistic fiber degrader in response to different fiber-rich nonwestern diets9. The first of these genomes is a single-contig Treponema succinifaciens genome, classified as Treponema_D succinifaciens by GTDB. The type strain of T. succinifaciens, isolated from the swine gut68, is the only genome of this species currently available in public reference collections. Our T. succinifaciens genome is an initial complete genome representative of this species from the gut of a human. We assembled a second Treponema sp. (GTDB Treponema_D sp900541945; Supplementary Fig. 19), which contains a candidate natural product biosynthetic gene cluster (aryl polyene cluster) and shares 92.1% ANI with T. succinifaciens. Additionally, we assembled a 5.08 Mbp genome for Lentisphaerae sp., an organism that has been shown to be significantly enriched in traditional populations69. This genome also contains an aryl polyene biosynthetic gene cluster and multiple beta-lactamases, and shares 94% 16S rRNA identity with Victivallis vadensis and is classified as Victivallis sp900550905 by the GTDB, suggesting a previously undescribed species or genus of the family Victivallaceae and representing the second closed genome for the phylum Lentisphaerae.

Altogether, we find that de novo assembly approaches are capable of generating contiguous, high-quality assemblies for diverse gut microbes, offering potential for investigation into the previously unclassified genomic content in the microbiomes of nonwestern communities. In particular, nanopore sequencing produced contiguous genomes for organisms that are difficult to assemble due to repeat structures (Prevotella sp., Bacteroides vulgatus), as well as for organisms that are AT-rich (Mollicutes sp., Melainabacteria sp.). We observe that long reads capture a broader range of taxa both at the read and assembly levels when compared to short reads, and that short- and long-read polishing approaches yield medium-quality or greater draft genomes for these organisms. This illustrates the increased visibility that de novo assembly approaches lend to the study of the full array of organisms in the gut microbiome.

Together with Oduaran et al.30, we provide a description of gut microbiome composition in Soweto and Bushbuckridge, South Africa, and to our knowledge, the first effort utilizing shotgun and nanopore sequencing in South Africa to describe the gut microbiome of adults. In doing so, we increase global representation in microbiome research and provide a baseline for future studies of disease association with the microbiome in South African populations, and in other transitional populations.

The present study was conducted in close collaboration between site staff and researchers in Bushbuckridge and Soweto as well as microbiome experts both in South Africa and the United States, and community member feedback was invited and incorporated at multiple phases in the planning and execution of the study (see Oduaran et al.30 and Supplemental Information for additional detail). Tremendous research efforts have produced detailed demographic and health characterization of individuals living in both Bushbuckridge and Soweto32,56,81,82 and it is our hope that microbiome data can be incorporated into this knowledge framework in future studies to uncover disease biomarkers or microbial associations with other health and lifestyle outcomes. More broadly, we feel that this is an example of a framework for conducting microbiome studies in an equitable manner, and we envision a system in which future studies of microbiome composition can be carried out to achieve detailed characterization of microbiomes globally while maximizing benefit to all participants and researchers involved.

Stool samples were collected from women aged 40–72 years in Soweto, South Africa and Bushbuckridge Municipality, South Africa. Participants were recruited on the basis of participation in AWI-Gen56, a previous study in which genotype and extensive health and lifestyle survey data were collected. Human subjects research approval was obtained (Stanford IRB 43069, University of the Witwatersrand Human Research Ethics Committee M160121, Mpumalanga Provincial Health Research Committee MP_2017RP22_851) and informed consent was obtained from participants for all samples collected. Participants were not compensated for participation. Stool samples were collected and preserved in OmniGene Gut OMR-200 collection kits (DNA Genotek). Samples were frozen within 60 days of collection as per manufacturer’s instructions, followed by long-term storage at −80 °C. As the enrollment criteria for our study included previous participation in a larger human genomics project56, we had access to self-reported ethnicity for each participant (BaPedi, Ndebele, Sotho, Tsonga, Tswana, Venda, Xhosa, Zulu, Other, or Unknown). Samples from participants who tested HIV-positive or who did not consent to an HIV test were not analyzed.

DNA was extracted from stool samples using the QIAamp PowerFecal DNA Kit (QIAGEN Cat. No. 12830) according to the manufacturer’s instructions except for the lysis step, in which samples were lysed using the TissueLyser LT (QIAGEN Cat. No. 85600) (30 s oscillations/3 min at 30 Hz). DNA concentration of all DNA samples was measured using Qubit Fluorometric Quantitation (DS DNA High-Sensitivity Kit, ThermoFisher Cat. No. Q32851). DNA sequencing libraries were prepared using the Nextera XT DNA Library Prep Kit (Illumina Cat. No. FC-131-1096). Final library concentration was measured using Qubit Fluorometric Quantitation and library size distributions were analyzed with the Bioanalyzer 2100 (Agilent G2939BA). Libraries were multiplexed and 150 bp paired-end reads were generated on the HiSeq 4000 platform (Illumina). Samples with greater than ~300 ng remaining mass and a peak fragment length of greater than 19,000 bp (with minimal mass under 4000 bp) as determined by a TapeStation 2200 (Agilent G2964AA) were selected for nanopore sequencing. Nanopore sequencing libraries were prepared using the 1D Genomic DNA by Ligation protocol (Oxford Nanopore Technologies SQK-LSK109) following standard instructions. Each library was sequenced with a full FLO-MIN106D R9 Version Rev D flow cell on a MinION sequencer for at least 60 h.

Literature review criteria based on Brewster et al.4 were employed: PubMed, EMBASE, SCOPUS, and Web of Science were queried for observational and interventional research involving the human gut microbiome through January 2021. Terms including “gut microbiome” and “gut microbiota” and names of each of the 54 African countries were included in the search. Primary reports on the gut microbiome in African children and/or adults, utilizing either 16S rRNA or shotgun metagenomic sequencing and written in English, were included. Abstracts, secondary reports, poster presentations, reviews or editorials, and in vivo and in vitro studies were excluded. The list of relevant articles yielded by this search strategy was manually reviewed.

Stool metagenomic sequencing reads were trimmed using TrimGalore v0.6.583 with a minimum quality score of 30 for trimming (–q 30) and minimum read length of 60 (–length 60). Trimmed reads were deduplicated to remove PCR and optical duplicates using htstream SuperDeduper v1.2.0 with default parameters. Reads aligning to the human genome (hg19) were removed using BWA v0.7.17-r118884. Taxonomy profiles were created with Kraken v2.0.9-beta with default parameters85 and (1) a comprehensive custom reference database containing all bacterial and archaeal genomes in GenBank assembled to “complete genome,” “chromosome,” or “scaffold” quality as of January 2020, and (2) the pre-built Struo50 GTDB release 95 database containing one genome per species. Bracken v2.2.0 was then used to re-estimate abundance at each taxonomic rank86. MetaPhlAn352 taxonomy profiles were also generated.

Published data from additional adult populations were downloaded from the NCBI Sequence Read Archive or European Nucleotide Archive (Supplementary Table 4) and preprocessed and taxonomically classified as described above. The study by Backhed et al. sampled both mothers and infants: only the maternal samples were retained in this study. For datasets containing longitudinal samples from the same individual, one unique sample per individual was chosen (the first sample from each individual was chosen from the United States Human Microbiome Project cohort).

K-mer sketches were computed using sourmash v2.0.060. Low abundance k-mers were trimmed using the “trim-low-abund.py” script from the khmer package v3.0.087 with a k-mer abundance cutoff of 3 (-C 3) and trimming coverage of 18 (-Z 18). Signatures were computed for each sample using the command “sourmash compute” with a compression ratio of 1000 (–scaled 1000) and k-mer lengths of 21, 31, and 51 (-k 21,31,51). Two signatures were computed for each sample: one signature tracking k-mer abundance (–track-abundance flag) for angular distance comparisons, and one without this flag for Jaccard distance comparisons. Signatures at each length of k were compared using “sourmash compare” with default parameters and the correct length of k specified with the -k flag.

Unassembled metagenomic reads were functionally profiled using ShortBRED88 v0.9.3 with a pre-built antibiotic resistance database based on the Comprehensive Antibiotic Resistance Database89. Features were pre-filtered for >10% prevalence and statistical analysis was performed using MaAsLin v290 using the compound Poisson linear model (CPLM) and total sum scaling normalization with “site” as a fixed effect.

MetaCyc pathways were profiled with HUMAnN v3.0.052 with default parameters, using the mpa_v30_CHOCOPhlAn_201901 database. Forward and reverse reads were concatenated into one file per sample prior to processing. Pathway abundances were normalized to copies per million and statistical analysis was performed using MaAsLin v2 using the CPLM and total sum scaling normalization with “site” as a fixed effect.

Short-read metagenomic data were assembled with SPAdes v3.1591 and binned into draft genomes using a publicly available workflow (https://github.com/bhattlab/bhattlab_workflows/blob/master/binning/bin_das_tool_manysamp.snakefile, commit version bbe6511 as of Apr 20, 2021). Briefly, short reads were aligned to assembled contigs with BWA v0.7.1784 and contigs were subsequently binned into draft genomes with MetaBAT v2.1592, CONCOCT v1.1.093, and MaxBin v2.2.794. Default parameters were used for each binner, with the following exceptions: For the jgi_summarize_bam_contig_depths step of MetaBAT, minimum contig length was set at 1000 bp (–minContigLength 1000), minimum contig depth of coverage of 1 (–minContigDepth 1), and a minimum end-to-end percent identity of reads of 50 (–percentIdentity 50). Bins were aggregated and refined with DASTool v1.1.195. Bins were evaluated for size, contiguity, completeness, and contamination with QUAST v5.0.296, CheckM v1.0.1397, Prokka v1.14.698, Aragorn v1.2.3899, and Barrnap v0.9 (https://github.com/tseemann/barrnap/). We referred to published guidelines to designate genome quality66. Individual contigs from all assemblies were assigned taxonomic classifications with Kraken v2.0.966,85. To create de-replicated genome collections, genomes with completeness greater than 75% and contamination less than 10% (as evaluated by CheckM) were de-replicated using dRep v3.2.0100 with ANI threshold to form secondary clusters (-sa) at 0.99 (strain-level) or 0.95 (species-level). For comparison to UHGG species representatives, secondary ANI was set to 0.95. dRep chooses the genome with the highest score as the cluster representative according to the following formula: dRep score = A × Completeness − B × Contamination + C × (Contamination × (Strain heterogeneity/100)) + D × log(N50) + E × log(size) + F × (centrality−secondary ani). A through F are values which can be tuned by the user to change the relative importance of each parameter in choosing representative genomes. Default parameters (A = 1, B = 5, C = 1, D = 0.5, E = 0, F = 1) were used herein.

Phylogenetic trees for all de-replicated short- and long-read MAGs were constructed with GTDBtk v1.4.1 and visualized with iTOL v6110. To construct phylogenetic trees for taxa of interest, reference 16S rRNA sequences were downloaded from the Ribosomal Database Project (Release 11, update 5, September 30, 2016)111 and 16S rRNA sequences were identified from nanopore genome assemblies using Barrnap v0.9 (https://github.com/tseemann/barrnap/). Sequences were aligned with MUSCLE v3.8.1551112 with default parameters. Maximum-likelihood phylogenetic trees were constructed from the alignments with FastTree v2.1.10112,113 with default settings (Jukes-Cantor + CAT model). Support values for branch splits were calculated using the Shimodaira-Hasegawa test with 1000 resamples (default). Trees were visualized with FigTree v1.4.4 (http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/software/figtree/).

Statistical analyses were performed using R v4.0.2114 with packages MASS v7.3-53115, stats v4.0.2114, ggsignif v0.6.0116, and ggpubr v0.4.0117. Alpha and beta diversity were calculated using the vegan package v2.6.0118. Two-sided Wilcoxon rank-sum tests were used to compare alpha and beta diversity between cohorts. Count data were rarefied and normalized via cumulative sum scaling and log2 transformation119 prior to MDS. Data separation in MDS was assessed via PERMANOVA (permutation test with pseudo F ratios) using the adonis function from the vegan package. Differential microbial features between individuals living in Soweto and Bushbuckridge were identified from unnormalized count data output from Kraken 2 classification and Bracken abundance re-estimation (filtered for 20% prevalence and at least 500 sequencing reads per sample) using DESeq2 with the formula “~site”120. Plots were generated in R using the following packages: cowplot v1.0.0121, DESeq2 v1.28.0120, genefilter v1.70.0122, ggplot2 v3.3.2123, ggpubr v0.4.0, ggrepel v0.8.2124, ggsignif v0.6.0, gtools v3.8.2125, harrietr v0.2.3126, MASS v7.3-53, reshape2 v1.4.4127, tidyverse v1.3.0128, and vegan v2.6.0.

Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.



Nature Communications thanks Lin-xing Chen, Jiachao Zhang, and the other, anonymous, reviewer for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Peer reviewer reports are available.

Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

These authors contributed equally: Scott Hazelhurst, Ami S. Bhatt.

Deceased: Marianne Alberts.

A list of members and their affiliations appears in the Supplementary Information.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41467-021-27917-x.

