Synergies of Systems Biology and Synthetic Biology in Human Microbiome Studies

A number of studies have shown that the microbial communities of the human body are integral for the maintenance of human health. Advances in next-generation sequencing have enabled rapid and large-scale quantification of the composition of microbial communities in health and disease. Microorganisms mediate diverse host responses including metabolic pathways and immune responses. Using a system biology approach to further understand the underlying alterations of the microbiota in physiological and pathological states can help reveal potential novel therapeutic and diagnostic interventions within the field of synthetic biology. Tools such as biosensors, memory arrays, and engineered bacteria can rewire the microbiome environment. In this article, we review the computational tools used to study microbiome communities and the current limitations of these methods. We evaluate how genome-scale metabolic models (GEMs) can advance our understanding of the microbe–microbe and microbe–host interactions. Moreover, we present how synergies between these system biology approaches and synthetic biology can be harnessed in human microbiome studies to improve future therapeutics and diagnostics and highlight important knowledge gaps for future research in these rapidly evolving fields.

The human microbiota consist of microorganisms, including bacteria, viruses, and fungi, that live in and on the human body (Ursell et al., 2012; Figure 1A). The composition of these microbial communities varies with body site (Ma et al., 2018) and can be influenced by several factors such as age, diet, drugs, and sex (Hollister et al., 2014; Figure 1B). The human microbiota play various roles in physiological functions including development of the immune system (Mezouar et al., 2018), drug metabolism (Nichols et al., 2019), nutrient degradation, protection against pathogens, and vitamin production (Rowland et al., 2018). Moreover, studies have shown that alterations of the homeostatic balance of gut microbial communities (dysbiosis) can be associated with disease including infectious diseases (e.g., Clostridium difficile; Bien et al., 2013), metabolic diseases (Karlsson et al., 2013; Bouter et al., 2017), and inflammatory bowel disease (Tamboli, 2004; Figures 1C,D).

In this review, we will discuss the range of multi-omics data types and computational methods that are used in human microbiome research. We highlight possible outcomes for integrating synthetic biology and systems biology in health and disease applications. Finally, we discuss whether it is possible to integrate both fields in human microbiome studies.

Microbiome research has benefited from recent advances in sequencing techniques and computational tools. There are different computational approaches used to study the microbial species of the human microbiome, to understand the microbial community composition and functions to unravel potential interactions. These methods include metagenomics, metatranscriptomics, metaproteomics, metabolomics, and single-cell omics. These individual methods alone provide limited mechanistic insight. However, combining these techniques with modeling approaches can help in elucidating interactions and predicting the behavior of the microbial community. Each omics technique has advantages and limitations when applied to study microbial communities (Figure 2).

A method commonly used to study microbiome composition is amplicon sequencing (also known as 16s rRNA sequencing). In this method, the DNA is extracted and a specific region of the 16S rRNA gene is amplified and sequenced, and the generated sequences are identified using a reference database (De Oliveira Martins et al., 2020). This method allows for the identification of a specific organism at different taxonomic level (Johnson et al., 2019) and the functional profiles of bacterial communities can be predicted by using different bioinformatic pipelines such as Tax4fun, PICRUSt2, and Vikodak (Aßhauer et al., 2015; Nagpal et al., 2016; Douglas et al., 2020). It is generally fast, cost-effective, and an appropriate tool to characterize unculturable bacterium. Although 16s rRNA sequencing is a powerful tool to study microbiome communities, there are limitations. For instance, this method has a limited taxonomic coverage and can identify bacteria and archaea but not viruses and fungi. In most cases, bacteria can only be identified at genus level due to the high similarity between 16s rRNA genes from closely related species (Osman et al., 2018).

Despite extensive culturing and sequencing, the microbial reference genome remains undefined and there is a need for well-characterized collection of reference genomes. Hence, a culture-independent and reference-free approach is possible by using a metagenome-assembled genome binning method (MAG). This is a computational approach in which sequence reads are assembled into contigs which are then binned into metagenome assembled genomes (MAGs) based on sequence coverage and tetranucleotide frequency. This method enables new insights into species and functions within uncharacterized bacterial communities (Almeida et al., 2019; Nayfach et al., 2019). However, there is still the issue of the incompleteness of the MAGs (Frioux et al., 2020).

The functional profile of microbial communities can be explored with metatranscriptomics. This technique provides information about which genes are expressed in a specific microbial environment. Metatranscriptomics in combination with metagenomics data, which provides the information for gene and species abundances, enables characterization of microbial transcription. Therefore, an in-depth functional profile of a microbe can be acquired such as active metabolic pathways in different contexts (Franzosa et al., 2014; Bikel et al., 2015). A longitudinal metatranscriptomics study of IBD patients showed that the expression of two specific organisms was the reason for the expression of a certain pathway at different time points, which correlated with disease severity (Schirmer et al., 2018).

While metatranscriptomics microbiome analysis holds promise in enhancing our understanding of the microbial communities, several challenges need to be overcome. Using a standard for RNA isolation, and sequence analysis can provide better integration of metatranscriptomics for microbiome research. As such, metatranscriptomics enables better elucidation of functional alterations of the microbiome in a given context and provides information of when a healthy microbiome converts toward a disease-driven configuration.

Metaproteomics aims to study the whole microbial community by measuring the expressed collective proteins. This proteomic profiling method provides a direct measurement of the functional state of the microbial community. Metaproteomics analysis not only provides information about the function of microbial communities but also about the community dynamics and structure (Wilmes and Bond, 2006). Cellular proteins carry out most functions such as transport, catalysis of biochemical reactions, and maintenance of cell structure. These functions provide a picture of the cell phenotype at the molecular level. This understanding can give us a stable picture of microbial community function. Metaproteomic research has revealed remarkable discoveries on the activity and functional pathways of microbial communities. For instance, a metaproteomic study applied to IBD revealed that different protein modules at the mucosal-luminal interface are found between healthy subjects and IBD patients (Li et al., 2016). In general, a metaproteomic approach consists of extraction followed by purification of the protein. Proteins are digested (either chemically or enzymatically) into peptides which are then separated using a technique named liquid chromatography (LC) before mass spectrometry (MS). To identify the proteins, the experimental mass spectra are compared with theoretical mass spectra from a protein database (Hettich et al., 2013). The main advantage of this technique is the identification of proteins and the assignment to taxa providing a better understanding of host physiology. There are some challenges associated with this technique. For example, there are many peptides which are common to most bacterial species and therefore indistinguishable from each other which might result in false positives. Fortunately, in recent years, new software has been developed to handle the requirements of complex mass spectrometry data and reduced the rate of false identifications (Heyer et al., 2017). A drawback is that the interaction between function and taxonomy is difficult to analyze (Easterly et al., 2019). Identifying proteins from a complex microbial community composed of thousands of species is difficult due to the absence of complete genomic sequences of poorly characterized or uncultivated species. Overall, a complete database containing the collection of all known protein sequences is essential to identify the proteins of microbiome samples.

A method that gives a snapshot of the physiology of the cells is metabolomics. This method studies the substrates and products of metabolism and as such provides a functional readout of the cellular state (Fiehn, 2002). Metabolites are exchanged between several species in the microbial community and host, and play key roles in biology as signaling molecules, energy sources, and metabolic intermediates. Hence, the metabolome is the most direct indicator of health or dysbiosis of a specific body niche, making metabolomics a promising method for personalized medicine (Jacob et al., 2019).

Metabolomics has been used in many human microbiome studies to investigate key metabolites and biological networks associated with host–microbiota interactions as it profiles the metabolites found in biofluids. For instance, a study by Gawron et al. (2019) used saliva to understand the pathological changes occurring in the oral cavity during the transition from health to chronic periodontitis and reported a change in eight metabolites. This study demonstrated that metabolomics can give insights in the metabolic status of the oral cavity in chronic periodontitis (Gawron et al., 2019). Urine has been used to study the dysbiosis that occurs in IBD. Williams et al. (2009) showed that a metabolite named hippurate had low levels in the urine of patients suffering from IBD which is interesting as hippurate levels have been shown to correlate with the presence of Clostridia in the gut. A recent large fecal metabolomics population study demonstrated that the fecal metabolome can be influenced by host phenotypes (i.e., age, sex, and obesity), gut microbial composition, and host genetic influences. This demonstrates the strong association between metabolic output and gut microbial structure (Zierer et al., 2018). Another study investigated the associations between the blood metabolome and gut microbial α-diversity (sample diversity) and found that 40 plasma metabolites could be used to predict gut microbiome diversity and that specific metabolites (e.g., TMAO) were also related to human health (Wilmanski et al., 2019).

While meta-omics approaches have aided in the insight of host–microbiota interactions, they have not provided information at the level of the single microbial cell. Single-cell analysis aims to study the cell-to-cell variation within a population of cells; hence, providing insight into cell function and intercellular heterogeneity (Dhawan, 2019). To perform single cell analysis, individual cells are isolated using methods such as flow activated cell sorting (FACS), microfluidics, or serial dilution (Zeb et al., 2019). Remarkable advances in the field of single-cell analysis and in particular single-cell genomics and transcriptomics (sc-RNAseq) have been made. However, profiling the single-cell proteome and metabolome are in their infancy due to high diversity and large dynamic range of the cellular proteome and metabolome. In addition, there is a difficulty in the amplification step and single-cell data requires simultaneous profiling of large number of individual cells to overcome the noise in the data (Zenobi, 2013; Streets et al., 2014; Lin et al., 2019). Single cell nucleic acid analysis (DNA or RNA) have been used in microbiome studies (Xu and Zhao, 2018). The advantage of single cell analysis is that it allows low abundance species, which may not be detected by metagenomic sequencing, to be identified. In addition, the function of individual microbes within a community can be studied (Zenobi, 2013; Streets et al., 2014; Tolonen and Xavier, 2017). A limitation is that cell-sorting is time consuming. Amplification biases and environmental contamination is frequently observed during single cell sequencing (Lasken and McLean, 2014). The technical aspects of many single-cell omics approaches are available in other reviews (Gawad et al., 2016; Svensson et al., 2018). Single cell sequencing has been used in intestinal microbiome research and has led to novel findings such as the identification of specific gut microbial cells which use host-derived compounds and the quantification of taxon abundances of the gut microbiome (Berry et al., 2013; Props et al., 2017). A review of the current applications of single-cell omics in model organisms and in humans as well as the potential it has to improve diagnosis and treatment is available in an excellent article by Strzelecka et al. (2018).

In the previous sections of this review, we have described approaches for understanding microbial diversity and microbial community composition, activity, and functionality. These omics technologies provide different ways to study microbial communities, but currently there is not a single approach that provides a complete picture of the complex interaction of these communities. Integrating multiple omic tools and analyses are needed for a deeper understanding of the members of a microbial community.

As large-scale omics data become more accessible, the integration of this data remains challenging due to the multiple types of data processing. Each individual omics discipline (e.g., genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, and metabolomics) uses specific analytic tools and experiment designs, which makes it difficult to undertake comparisons or integrate the multiple omics datasets. Assuming that the data of the individual omics techniques are of high quality and well validated, different platforms can be used to integrate the data. Recently, Misra et al. (2018) reviewed different tools, databases, and approaches to integrate multi-omics data. For instance, the method ortholog two-way projection to latent structures (O2PLS) can be used to combine multiple sets of omics data, by reducing the feature space and without the need for a priori biological information (Löfstedt and Trygg, 2011). This method has been used, for example, in an asthma study in which data matrices from transcriptomics and metabolomics were combined with other assays (Reinke et al., 2018). Web-based platforms such as 3Omics and MetaboAnalyst enable the integration of different omics data and generate inter-omics correlation networks which aid data visualization (Kuo et al., 2013; Chong et al., 2018). Another approach for multi-omics data integration is with mathematical modeling.

Systems modeling is based on a well-defined understanding of the system (e.g., transcriptomics or metabolomics) that is being studied so that new experimental findings can be compared against the predicted models. For instance, the COBRA (Constraint-Based Reconstruction and Analysis) toolbox contains a function that integrates modeling of experimental molecular systems biology data and enables the prediction of, for instance, phenotypic properties at a genome scale (Heirendt et al., 2007). Mathematical models in biology are a useful platform for either the integration of omics data for new discoveries or to perform simulations to generate new hypotheses (Dahal et al., 2020). There are different types of mathematical modeling approaches such as differential equation models, dynamic models, and constraint-based stoichiometric models which provide insights into the functioning of the microbiome (Zomorrodi and Segrè, 2016).

GEMs have been widely implemented in human microbiome studies to understand the interactions between the host and the microbiota as well as the effect of the microbiome composition on host. Diseases such as cancers, obesity, type 2 diabetes, and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease have been studied using context-specific GEMS (Shoaie et al., 2013; Ji and Nielsen, 2015; Mardinoglu et al., 2015; Shubham et al., 2017; Bidkhori et al., 2018; Rosario et al., 2018). GEMs can be constrained by using uptake/secretion reactions of metabolites, transcription data, rate of turnover of molecules through a metabolic pathway, also known as flux, and the gene expression state (on or off) based on information of high-throughput data (Bordbar et al., 2014). These constrains can specify a particular state or condition in which information of the overall metabolic capacity of the microbes can be obtained. Multiple GEMS can be joined together along their extracellular compartments to build a community model. This community model can be linked to a “common compartment” mimicking a certain body niche such as the human gut. This approach can be used to identify beneficial bacteria for human health and hence be used for the treatment of disorders that are associated with the human microbiota. Simulations such as flux variability analysis can estimate the flux span (minimum or maximum possible difference) for a specific metabolic exchange reaction of bacterial strains in a microbial community (Gudmundsson and Thiele, 2010). Also, pairwise analysis of microbes (can predict six different interactions: competition, parasitism, amensalism, neutralism, commensalism, and mutualism) in a community can be undertaken as well as measuring how the metabolic relationships change when introduced to different diets (Heinken et al., 2019). In the human gut microbiota, short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) are bacterial metabolites produced in the colon and have been shown to impact on human health. With the help of GEMs, it was found which microbes produced specific SCFAs and that the concentration of SCFAs is low in Crohn’s disease (Bauer and Thiele, 2018). Thus, GEMs can give an insight into altered molecular processes in the development of diseases. Using GEMs and integrating high-throughput data gives us insights into microbial communities and is key to understanding the microbiome. This knowledge can directly or indirectly contribute (e.g., with biotechnological applications) to changing the microbiome to benefit the medical industry (Figure 3).

Early stage diagnostics are essential to detect diseases in the initial phases, when treatments tend to be more effective. Diagnostic applications of the microbiome are needed to assess dysbiosis states or specific diseases. For most diagnostics, a sample from the patient is obtained (e.g., urine, saliva, feces). This sample is then studied in a clinical laboratory, providing information about the health of the patient. Using multi-omics techniques, applied to the human microbiome, resulted in the discovery of biomarkers, for example, in periodontal disease and oral cancer (Yoshizawa et al., 2013). Besides traditional diagnostics, new diagnostics using synthetic biological systems can be employed to develop devices that can sense a stimulus in situ and immediately provide a therapeutic.

Quorum sensing can be used to control the expression of engineered functions and to restrict expression to a relevant body site. For instance, in a study by Swofford et al. (2015), the authors engineered the species Salmonella enterica to turn on gene expression in tumors, as there is a high cellular density, and remained off in other off-target locations such as the liver where a low bacterial cell density was present. This study shows promise in using quorum sensing mechanisms to control expression at a specific site. Also, autoinducer (AI-2) has been shown to be present in the human gastrointestinal tract and this molecule is produced by many gut bacterial species, which promote colonization of Firmicutes over Bacteroidetes and can limit Vibrio cholerae infections (Hurley and Bassler, 2017). Hence, QS provides an opportunity to intervene in gut dysbiosis.

The field of synthetic biology provides ways to rebalance the dysbiosis of the microbiome, therefore preventing the development or treating diseases. Recent advances in this field make use of genetically engineered bacteria to deliver targeted therapies for treatment of diseases such as HIV, inflammatory bowel disease, diabetes, and cancer (Duan et al., 2015; Gosmann et al., 2017; Ho et al., 2018; Charbonneau et al., 2020). This new approach has several advantages in comparison with the traditional therapeutics (Braat et al., 2006; Lagenaur et al., 2011; Takiishi et al., 2017; Zheng et al., 2017). First, the production costs of medication would decrease as the microorganisms will produce the therapeutic directly in the human body. Second, reduced side effects are expected as the administration is non-invasive and the therapeutics are administered locally.

Besides phages, another way to alter the microbial community is with the help of AMPs. These are a diverse group of bioactive small proteins; key regulators of interaction between microbes and host. Especially the gastrointestinal tract has been explored extensively. For example, an E. coli strain has been modified to overproduce the compound arginine to lower the amount of blood ammonia from the intestine to correct for rare metabolic disorders. This engineered strain had no serious adverse events and is now in clinical trials (Kurtz et al., 2019). Also, E. coli has been engineered to produce multiple AMPs to specifically target and kill specific Enterococcus species to decrease murine colonization (Geldart et al., 2018).

As described previously, synthetic and systems biology offer very promising opportunities to understand, diagnose, and treat microbiome-associated disorders. However, they still have several challenges. One of the major limitations in microbiome studies is recovering reliable assembled genomes form metagenomics studies with higher quality draft, therefore less accurate functional annotations to unravel the microbe’s specific phenotype. This can hinder the reconstruction of biological networks for incomplete genomes such as GEMs within large ecosystems. Advances in technologies such as culturomics could offer isolation of new strains and generating new genomes. Culturomics is a high-throughput culture approach and describes the microbial composition. In this method, various selective and/or enriched culture conditions are coupled to MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry and targeted sequencing (Greub, 2012). However, this technology is laborious, costly, and time consuming. Moreover, a deeper understanding of host physiology will make the construction of synthetic biology tools more reliable, precise, and robust. This will enable us to design microbial diagnostics and therapeutics to target human pathologies associated with human microbiome for which there is still an urgent unmet need.

There has been a great progress in the past decades in human microbiome research. Advancement in systems biology contributed to the newfound knowledge on the microbiome. This knowledge has demonstrated great success for understanding microbiome associated diseases. However, there is still a lot about the microbiome that is unknown. Especially, the dynamics and interactions of microbiomes are largely not understood. Studying the direct interaction between the host and microbiome remains a challenge. However, recently, microfluid systems called organs-on-a-chip were designed to mimic an organ in vitro. In this study, the human gut microbiota was co-cultured with intestinal epithelial cells and local immune cells providing an in vitro model in which the host–microbiome interactions could be studied (Jalili-Firoozinezhad et al., 2019). This method shows potential and opens new opportunities for personalized medicine and human microbiome studies. Engineering approaches will allow us to “communicate” with other microorganisms or the host. Together with omics technologies, this can help to unravel the microbiome remaining mysteries. In comparison with the gut, the microbiomes of the skin, oral cavity, genitals, and airways is in its infancy. Thus, more research needs to be directed in the aforementioned microbiomes. Synthetic biology not only provides tools to develop a deeper understanding of the microbiome but also has shown great promises toward diagnostics and therapeutics. Challenges of synthetic biology–based microbiome therapeutics and diagnostics are mostly associated with the incomplete knowledge of the microbe–microbe and host–microbe reactions. When this understanding is improved, it will go hand in hand with enhanced and localized diagnostics and therapeutics.

SS and RL-A conceived the project. RL-A supervised the work. BE, SS, and RL-A wrote and revised the manuscript. All authors contributed to the article.

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

Funding. RL-A gratefully acknowledges support from 19-ERACoBioTech-33 SyCoLim BB/T011408/1, BBSRC BB/T013176/1, and BB/R01602X/1, British Council 527429894, European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Program (DEUSBIO—949080). SS was supported by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC), EP/S001301/1, Biotechnology Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC) BB/S016899/1, Science for Life Laboratory.

