Dynamics of metatranscription in the inflammatory bowel disease gut microbiome



Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a group of chronic diseases of the digestive tract affecting millions of people worldwide. Genetic, environmental and microbial factors have been implicated in onset and exacerbation of IBD. However, the mechanisms associating gut microbial dysbioses and aberrant immune responses remain largely unknown. The integrative Human Microbiome Project (iHMP) seeks to close these gaps by examining the dynamics of microbiome functionality in disease by profiling the gut microbiomes of more than 100 individuals sampled over a one year period. Here, we present the first results based on 78 paired fecal metagenomes/metatranscriptomes and 222 additional metagenomes from 59 Crohn’s disease (CD), 34 ulcerative colitis (UC), and 24 non-IBD control patients. We demonstrate several cases in which measures of microbial gene expression in the inflamed gut can be informative relative to metagenomic profiles of functional potential. First, while many microbial organisms exhibited concordant DNA and RNA abundances, we also detected species-specific biases in transcriptional activity, revealing predominant transcription of pathways by individual microbes per host (e.g. by Faecalibacterium prausnitzii). Therefore, a loss of these organisms in disease may have more far-reaching consequences than suggested by their genomic abundances. Further, we identified organisms that were metagenomically abundant but inactive or dormant in the gut with little or no expression (e.g. Dialister invisus). Lastly, certain disease-specific microbial characteristics were more pronounced or only detectable at the transcript level, such as pathways predominantly expressed by different organisms in IBD patients (e.g. Bacteroides vulgatus and Alistipes putredinis). This provides potential insights into gut microbial pathway transcription that can vary over time, inducing phenotypic changes complementary to those linked to metagenomic abundances. The study’s results highlight the strength of analyzing both the activity and presence of gut microbes to provide insight into the role of the microbiome in IBD.

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a group of chronic inflammatory disorders that affects all or part of the digestive tract and incidence rates are increasing worldwide1. IBD is a lifelong disease with no effective long-term treatment options, and an estimated 25-30% of all patients present with symptoms before the age of 202,3. Several human genetic mutations are implicated in an increased susceptibility to IBD; however, not everyone who carries these mutations develops IBD, indicating that additional exposures are also involved. Recognizing that the gut microbiome is one such factor altered in Crohn’s disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC) patients, the two main forms of IBD, is one of the most significant developments in the field of IBD in the last decade and provides a wealth of opportunities for the discovery of diagnostic and therapeutic approaches4,5.

In order to close these gaps, we compared the functional potential of gut microbial communities (from shotgun metagenomics) to direct measures of functional activity (from metatranscriptomics) in a longitudinal cohort. Fecal samples were collected biweekly from approximately 100 patients over the course of one year and subjected to shotgun metagenomic (DNA) and metatranscriptomic (RNA) sequencing. Here, we present the results based on 78 paired metagenomes and metatranscriptomes and an additional 222 metagenomes. For many species, functional potential was well-correlated with functional activity. However, we were able to identify species-specific shifts in transcript levels indicating that some organisms (e.g. Faecalibacterium prausnitzii) and pathways may play a more central role in maintaining gut health than their genomic abundances indicate. We also detected organisms that were metagenomically present but with low or non-existent gene expression (e.g. Dialister invisus), suggesting that the organism is either dead or inactive and hence of questionable importance in the gut community. In addition, we uncovered disease-specific changes in microbial gene expression that were either more pronounced or only detectable on the RNA level (e.g. metabolic pathways contributed by Bacteroides vulgatus and Alistipes putredinis). Together, our findings highlight that crucial insight into microbial community dynamics can be gained through integrated analysis of metatranscriptomic and metagenomic profiles of microbial community structure and function. This approach will lead to a better understanding of the underlying mechanisms of gut microbial dysbioses and their role in IBD.

As part of the Integrative Human Microbiome Project (iHMP or HMP2), the goal of the IBD Multi’omics Database (IBDMDB, http://ibdmdb.org) is to assemble longitudinal multi’omic profiles of IBD patients to gain insight into the mechanisms of microbial dysbioses and their effects on disease onset and progression (Fig. 1). Participants provided biweekly stool samples over the course of one year from which we generated shotgun metagenomic and metatranscriptomic sequencing data. In this one of several resulting datasets and studies, we analyzed 78 paired metagenomes/metatranscriptomes and an additional 222 metagenomes from 117 individuals: 59 CD patients, 34 with UC, and 24 non-IBD controls (Fig. 1a). These datasets yielded high-resolution profiles of gut microbial community composition (taxonomy), functional potential, and functional activity.

Consistent with previous studies, taxonomic shifts in microbial composition inferred from the metagenomic data accounted for significant, but modest effect size, separation among the three phenotypes (Fig. 1b). Longitudinal profiling further emphasized that variation in microbial community composition is dominated by inter-individual effects, as samples from the same subject tended to cluster tightly. However, we also observed taxonomic shifts in community composition over time that coincided with changes in disease severity [i.e. as measured by the Harvey-Bradshaw Index (HBI)] and antibiotic treatment (Fig. S1). This highlights the importance of examining longitudinal profiles in order to establish a better understanding of species dynamics within and across patients.

In order to better understand the variability in microbial species composition within and across individuals, we first examined the taxonomic profiles from six long time courses (i.e. 2 CD, 2 UC and 2 non-IBD patients with at least 12 samples each over the one-year sampling period; Fig. S2a). Three general patterns were observed: 1) intra-personal stability, 2) global stability, and 3) inter- and intra-personal variability. Intra-personal stability refers to species that were only encountered in individual patients or a subset of the patients and represented permanent members of their gut microbial community (Fig. S2b). The relative abundances of these species often remained fairly stable over the course of the year. Among these patient-specific microbial organisms were several Bacteroides species, suggesting that these closely related organisms can contribute similar functions in different patients.

In contrast, we also encountered many examples of microbial organisms that were universally present in all patients at high abundance (1-10%), including Faecalibacterium prausnitzii and Bacteroides vulgatus, two species that are implicated in gut inflammation and IBD specifically (Fig. S2c)13,17,20,21. Their tendency to be present in all patients irrespective of disease phenotype suggests that their abundance or transcriptional activity rather than presence/absence plays a role in gut inflammation. Finally, some species displayed inter- and intra-personal variability patterns, intermittently disappearing and reappearing in all six patients over time (Fig. S2d). Among these were prominent IBD-associated organisms such as Ruminococcus gnavus and Roseburia intestinalis, highlighting that taxonomic variability is not only observed between patients but also within a patient over time22,23. Furthermore, spikes of R. gnavus were observed in some IBD patients in the overall cohort, with relative abundances of up to 19%.

In order to compare and contrast community functional potential and functional activity, we profiled the 78 paired metagenomes and metatranscriptomes with HUMAnN224, which outputs per-sample pathway abundance, stratified according to individual species’ contributions (Methods). Averaging first within and then across patients, we found that species contributing more pathway copies to the total pool of microbial genomic DNA (i.e. more metagenomically abundant species) also tended to contribute more pathway transcripts (Fig. 2a).

Faecalibacterium prausnitzii exhibited a third distinct pattern of behavior: poor correlation in total DNA and RNA abundances across samples despite being abundant on average across both data types (Fig. 2c). F. prausnitzii is a known producer of butyrate, a SCFA that plays a role in maintaining gut health and barrier function, and previous studies have found the species to be depleted in IBD patients13,17,20. While F. prausnitzii remained fairly stably abundant in IBD patients with long time courses (Fig. S2c), the metatranscriptomic data suggests that the metagenomic abundance of this species is not predictive of its relative transcriptional activity (Fig. 2c).

The patterns of species-specific microbial transcription introduced above can be further stratified to identify interactions with IBD phenotype (Fig. S4). More specifically, if we define a dysbiosis as a shift in a species’ mean pathway contributions between IBD phenotypes (UC or CD) and non-IBD controls, a species can be dysbiotic at the DNA level, the RNA level, or both, and in any combination of directions. The seven species that exhibited the largest such dysbioses are summarized in Fig. 2d (for a complete list see Table S1). Of these, two exhibited a more pronounced dysbiosis in their functional activity compared to their functional potential. Ruminococcus gnavus exhibited the largest amplification of disease-specific dysbiosis on the RNA level, with greatly increased RNA abundance in both CD and UC patients compared to non-IBD controls (~3 orders of magnitude) in a background of a smaller increase in DNA abundance (~1 order of magnitude). Hence, small changes in the abundance of R. gnavus may be more consequential than previously assumed.

The two species that exhibited the largest difference in community DNA compared to RNA were Clostridium symbiosum and Bacteroides faecis. One possible implication may be that the impact of these species on disease progression is less critical than suggested by the metagenomic data alone. While the preceding examples focused on dysbioses that were consistent across the two IBD subtypes, this was not always the case. For example, Bacteroides fragilis was less abundant in DNA in UC patients compared to non-IBD controls, while it was more abundant in CD patients. On the other hand, the species’ mean RNA abundance was similar between CD and non-IBD patients but markedly lower in UC. Furthermore, we observed many examples of species whose overall expression was comparable across disease phenotypes with similar DNA and RNA pathway abundances (Fig. 2e). These organisms are thus unlikely to play a role in disease onset and progression.

To compare the functional potential and activity of the entire microbial community, we next investigated overall metabolic pathway abundances in both data types (Fig. 3). We used contributional alpha diversity as a measurement to compare the diversity of organisms contributing metagenomically and metatranscriptomically to each pathway (Methods). This allowed us to distinguish pathways contributed by a single or few microbial organisms, representing specialized metabolic processes, from pathways that are contributed by a multitude of organisms, representing more essential metabolic processes (Fig. 3a).

One of the pathways where transcription was dominated by F. prausnitzii was dTDP-L-rhamnose biosynthesis I (Fig. 3c). The resulting deoxysugar β-L-rhamnopyranose functions as a building block of the glycan component of the O-antigens, which is a major target for the immune systems and the target of many vaccine development studies32–35. Regulation of this biosynthetic pathway has been previously studied in the context of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, in which it is transcriptionally regulated specifically by quorum sensing systems36. Quorum sensing is a mechanism by which regulation (within or among species) can achieve multi-stability, i.e. activate or deactivate expression only after a certain concentration of signaling molecule is achieved. As this type of multi-stability is exhibited by many pathways in the metatranscriptome - that is, only one of several possible organisms upregulated, and others downregulated - we hypothesize that these, and specifically the expression of F. prausnitzii for this pathway, may be regulated through quorum-sensing-like mechanisms, constituting a potential example of interspecies interactions in the gut.

Differences between pathway encoding versus transcription were particularly evident in the pathway contributions of Alistipes putredinis and Bacteroides vulgatus and these transcriptional effects were also disease-associated (Fig. 4). A. putredinis exhibited the highest discrepancy between functional potential and functional activity across all of its pathways (Fig. 3b). One example is the methylerythritol phosphate (MEP) pathway, which was consistently overtranscribed by A. putredinis (Fig. 4a). The product of this pathway, isopentenyl diphosphate (IPP), is used by organisms in the biosynthesis of terpenes and terpenoids: a group of natural products that have been increasingly mined for drug discovery, in particular for cancer. In E. coli, the MEP pathway is also involved in the production of phosphate-containing antigens recognized by human gamma delta T lymphocytes, which are suggested to play an important role in the immune response to microbial organisms37. Furthermore, IPP can be converted to the more-reactive electrophile dimethylallyl pyrophosphate (DMAPP), which has been shown to induce acute inflammation38.

We further examined disease-associated transcriptional changes that generalized across IBD patients. The most pronounced IBD-specific transcriptional changes were observed for Bacteroides vulgatus (Fig. 4c). More specifically, most B. vulgatus pathways were more DNA-abundant in non-IBD patients, but many of these pathways were considerably more RNA-abundant among UC and CD patients (Fig. 4d). This suggests that B. vulgatus follows a different transcriptional program in IBD patients, possibly triggered by disease-specific environmental changes in the gut (e.g. inflammation or increased levels of oxygen).

Our findings highlight that directly measuring functional activity of the gut microbiome through metatranscriptomics reveals important insights that are only partially observable in metagenomic functional potential, including disease-linked observations. For some pathways, a dominant transcribing organism was identified in a background of mixed metagenomic contributions. Several striking examples of this phenomenon involved, for example, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, Bacteroides vulgatus or Alistipes putredinis, which often dominated pathway transcription in IBD even when not the most abundant organism in a sample. Furthermore, several species displayed altered expression profiles in IBD.

In conclusion, metagenomics and metatranscriptomics can provide complementary insights into community interactions and disease-specific alterations in population-scale human microbiomes, here demonstrated in the IBD gut microbial community. In particular, disease-related changes in the gut environment may specifically affect microbial expression patterns, in different organisms and pathways among individuals, and in some cases without altering metagenomically-measured functional potential. In order to understand the underlying mechanisms associating microbial dysbiosis with aberrant immune responses, we need to understand how the behavior of individual organisms, as well as the gut community as a whole, changes in disease. Furthermore, disease-specific changes may be patient-specific and the specific microbial organisms in a patient’s gut may react differently to environmental changes, resulting in different short-term expression dynamics. Longitudinal, multi’omic, patient-focused studies will thus provide an important step towards understanding microbiome-related diseases and their roles in personalized medicine.

Patients at Massachusetts General Hospital [as part of the Prospective Registry in IBD Study (PRISM)], Emory University, and Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, with a suspected diagnosis of IBD were approached for participation in the new-onset and pediatric portion of the study. Patients were consented prior to a screening colonoscopy, which separated them into confirmed IBD patients and non-IBD controls. Sampling and data gathering began at a later “baseline” visit no more than 6 months after their diagnosis was confirmed. New-onset patients were excluded if they were on an anti-TNF inhibitor. Established disease patients were recruited from the MLI cohort at the Cedars-Sinai IBD Center, and were required to have had a diagnosis of IBD for over 5 years. Participants in all groups were excluded if they were pregnant, had a known bleeding disorder, had taken antibiotics within the month preceding the screening visit, were actively being treated for a malignancy with chemotherapy, had an acute gastrointestinal infection, were diagnosed with an indeterminate colitis, or had had bowel/intestinal surgery other than an appendectomy or cholecystectomy. Non-IBD controls were further required to have no known immune-mediated disease (rheumatoid arthritis, lupus, or type 1 Diabetes mellitus).

In total, 117 patients participated in the study, with 59 CD patients, 34 UC patients and 24 non-IBD controls. This includes 55 pediatric patients (age ≤ 17 years; 13 non-IBD patients) with new-onset disease (13 UC, 29 CD) and 62 adults (age ≥ 18 years, 11 non-IBD patients), which were divided into new-onset (9 UC, 13 CD) and those with established disease (12 UC, 17 CD). Gender was balanced across all cohorts, with 57 male and 60 female patients overall, and no more than a difference of 2 patients between genders for any disease type. Stool samples were self-collected biweekly for one year from each patient according to the protocol established in47, starting from the baseline visit. Disease severity was monitored using the Harvey-Bradshaw Index48 (HBI) for CD patients and the Simple Clinical Colitis Activity Index49 (SCCAI) for UC patients.

Subject recruitment and study procedures were approved by and carried out in accordance with the Research Ethics Boards of Massachusetts General Hospital (IRB for adult cohort: 2013P002215, IRB for pediatric cohort: 2014P001115), Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center (IRB: 2013-7586), Emory University (IRB: IRB00071468), and Cedars-Sinai Medical Center (IRB: 3358). In compliance with the Research Ethics Board study approval, informed consent was obtained from all study participants immediately prior to the initial sample collection. Further, all experimental methods are compliant with the Helsinki Declaration.

For metagenomic sequencing, the total genomic DNA content of the sample was sequenced, allowing us to infer functional potential of the community and taxonomic composition at species-level. For metatranscriptomics, messenger RNA (mRNA) was extracted, reverse transcribed into complementary DNA (cDNA), and subsequently sequenced. DNA was extracted from 300 samples spanning all 117 participants, and RNA from a subset of 78 samples spanning 28 participants. Illumina HiSeq sequencing yielded a total of 4.59 Gnt and 1.06 Gnt of paired-end reads (2×100 nt) of metagenomic and metatranscriptomic sequencing, respectively. Metagenomes averaged 30,581,993 reads ± 12,567,915 reads (mean ± s.d.) per sample before quality filtering (see below) and 28,242,423 reads ± 12,437,200 reads afterward. Meanwhile, metatranscriptomes averaged 27,211,997 reads ± 21,831,783 reads and 20,050,758 reads ± 16,301,242 reads before and after quality control, respectively.

Sequence reads were processed with the KneadData v0.5.1 quality control (QC) pipeline (http://huttenhower.sph.harvard.edu/kneaddata), which uses the Trimmomatic50 and BMTagger51 filtering and decontamination algorithms to remove low-quality read bases and host (human) reads, respectively. Trimmomatic was run with parameters MAXINFO:80:0.5, and Phred quality scores were thresholded at <20. Trimmed non-human reads shorter than 50 nt were discarded. Potential human contamination was filtered by removing reads that aligned to the human genome (reference genome hg19). Additionally, metatranscriptomic reads were filtered against the human transcriptome and the SILVA database52. After QC, samples averaged 28 million and 20 million reads in MGX and MTX respectively (minimum 2 million).

Taxonomic profiling was performed using the MetaPhlAn2 classifier53, which unambiguously classifies metagenomic reads to taxonomies based on a database of clade-specific marker genes derived from 17,000 microbial genomes (corresponding to >7,500 bacterial, viral, archaeal, and eukaryotic species). Functional profiling of metagenomes and metatranscriptomes was performed using HUMAnN224 version 0.9.6 (http://huttenhower.sph.harvard.edu/humann2). Briefly, the MetaPhlAn2 taxonomic profile generated from a metagenome is used to identify the set of organisms present in a sample. Metagenomic and metatranscriptomic reads are then mapped using Bowtie254 to sample-specific pangenomes including all gene families in any microbe present. A translated search using DIAMOND55 then maps unmapped reads against UniRef9056. Hits are counted per gene family and normalized for length and alignment quality. Gene family abundances from both the nucleotide and translated searches are then combined into structured pathways from MetaCyc57 and sum-normalized to relative abundances. We ran HUMAnN2 with the MinPath58 and gap filling options. As a result, 385 pathways had non-zero abundance in at least one metagenome, and 331 pathways had non-zero abundance in at least one metatranscriptome. The nucleotide search identified 182 species contributing these pathways in metagenomes, and 134 species in metatranscriptomes (a subset of the MGX species).

All of our datasets consisted of at least 2 million reads (corresponding to at least 20 observed reads per species) and the majority of them were in excess of 10 million reads (corresponding to at least 100 observed reads per species), ensuring that species calls were well supported (Fig. S2E).

(Fig. 2A+D+E,
4E, S3C): The total contribution of each species to the functional profile was computed by summing their contributions over all pathways. Only the 51 species, which contributed at least one pathway in DNA and RNA level in >10% of samples (8 samples) were considered. Species contributions were first averaged over all samples where the species was detected within each patient and then across patients. Fig. 2B+C: For all species we computed Spearman correlation coefficients between their total pathway contributions to the metagenomes and metatranscriptomes across all samples.

Stacked bar plots presented in Figs. 3,
4, S3, and S4 were ordered to maximize the similarity of species contributions to the pathway’s abundance between adjacent samples. For this, we calculated Bray-Curtis dissimilarities between the sum-normalized species contributions to the pathway in a given sample for both the metatranscriptomic and metagenomic data. The two dissimilarity matrices were combined by a weighted mixture, with metagenomic dissimilarities weighted at 1/100th of metatranscriptomic dissimilarities. The final sample order was determined by running solve_TSP from the R package TSP on the mixture dissimilarity matrix. To determine which sample to place first, we included a “fence” sample with zero dissimilarity to all other samples in the above procedure. The fence sample was then placed in the first position by rotating the final sample order appropriately, before finally removing it.

We quantified the contributional alpha diversity of species contributing to the abundance of a MetaCyc pathway in DNA or RNA by the Gini-Simpson index of alpha diversity. Pathways were first excluded if they had non-zero abundance in DNA in less than 95% of the samples, or if more than 25% of the pathway was attributed to unclassified organisms (from HUMAnN2’s translated search) in more than 25% of the samples. For each of the 58 remaining pathways, we then computed the Gini-Simpson index from the relative contribution of each species to the pathway for each sample (excluding unclassified organisms). The pathway’s alpha diversity was then defined as the mean alpha diversity of samples with non-zero abundance.

All sequencing data and metadata is available on www.ibdmdb.org. The metagenomic and metatranscriptomic sequencing data is also available on SRA (BioProject: PRJNA389280).

Competing interests

DPBM is consulting for Cidara. The authors declare no other competing financial interests.

