The role of gut microbiome in immune modulation in metastatic renal cell carcinoma

Treatment of metastatic renal cell carcinomas (mRCC) has drastically improved since the advent of immunotherapy with immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs), with a significant proportion of patients achieving durable responses. While this has revolutionized treatment and improved outcomes for mRCC patients, a large subset of patients still does not respond to treatment with ICIs. Moreover, ICIs can induce various immune-related adverse events, limiting their use in many patients. Therefore, there is a need to identify the predictive biomarkers of both efficacy and toxicity associated with ICIs, which would allow for a more personalized approach and help with clinical decision-making. This review aims to explore the role of the gut microbiome in RCC to overcome primary resistance and predict response to treatment with ICIs. First, current therapeutic strategies and mechanisms of action of ICI therapies for RCC treatment will be reviewed. With the technological development of shotgun whole-genome sequencing, the gut microbiome has emerged as an exciting field of research within oncology. Thus, the role of the microbiome and its bidirectional interaction with ICIs and other drugs will be explored, with a particular focus on the microbiome profile in RCC. Lastly, the rationale for future clinical interventions to overcome resistance to ICIs using fecal microbiota transplantation in patients with RCC will be presented.

Immunotherapies with immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) have revolutionized the treatment of advanced cancers in the last decade, particularly in melanoma, non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), and renal cell carcinoma (RCC). 1 More recently, ICIs have been used in triple-negative breast cancers, head and neck malignancies, and investigated in new settings such as adjuvant treatment of urothelial carcinoma and RCC.2,3 RCC accounts for 2–3% of cancers with an annual incidence of 338,000 cases worldwide. 4 At diagnosis, roughly 30% of these patients present with de novo metastatic disease. Additionally, approximately one-third of those who initially receive curative-intent treatment eventually progress to advanced disease. 1 The median overall survival (mOS) in patients with metastatic disease was about 22 months, prior to the advent of ICIs, at a time when multi-targeted receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) were the standard of care first-line treatment. 5 However, recent advances in the treatment of metastatic RCC (mRCC) with either combination of ipilimumab and nivolumab or anti-programmed cell death-1 (PD-1) inhibitors plus a TKI agent have significantly improved efficacy, at the cost of risk of immune-related adverse events (irAEs).6–10 Furthermore, particularly impressive is that a subset of patients seems to obtain durable responses. Although response rates are higher with combination therapies than single-agent TKI, unfortunately, many patients still progress on treatment. For example, the objective response rates (ORRs) in patients with mRCC treated with combined immunotherapy with dual ICIs were only 42% in the checkmate 214 trial. 6 This suggests primary resistance occurring in more than half of the patients. Researchers have been exploring ways to overcome primary resistance by several mechanisms, including utilizing combination treatments, identifying potential molecular biomarkers, and modulating the gut microbiome to enhance response to treatment. Current challenges include translating RCC heterogeneity into individualized treatment plans, identifying and utilizing biomarkers that predict survival and/or treatment response, and identifying optimal tools to help guide precision medicine. The landscape of biomarker-driven targeted therapy in RCC is rapidly changing. There are several ongoing clinical trials with the potential to personalize the standard of care treatment for this heterogeneous disease. This review aims to describe an overview of the mechanism of immunotherapy in RCC treatment, describe our current knowledge of the microbiome in cancer, and how it may modulate the immune system. Moreover, given the emerging role of the microbiome in modulating response to ICIs, we discuss the literature around the microbiome and mRCC, specifically highlighting the implications of response to treatment with ICIs.

A literature search was conducted on PubMed using the terms ‘advanced/metastatic renal cell carcinoma’ and ‘microbiome’ from January 2000 to July 2021. The same search terms were used for the ClinicalTrials.gov registry of clinical trials. In addition, abstracts from the annual meetings for the American Society of Clinical Oncology and the European Society for Medical Oncology were included. Only English studies were included. Since there were very few primary articles with a specific focus on the microbiome in RCC, articles including characterizations of the microbiome in other solid cancer types were also included for discussion and review articles.

Immune checkpoints are self-recognition proteins inherent in the host, which function to suppress the immune response to prevent tissue damage to the host in response to inflammation. 11 Examples of these self-recognition proteins include cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein-4 (CTLA-4) and PD-1 and its ligands (PD-L1 and PD-L2), which help the body evade its immune system to prevent any exaggerated immune response against normal tissues. Figure 1 describes the mechanism of action of these ICIs. CTLA-4 is a receptor homolog to cluster of differentiation (CD) 28 and expressed on T lymphocytes. CTLA-4 binds to B7 receptors (CD80/CD86) expressed on antigen-presenting cells with higher affinity than CD28, thereby inhibiting the activation of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, mitigating the T-cell response. Thus, when CTLA-4 is inhibited with therapeutic monoclonal antibodies such as ipilimumab, it activates T cells. 11 PD-1, on the other hand, is a co-signaling receptor part of the B7/CD28 family, expressed on activated T cells, B cells, and natural killer cells, and particularly exhausted T cells. Its ligands PD-L1 and PD-L2 are expressed in T cells, B cells, dendritic cells, macrophages, and mast cells. When bound to its ligand, PD-1 reduces T-cells’ activity and effector functions in peripheral tissues. 11 PD-L1 is often expressed on many tumor cells, resulting in inhibition of T-cell response in the tumor microenvironment (TME), thus inhibiting T-cell-mediated cytokine production and tumor cell killing. Blocking this interaction allows the resumption of T-cell activity in the periphery. When either PD-1 or its ligands are blocked, the result is the enhancement of the immune response. While immune checkpoints have a role in protecting host tissue from an autoimmune response, tumors have exploited these mechanisms as a way to camouflage from the immune system by disguising themselves as ‘self’ by increasing the expression of PD-L1 on their surface to escape immune surveillance. 12

Due to the inactivation of the von Hippel–Lindau tumor suppressor gene, which occurs in an estimated 46–82% of sporadic RCC tumors, VEGF is commonly overexpressed in these tumors. 15 Interestingly, VEGF also alters the TME by enhancing T-cell regulation, enhancing myeloid-derived suppressor cells, both of which inhibit the immune response. Therefore, by blocking this pathway with TKIs or monoclonal antibodies, there is less inhibition of the immune response. 16 In theory, the removal of immune response suppression could work additively, or perhaps even synergistically, in combination with immunotherapy by enhancing the anti-tumor activity of the immune system. Combining these two types of treatments could help overcome primary resistance. Several combinations with anti-PD1/PD-L1 plus TKI have been investigated in phase III trials.9,10 Using these combination strategies, there was a significant improvement in ORR from 25–35% to 55–71% and survival benefit compared with single-agent sunitinib.

The microbiome is the collective genome that is found within an ecosystem, and microbiota is the specific community of microorganisms inhabiting the surface of an organism. 1 Microbial pathogens are suspected of driving tumorigenesis in 15–20% of cancers by modulating the immune system via gut cells and immune signaling pathways. 1 With the microbiome accounting for roughly 1000 times the number of cells in the human body and 10,000 times the amount of DNA, there is a high statistical likelihood that peptide products of gut microbiota could mirror neoantigens created by tumors. This could potentially lead to the generation of T-cell epitopes that more swiftly or accurately recognize the otherwise foreign tumor cells due to molecular mimicry.17,18 This can partly explain why some patients experience more favorable responses to ICIs and others do not benefit at all.

Researchers have attempted to reverse gut dysbiosis. This can be accomplished by administering prebiotics, which are fibers or foods that feed particular taxa and promote their development. Administering prebiotics such as insulin and mucin alone does not enhance anti-tumor activity in gut-free mice, suggesting their role is dependent on the interaction between those prebiotics and the microorganisms. Prebiotics can enhance the development of particular taxa that enhance anti-tumor immunity. 23 Probiotics are specific microbes thought to have a positive impact on microbiome health. By administering or replenishing prebiotics, probiotics, and even fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT), whereby stool from a healthy donor or treatment responder is transplanted orally into the recipient host, the hope is that this will restore homeostasis and improve the health of the host. This approach has already been utilized in other diseases such as inflammatory bowel disease or infectious colitis and diabetes.26–28 There has been a growing interest in similar interventions in cancer, both to prevent tumorigenesis and as a way of augmenting response to treatments, particularly immunotherapies. A recent review was published describing the specifics of pharmacomicrobiomics, targeting microbiota to optimize cancer therapy outcomes. 29 The authors reviewed several studies on solid tumors and provide detailed mechanisms by which bacteria may influence or modulate activity of chemotherapy or immunotherapy, and the potential to translate this impact into clinical outcomes. 29

With the advent of metagenomics utilizing shotgun sequencing approaches or sequencing of 16S ribosomal ribonucleic acid, stool samples from patients with cancer can be analyzed for intestinal microbiota composition, identifying microbe signatures at baseline or after treatment with ICIs, potentially distinguishing between responders and non-responders.30–32 The microbiome seems to have a bidirectional relationship with various cancer treatments, including surgery, radiation, and drug therapies such as chemotherapy, targeted agents, and immunotherapy, whereby treatment may alter the microbiome’s composition. However, the microbiome may also confer sensitivity or resistance to treatments based on its composition. 33 Mechanisms of overcoming resistance to immunotherapies include increasing tumor immunogenicity and T-cell priming, enhancing the TME, overcoming T-cell exhaustion, and combining therapies. 34 Modulating the gut microbiome by administering microbes and microbial metabolites such as butyrate and other SCFAs have also been implicated in orchestrating anti-tumor responses through induction of CD8 T cells and have been investigated as supplemental treatments to augment immune response and enhance response to treatment.35,36

Several ongoing trials are investigating administering oral probiotics in combination with immunotherapy in patients with melanoma, bladder cancer, RCC, and NSCLC to assess safety, clinical response, as well as change in gut microbiota composition (NCT03817125; NCT03637803).

In recent years, there has been enormous interest in identifying and validating biomarkers associated with treatment response to ICIs, mainly if it captures the dynamic interplay of the TME and treatment response. 57 Identifying which patients are more likely to respond to treatment with immunotherapy is essential because the benefit of potentially achieving a complete or durable response must be balanced with the risk of toxicity. In the checkmate 214 trial, nearly 50% of participants with mRCC receiving ipilimumab and nivolumab experienced grade 3 or 4 toxicity, which led to treatment discontinuation in over 20% of participants. 6 In combination treatments with an anti-angiogenic drug and an ICI to treat mRCC, grade 3 or 4 toxicities occurred between 63% and 82% of the time.8–10,14,16 In treating RCC, there is also the unique opportunity to capitalize on the synergy between ICI and the indirect immunological effects of TKIs. 57 Profiling the microbiome in patients with mRCC receiving ICI has shown that higher diversity was associated with improved efficacy of treatment. 58 Furthermore, treatment response was associated with a change in microbial species composition throughout treatment. 58 Similar to other cancers, administration of antibiotics to patients with mRCC just prior to or soon after starting ICI was associated with reduced efficacy of treatment. 38 Interestingly, Bacteroides have also been associated with toxicity, specifically diarrhea, in patients who have received TKI therapy in RCC. This is important as diarrhea was found to be dose-limiting toxicity and prevented patients from tolerating full-dose treatment. 59 Administration of antibiotics targeting Bacteroides actually improved PFS in these patients in a duration response manner. 59

ICI, immune checkpoint inhibitor; N, number of participants; RCC, renal cell carcinoma.

FMT in patients with RCC showed that transplanting feces from patients who responded to ICIs into germ-free mice resulted in the mice exhibiting higher response rates to anti-PD-1 treatment, and this response was diminished with the administration of antibiotics. 60 Derosa et al. 62 also found in pre-clinical studies with mouse models of RCC that were sterilized with antibiotics and received FMT from patients with RCC had high concordance rates in their response to ICIs. Interestingly, the non-responding mice could be rescued by FMT from responding donors, as well as by oral administration of immunostimulatory microbes. 62 An early phase I trial in patients with melanoma examined the use of FMT in patients who were refractory to ICI, and observed clinical responses in 3 out of the 10 patients included, and also found favorable changes in their immune cell infiltrates and gene expression in the TME. 74 Taking it one step further, researchers are now also examining stool post-FMT for donor and recipient microbiota, to explain variability in response to FMT. 75 These researchers propose perhaps clearing the recipients microbiota in advance of FMT may allow for optimal colonization from the donor microbiota. 75 Ongoing trials are looking at the role of FMT in patients with RCC receiving ICIs, either evaluating whether FMT may help to prevent immune-related toxicities or improve treatment efficacy (NCT04163289; NCT04758507). Table 2 lists selected clinical trials with FMT and ICIs in genitourinary tumors. An excellent review on gut microbiota influence on immunotherapy responses in various tumors was recently published, which includes proposed mechanisms and therapeutic strategies including FMT and other probiotics. 76

ARAT, androgen receptor axis targeted; CTLA-4, cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein-4; ICI, immune checkpoint inhibitor; FMT, fecal microbiota transplantation; PD-1, programmed cell death-1; PD-L1, programmed cell death ligand-1; RCC, renal cell carcinoma.

In summary, the clinical use of ICIs in mRCC has improved survival outcomes in the last decade; however, there are still a significant number of patients whose tumors have primary resistance to ICIs, and response rates are not as high as in other types of immunogenic cancers. Identifying ways to overcome primary resistance is an unmet need and of utmost importance in improving survival for these patients. While combination strategies with targeted anti-angiogenic agents plus immunotherapy have added improvement compared to a single treatment modality, likely due to changes in the TME that result in augmented immune responses, the vast majority of patients still do not respond. Unfortunately, a more personalized analysis with multi-modal arsenal of biomarker-driven targets to identify patients who would benefit from treatment is lacking.

While some studies have examined the relationship of the gut microbiome to the efficacy of treatment with ICIs, much of the research has been limited to animal studies and cell lines or has been non-homogeneous in that the participants had various tumor types that may individually interact in different ways with the microbiome and TME. Some solid tumors, such as melanoma, have better outcomes than others, such as RCC, suggesting that biology plays a role in the immunogenicity of the tumors. Future research should focus on examining more homogeneous groups of patients with RCC to characterize baseline microbial populations and during and after treatment to identify any differences that could account for variability in response. While supplementing treatments with prebiotics or probiotics may potentially augment immune responses, it is very likely that FMT may more easily replicate dynamic, complex interactions among the microbiome community from donors who responded to treatment with immunotherapy or from healthy donors with a diverse population of microbes. Future research to understand and explore these dynamic interactions between the gut microbiome and response or resistance to immunotherapy in RCC is a promising direction for potentially overcoming resistance to treatment and improving survival outcomes for patients. Ultimately, prospective studies will be key to providing validation of novel biomarkers to be used and integrated into clinical practice.

ORCID iDs: Jasna Deluce https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4348-2164

Saman Maleki Vareki https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9615-7779

Ethical approval and consent to participate: Not applicable.

Consent for publication: Not applicable.

Author contribution(s): Jasna Deluce: Conceptualization; Writing – original draft; Writing – review & editing.

Ricardo Fernandes: Conceptualization; Funding acquisition; Supervision; Writing – review & editing.

Funding: The authors disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: This work was supported by two grants from the London Regional Cancer Program’s Catalyst Grant Program, Keith Smitt Translational Research Grants awarded to SMV and RF.

Competing interests: RF has the following disclosures: Advisory Board or Honoraria: Merck, Novartis, Ipsen, Janssen, Pfizer, BMS, Bayer; Travel Grant: Janssen. The other authors have no other conflicts of interest to declare.

Availability of data and materials: Data sharing not applicable to this article as no datasets were generated or analyzed during the current study.

