How we decide what to eat: Toward an interdisciplinary model of gut–brain interactions



Everyday dietary decisions have important short‐term and long‐term consequences for health and well‐being. How do we decide what to eat, and what physiological and neurobiological systems are involved in those decisions? Here, we integrate findings from thus‐far separate literatures: (a) the cognitive neuroscience of dietary decision‐making, and (b) growing evidence of gut–brain interactions and especially influences of the gut microbiome on diet and health outcomes. We review findings that suggest that dietary decisions and food consumption influence nutrient sensing, homeostatic signaling in the gut, and the composition of the gut microbiome. In turn, the microbiome can influence host health and behavior. Through reward signaling pathways, the microbiome could potentially affect food and drink decisions. Such bidirectional links between gut microbiome and the brain systems underlying dietary decision‐making may lead to self‐reinforcing feedback loops that determine long‐term dietary patterns, body mass, and health outcomes.

This article is categorized under:

Understanding food choices and eating requires an interdisciplinary approach that addresses the complex interactions between a person's metabolism, the brain circuits underlying dietary decision‐making, and the gut microbiome. In this article, we provide an overview of the emerging research on microbiome–gut–brain interactions and their potential role for dietary decision‐making, overeating, obesity, and other negative health outcomes.

Eating decisions are among the most frequent types of decisions, made every day. Any single food decision by itself—whether one has a salad or a burger for lunch—might seem less important for overall weight management, but over time these decisions can cumulate into substantial weight gain, metabolic disorders such as diabetes, and even premature death.

Taken together, although several disciplines study dietary decision‐making from their own perspectives, it still remains poorly understood why we choose what and how much we eat. One hurdle is the insufficient dialogue among these areas of research (Berthoud, 2011; Rangel, 2013). Here, we propose an interdisciplinary perspective that integrates findings from (a) the psychology and cognitive neuroscience of decision‐making with (b) research in nutrition science and microbiology. The goal of this article is to give a brief overview of the current state of the art in these complementary perspectives on dietary decision‐making and how they could be integrated in order to advance our understanding of dietary decision‐making and its control. We then point to open questions that could guide future research on dietary decision making.

Since energy intake is crucial for survival and keeping the organism in good health, multiple physiological systems have evolved to regulate food intake and metabolism. Here, we organize our discussion of the regulation of eating and dietary decisions into two broad systems: (a) homeostatic drivers that regulate eating based on energy needs and the availability of macronutrients and micronutrients (reviewed in Section 2.1) and (b) cognitive and affective factors that arise from interactions between the environment and the central nervous system (CNS), and that determine how we assign value to food at time of choice and how we regulate these signals (reviewed in Section 2.2). Importantly, these two types of drivers of dietary decision‐making do not act in isolation but interact strongly with each other—to the point that a separation into different systems may be artificial. These interactions are discussed in Section 2.3.

The human body is metabolically dependent not only on oxygen, water, and micronutrients, but also on energy‐supplying nutrients in the form of carbohydrates, fat, and proteins (Plata‐Salamán, 1991; Tortora & Derrickson, 2018). These macronutrients must be stored, since food intake is irregular but energy consumption, which maintains basic cellular processes, is a continuous process. Body weight and the amount of fat tissue have to be kept relatively stable over longer periods in the adult human organism. If not matched by energy expenditure, an increased energy supply will lead to weight gain and adiposity, with multiple negative health consequences (Plata‐Salamán, 1991). Thus, to ensure energy balance, the human organism has established several mechanisms to regulate food intake in the short term and long term.

Sensations of hunger and satiety are communicated from the body to the brain by several neural, hormonal, and metabolic signals (Figure 1), which are modulated by a large number of factors (Plata‐Salamán, 1991; Stengel & Taché, 2012; Zanchi et al., 2017). Of particular interest for this review are two types of signals: (a) various gastrointestinal peptide hormones and (b) various neurotransmitters and neuromodulators of the central nervous system and of peripheral systems that are involved in this complex regulation of hunger and satiety. They are described in the following two sections.

The primary goal of the homeostatic system of food intake is to ensure sufficient energy supply. Such regulation is based on two‐way communication: Macronutrients and their metabolites serve as sources of energy (see Box 1). But macronutrients themselves also have regulatory effects: The transfer of nutrients into the blood (i.e., their resorption) is accompanied by the secretion of numerous hormones. These hormones in turn influence the blood level of various nutrients, thus regulating further hormone release via a negative feedback mechanism.

The hypothalamus produces other regulatory peptides, including neuropeptide Y (NPY), galanin, corticotropin‐releasing hormone (CRH), melanocyte‐stimulating hormone (MSH), and glucagon‐like peptides‐1 (GLP‐1), that are crucial for the control of food intake (Williams et al., 2001; Williams & Elmquist, 2012). GLP‐1 is one of the neuropeptides that reduces food intake by acting directly on the brain. Both the place of synthesis of GLP‐1 and its receptors have been found in hypothalamic areas that are related to the regulation of food intake. It is assumed that the satiating effect of GLP‐1 results from an interaction with NPY, the most potent stimulator of food intake: Possible interactions between GLP‐1 and leptin are the object of ongoing research in neurobiology (Cummings & Overduin, 2007; Murphy et al., 2006; Zac‐Varghese et al., 2010).

Via the central nervous system, energy consumption and the selection of macronutrients are also influenced by several neurotransmitters and neuromodulators, including serotonin (5‐hydroxytryptamine), norepinephrine, and various endogenous opioids. The effects of serotonin are the best known to date and suggest a bi‐directional relationship between diet and serotonin metabolism (Leibowitz & Shor‐Posner, 1986; Meguid et al., 2000; Shor‐Posner et al., 1986). Serotonin is synthesized from the amino acid l‐tryptophan. Thus, all processes that influence the plasma level of tryptophan and its uptake through the blood–brain barrier also have an effect on the biosynthesis of serotonin.

More specifically, this homeostatic system includes the hypothalamic arcuate nucleus and nucleus of the solitary tract, the paraventricular nucleus (PVN), and the lateral hypothalamic area (see Figure 2; for detailed reviews, see Roh et al., 2016; G. Williams et al., 2001).

The idea of the homeostatic eating model described above is that we eat when our energy resources are depleted and abstain from eating or stop eating when our energy levels are replenished. Yet eating behavior is also influenced by many other factors, such as the availability of food (e.g., in an all‐you‐can‐eat restaurant), social and cultural context (e.g., at typical mealtimes), and internal cognitive and affective factors (e.g., boredom, stress, or dietary goals). For instance, we often continue to eat until our plate is empty, no matter how the portion size relates to our caloric needs (Wansink et al., 2005). We also often eat when we are not even hungry, such as when snacking on peanuts at a party (Berridge, 2004). We also tend to eat differently and typically less healthily when we are stressed (Adam & Epel, 2007; Tomiyama, 2018). Of note, the effects of acute and chronic stress on diet and weight gain are complex and bi‐directional, with changes in glucose metabolism also affecting the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) activity (Sinha, 2018). Together, these examples illustrate the role of motivational, affective, and social factors for dietary decision making and its control. In the next section we review which brain systems encode the value of rewards, including foods, at time of choice and their modulation by motivational, affective, and social factors to alter and regulate dietary decision‐making.

How do we choose between sandwiches at lunchtime? How is this decision different from choosing which pair of jeans to buy, which stock to invest in, and so forth? Such choices play a prominent role in our everyday life, which explains why decision‐making is studied in a variety of ways in different disciplines, including economics, psychology, behavioral ecology, and computer science. One idea common to many of these disciplines is that decision‐making is guided by subjective representations of value (Rangel et al., 2008). Economic concepts such as “value,” “utility,” and “efficiency” provide a biologically sound framework for describing different kinds of choice behavior (Glimcher, 2004, 2010).

On the neurotransmitter level, the dopaminergic system appears to play an important role in encoding value at time of choice: Dopaminergic neurons in the midbrain are well known for their role in hedonic, motivational, and reinforcement processes. For example, palatable food intake, when the food's taste is unexpected or better than expected, leads to dopamine signaling and can increase the learned value of the food item in the brain's memory system (Volkow et al., 2017). Increased dopaminergic signaling due to such palatable food intake can act as motivator or reinforcer and lead someone to repeatedly choose a piece of cake over a fruit salad each day at lunchtime (Nicola et al., 2005; Rangel, 2013; Volkow et al., 1996; Wise, 2004). That means that dopamine signaling is essential in a person's active seeking of a particular rewarding food and thus in the computation of its expected value, as opposed to being involved in encoding the taste pleasure of eating the rewarding food and thus in the computation of its outcome value (De Araujo et al., 2017; Pecina et al., 2003; Robinson & Berridge, 2004; Volkow et al., 2002).

A related question of important current debate in psychology and cognitive neuroscience (Berkman et al., 2017; Shenhav et al., 2013; Vosgerau et al., 2020) is how choices are made between options whose attributes reflect conflicting goals or temptations—such as choosing between an apple and a piece of chocolate cake when dieting—and how that decision context differs from deciding to spend money today instead of saving it and delaying consumption. Daily life is rife with various goal‐oriented choices to be made between complex options that are associated with conflicting attributes. Conflict typically arises when some attributes are associated with concrete and immediately rewarding outcomes (e.g., the tastiness of chocolate cake) and others are associated with abstract and delayed ones (e.g., the healthiness of an apple). A normatively “good” decision requires computing predicted value signals that weigh both types of attributes properly, which involves discounting future outcomes at an appropriate rate (i.e., given the state of the decision maker). Current neuroeconomic theories (Hare et al., 2009; McClure, 2004; McClure et al., 2007) suggest the involvement of at least two brain systems in self‐control, with major hubs in the prefrontal cortex: the brain's valuation system and the brain's cognitive control system—most prominently, the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC), which is presumed to implement control based on a conflict signal from the dorsal anterior cingulate (Botvinick et al., 2004; Buhle et al., 2013; Egner & Hirsch, 2005; Ochsner et al., 2012).

Cognitive control of dietary decisions is susceptible to different states and context factors. For instance, acute stress reduces the influence of health goals compared with taste aspects on food choices, and this behavioral shift is paralleled by a decrease in dlPFC–vmPFC connectivity and an increase in vStr–vmPFC activity (Maier et al., 2015), in line with a large body of evidence that links stress to altered eating patterns and to increased risk for weight gain and obesity (Adam & Epel, 2007; Pagoto et al., 2009; Sinha, 2018). Further, recent evidence points to a modulatory role of serotonin in dietary decision‐making and in self‐control and patience more broadly (Vlaev et al., 2017). Administration of a single dose of the serotonin reuptake inhibitor citalopram (compared with placebo) led to an increase in healthy compared with unhealthy food choices, suggesting that serotonin may amplify the consideration of long‐term (e.g., health) goals (Vlaev et al., 2017). These findings are in line with previous results, which showed that optogenetic stimulation of serotonergic neurons increased patience for food rewards in mice (Miyazaki et al., 2014). In contrast, depletion of the serotonin precursor tryptophan increased sweet food consumption in higher‐weight but not lean female individuals (Pagoto et al., 2009). Future research could further investigate the role of serotonin in food preferences and (dietary) self‐control, and how those might be interrelated.

Homeostatic and value‐based systems do not act independently but interact strongly with each other in determining food choice (Berthoud, 2011; Rangel, 2013). As described above, serotonin is influenced by nutrient levels and influences appetite for carbohydrates versus proteins, and at the same time may interact with cognitive control mechanisms and affect how health attributes influence food valuation.

In line with these observations, recent findings suggest that the rewarding and thus reinforcing properties of food stimuli do not arise solely from perceived taste pleasantness. Instead, internal homeostatic and nutritive signals (i.e., the presence of macronutrients, including glucose and fat, in the gut) also affect the central dopamine release and reward processing (De Araujo et al., 2017). For instance, a recent study by Thanarajah et al. (2019) used combined fMRI and PET to investigate the time course of regional changes in dopamine response during and after consumption of a milkshake. They showed both an immediate and a delayed (15–20 min after consumption) peak in dopaminergic brain responses. Areas including the vmPFC, orbitofrontal cortex, vStr, insula, and hypothalamus showed immediate dopamine response, whereas delayed peaks in dopamine response were found in putamen, vStr, amygdala, anterior insula, and subcortical areas (Thanarajah et al., 2019). The authors suggested that this delayed response in dopamine indicates that the nutritive value of food is able to reinforce its consumption independent of the experienced “liking” (e.g., taste and smell). An observed negative correlation of immediate and delayed dopaminergic response further points to an interaction of brain and gut for food valuation. However, other recent work points to a more complex picture and suggests that nutrient content, perceived taste (e.g., sweetness), and metabolic signals interact in unexpected and non‐linear ways with brain reward signals (Veldhuizen et al., 2017).

We have outlined how homeostatic information about nutrients from the gastrointestinal tract can influence brain responses and dietary decision‐making. In this section, we describe how the gut microbiota—the bacteria and other organisms that live in our intestinal tract—influence host health and well‐being. We then discuss how the gut microbiota might interact with homeostatic and value‐based drivers of dietary decision‐making via the so‐called “microbiota–gut–brain axis” (Foster & Neufeld, 2013; García‐Cabrerizo et al., 2021; Mayer et al., 2015; Wang & Wang, 2016).

With up to 1013 bacteria and more than a hundred different bacterial species, the human gastrointestinal tract houses the majority of physiologically relevant microbiota (Chatelier et al., 2013). Most of these bacteria live in symbiosis with their host. The totality of all microorganisms that colonize humans, including their genetic material, is called the microbiome. Our understanding of the complexity and diversity of the microbiome results mainly from recent advances in sequencing technology that enable a detailed analysis of all bacteria and viruses colonizing humans (Bella et al., 2013).

Taken together, it is likely not only that our food choices affect the composition of our gut microbiota, but also that the gut microbiota may in turn affect brain responses to food and how we choose what we eat. Yet little is known regarding the mechanisms at play.

Growing evidence suggests a crucial role for the gut microbiota in the development of obesity (Chatelier et al., 2013; Torres‐Fuentes et al., 2017; Turnbaugh et al., 2006, 2009). But what could be the mechanisms underlying this link among gut microbiota, unhealthy food choices, and overeating? In what follows, we describe how the gut microbiome may influence brain function and dietary behavior. Generally, the gut microbiome and the brain communicate bi‐directionally via the systemic and neural pathways that comprise the microbiota–gut–brain axis (for an overview, see Figure 3). Information that reaches the brain via circulation of the blood (i.e., the systemic pathways) includes the effects of microbial metabolites, interactions with gut peptides, neurotransmitter synthesis, and modulation of the immune system. The vagus nerve, one of the cranial nerves, is the principal neural pathway of gut‐to‐brain communication (Cryan & Dinan, 2012). How each of these communication pathways might affect dietary decision‐making is discussed in the following sections.

The gut microbiome composition could influence (food) reward processing and decision‐making via metabolites such as short‐chain fatty acids (SCFA) (García‐Cabrerizo et al., 2021), a major product of gut microbial fermentation (Den Besten et al., 2013). Evidence linking SCFA metabolism and reward processing comes from animal and human studies and various reward domains. For example, one study found that antibiotic treatment in mice led to a reduction of gut bacteria and increased sensitivity to cocaine reward, but administering bacterial fermentation products such as SCFA reversed these effects (Kiraly et al., 2016). In humans, an intervention that increased levels of the SCFA propionate reduced the valuation of high‐energy foods in humans (Byrne et al., 2016). Propionate also reduced activity in the brain reward circuit (dorsal and ventral striatum) and decreased subjective appeal of high‐energy food and energy intake (Byrne et al., 2016).

Providing further support for the hypothesis that gut metabolites can affect processing in brain areas related to reward and decision‐making, a recent exploratory study (Osadchiy et al., 2018) found an association of gut microbiota‐derived metabolites with the connectivity of the extended reward circuit in humans. More specifically, the authors found that microbial‐derived fecal indole metabolites (enzymatically converted from the dietary amino acid tryptophan) were positively correlated with functional and anatomical connectivity between the central hub of the brain's reward and motivation system (i.e., the nucleus accumbens) and regions shown to be involved in taste processing (i.e., the amygdala and anterior insula; Berridge & Robinson, 2016; Ikemoto & Panksepp, 1999; Yiannakas & Rosenblum, 2017).

Peripheral ghrelin levels are sensitive to nutrition and to the composition of the gut microbiome and may thus constitute another pathway for gut–brain interactions in dietary decision‐making. Both a 12‐week dietary intervention with oligo‐fructose (Parnell & Reimer, 2009) and changes in gut microbial composition resulting from antibiotic treatment (Yanagi et al., 2017) led to a reduction of plasma ghrelin. As outlined above, both neurophysiological and behavioral reward sensitivity is modulated by peripheral ghrelin levels; for example, higher ghrelin levels are associated with higher reward sensitivity and impulsivity (Ralevski et al., 2017).

Gut microbiota produce a variety of neurotransmitters and neurotransmitter precursors (Wasilewski et al., 2015) that could influence brain functioning and behavior. These include dopamine and serotonin, which are involved in reward‐related decision‐making (Fischer & Ullsperger, 2017; González‐Arancibia et al., 2019; Strandwitz, 2018) and in interactions of valuation signals with homeostatic processes, as described above. For example, a recent study (Aarts et al., 2017) found an increased abundance of Bifidobacterium in stool probes of ADHD patients compared with controls; this was associated with an increased availability of a gut microbial enzyme that is involved in the synthesis of the dopamine precursor phenylalanine. Using fMRI, Aarts et al. (2017) further showed that the increased abundance of this enzyme was related to decreased ventral striatum activity during reward anticipation.

As described in Section 2.2, serotonin has been associated with healthier food choices and reduced consumption of sweet food (Miyazaki et al., 2014; Pagoto et al., 2009; Vlaev et al., 2017). While the link between serotonin and sweet food consumption seems to be moderated by body weight (Pagoto et al., 2009), it is interesting to note that gut microbial composition differs between lean participants and those with obesity (Ley et al., 2006). This association of serotonin levels and food choice suggests that bacterial modulation of tryptophan and serotonin levels (Clarke et al., 2013; O'Mahony et al., 2015; Yano et al., 2015) could mediate the effects of the gut microbiome on eating behavior. Tryptophan and serotonin levels might be especially sensitive to nutritional and microbial changes, as around 90% of the body's serotonin is synthesized in the gastrointestinal tract (Yano et al., 2015).

The modulation of the immune system is another important pathway of the gut–brain axis (Fung, 2020). Gut bacteria can activate the innate immune system and induce the release of pro‐inflammatory and anti‐inflammatory cytokines (for a review, see Zheng et al., 2020). These inflammatory markers can reach the brain, trigger neuroinflammatory reactions, and modulate serotonin and dopamine levels (Felger & Treadway, 2017; Miller et al., 2013), and as a consequence might have broad impact on reward processing and (dietary) decision‐making (Bradley et al., 2019; Treadway et al., 2019). For instance, patients treated with the inflammatory cytokine tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF‐alpha) have decreased activity in the ventral striatum during a gambling task, as well as changes in dopamine functioning in the same region (Capuron et al., 2012). In mice, treatment with lipopolysaccharide—a bacterial endotoxin that promotes inflammation—decreased the willingness to invest effort for food while reward sensitivity remained unchanged (Vichaya et al., 2014), and similar alterations in incentive motivation have been observed in humans (Lasselin et al., 2017). Thus, systemic inflammation is a further candidate mediator of bacterial effects on reward‐seeking and eating behavior, but few studies have investigated the entire causal chain from gut microbiome composition via inflammation to value‐based decision‐making.

Another route by which gut‐derived nutritive signals might reach the brain is through neural signaling via the vagus nerve. As part of the autonomic nervous system, sensory fibers of the vagal nerve connect the gut and brain. Nerve endings in the gastrointestinal tract are able to sense nutrient‐related chemicals (including ghrelin, GLP‐1, and CCK; Browning et al., 2017). These gut‐derived nutrient signals are forwarded to the central nervous system and elicit neural, endocrine, and behavioral reactions for the regulation of eating behavior (Howland, 2014; Le Roux et al., 2005; Waise et al., 2018). Extensive research in rodents has demonstrated that signaling of the vagus nerve affects the brain's reward‐learning circuitry (De Araujo et al., 2012; Han et al., 2018; Suarez et al., 2018). For example, vagal afferent signaling increased reward sensation and motivation in mice and induced dopamine release from the substantia nigra onto the dorsal striatum (Han et al., 2018).

In humans, a recent study demonstrated the involvement of interoceptive gut‐to‐brain signals in reward processing via transcutaneous auricular vagus nerve stimulation (taVNS). In this study, taVNS decreased reward‐learning in a go/no‐go task (Kühnel et al., 2020). Another study found that when human participants worked for food and money rewards, taVNS did not increase subjective wanting per se or effort maintenance but boosted the desire to work for rewards, particularly those rewards that were wanted less (Neuser et al., 2020).

The goal of this review was to provide a brief and interdisciplinary overview of dietary decision‐making—what makes us eat what we eat. Advances have been made in multiple fields, and we specifically focused here on (a) the physiology of the homeostatic system, (b) the neuroeconomics of dietary decision‐making, and (c) emerging evidence for a role of the gut microbiome in reward‐based dietary decision‐making. While these research areas have been largely separate from each other, there is a growing recognition of the need for more interdisciplinary research to understand dietary decisions and obesity from a more integrative perspective (Gupta et al., 2020; Rangel, 2013).

In sum, many questions remain unanswered thus far and need to be addressed to further advance our understanding of the complexity of eating behavior and obesity. Future studies could further experimentally manipulate the composition of the gut microbiome to test causal effects on the gut–brain axis and behavioral measures of dietary decision‐making—food consumption and its control—in both human and animal models. An especially important point will be to characterize the mechanisms that might mediate gut microbial effects on brain responses and behavioral outcomes, and how they may be targeted to improve individual decision‐making, long‐term dietary patterns, and health.

The authors have declared no conflicts of interest for this article.

Hilke Plassmann: Conceptualization; writing‐original draft; writing‐review & editing. Daniela Schelski: Conceptualization; visualization; writing‐original draft; writing‐review & editing. Marie‐Christine Simon: Conceptualization; writing‐original draft; writing‐review & editing. Leonie Koban: Conceptualization; writing‐original draft; writing‐review & editing.

Decision neuroscience: Neuroeconomics

Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no new data were created or analyzed in this study.

