Oral microbiome: possible harbinger for children’s health

The human microbiome functions as an intricate and coordinated microbial network, residing throughout the mucosal surfaces of the skin, oral cavity, gastrointestinal tract, respiratory tract, and reproductive system. The oral microbiome encompasses a highly diverse microbiota, consisting of over 700 microorganisms, including bacteria, fungi, and viruses. As our understanding of the relationship between the oral microbiome and human health has evolved, we have identified a diverse array of oral and systemic diseases associated with this microbial community, including but not limited to caries, periodontal diseases, oral cancer, colorectal cancer, pancreatic cancer, and inflammatory bowel syndrome. The potential predictive relationship between the oral microbiota and these human diseases suggests that the oral cavity is an ideal site for disease diagnosis and development of rapid point-of-care tests. The oral cavity is easily accessible with a non-invasive collection of biological samples. We can envision a future where early life salivary diagnostic tools will be used to predict and prevent future disease via analyzing and shaping the infant’s oral microbiome. In this review, we present evidence for the establishment of the oral microbiome during early childhood, the capability of using childhood oral microbiome to predict future oral and systemic diseases, and the limitations of the current evidence.

Human life is dependent on a diverse community of symbiotic microbiota that has co-evolved with their human host. The interactions between microbiota and host modulate crucial aspects of the host’s normal physiology, metabolism, immunity, and neurologic function.1 In the adult population, the host-microbiome at various body sites has reported associations with systemic diseases. For instance, dysbiosis in the gut microbiome could induce an ecological shift of the microbial community, from a physiological to a pathological composition, lead to dysregulated production of harmful microbial-derived products or metabolites, and contribute to or become a risk marker for a diverse range of local and systemic diseases. The reported diseases that have a gut microbial association include but not limited to inflammatory bowel diseases.2,3 celiac disease (CD),4,5 depression.6and Alzheimer’s disease.7 Intriguingly, an intricate linkage between the dysregulated gut microbiome and osteoarthritis was recently revealed. The loss of beneficial Bifidobacteria while an increased abundance of key proinflammatory species in the gut microbiome is found to be associated with obesity; this microbial imbalance event is further linked with a downstream of systematic inflammation that could accelerate knee osteoarthritis.8 Associations between oral microorganisms and cancers (oral and esophagus,9–12 pancreatic,13 and colorectal14) have also been suggested recently. Moreover, periodontal microorganisms, i.e., Porphyromonas gingivalis, Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans, Provetella intermedia, have been found in human atheromatous plaques at various sites, with implied association with vascular disease.15 Furthermore, a dysbiosis in the vaginal microbiome is associated with a variety of adverse outcomes, including miscarriage, invasive maternal and neonatal infections, and preterm birth delivery.16–20

To the vulnerable populations, infants and young children, oral sample collection in forms of saliva and mucosal swabs is noninvasive and thus presents an optimal diagnostic medium that holds great promise for use as diagnostic tools. Moreover, researchers are searching for the potential utility of the microbiome with a particular focus on manipulating microbials.51 Microbial intervention of a single bacterial strain was demonstrated to be effective in altering disease risk in the low-complexity microbiome of the newborn gut.52 Although, to date, no studies have addressed the impact of manipulation of the oral microbiome on systemic disease, as the microbiome research moves on a fast track, we can envision a future where early life salivary diagnostic tools could be used to understand better and shape our oral and systemic health. Therefore, this review attempts to gather evidence and elucidate the establishment of the oral microbiome during early childhood, the factors associated with oral microbial profiling, and the capability and challenges of using childhood oral microbiome to predict future oral and systemic diseases.

Several terms are used to define different stages of early childhood. Medically, the newborn or neonate is defined as an infant in the first 28 days after birth. The term “infant” typically refers to young children under 1 year of age, or some definitions expand this period to up to 2 years of age. When a child learns to walk from age 1 to 4, the term “toddler” may be used instead. The period of birth to preschool age (5–6 years old) is considered as early childhood.

During and after birth, the newborn exposes to a wide variety of microorganisms, e.g., bacteria, fungi, parasites, and virus, under the influence of contact routes and an infant’s immune tolerance.56 Remarkably, the oral microbial colonization follows a temporal and spatial sequential, and only a subgroup of microorganisms become permanent residents of the oral cavity,57 illustrated in Fig.
1. The set of earlier colonizers seems to condition the subsequent colonization, which leads to more complex and stable ecosystems in adulthood.58

Immediately after birth, with contact with the outside world through breathing, feeding, and the contact with care providers, the colonization and establishment of microbial pioneers in the oral cavity take the stage. In a cross-sectional designed study, Mason et al.29 analyzed the oral mucosal swab samples from 47 infants at the prdentate stage and identified 178 species-level operational taxonomic units (s-OTUs) that belong to 50 genera, with (65 ± 18) s-OTUs in each infant. The majority of these identified species were Gram-positive facultative, followed by Gram-negative anaerobes..29 Mason et al.29 further identified a core of oral microbiome for predentate infants, including genera Streptococcus, Gemella, Granulicatella, and Veillonella. Interestingly, these core species only accounted for 45% (23%–61%) of the total oral microbiota of each infant.29 Out of the 178 identified species, only 33 were shared by ≥75% of infants. The mean number of shared core species by each infant was 27 ± 5.29

After tooth eruption, the plaque microbiota forms a new, distinct oral community. As noted in our study, while comparing the oral microbial community between preschool children with and without caries using 16s sequencing, the microbial composition differed notably between saliva and plaque samples, regardless of caries status.48 At the genus level, the two most abundant genera in children’s saliva were Streptococcus and Veillonella, whereas, in plaque, the most abundant genera were Veillonella, Streptococcus, Actinomyces, Selenomonas, and Leptotrichia.48 At the species level, three dominant taxa represented 60% of the relative abundance in the salivary community: Streptococcus ET_G_4d04, Veillonella atypica_dispar_parvula, and Streptococcus vestibularis_salivarius.48 In contrast, the five most abundant species, representing 30%–50% of the bacterial plaque community, were Veillonella atypica_dispar_parvula, S. mutans, S. ET_G_4d04, Streptococcus oral_taxon_B66, and Streptococcus gordonii.4

In addition to bacterial community, the oral cavity of newborns is also known to be colonized by fungal community, specifically Candida, starting on the first day of life; during the first year, the rate of oral colonization by Candida may vary, depending on the study population and detection methods, the detection rate range between 40% and 82%.66–68 For an extended period, Candida was the only fungus recognized as part of the normal oral microbial population, despite its opportunistic character.69 In 2010, a metagenomic study identified 74 genera of cultivable fungi and 11 uncultivable fungi in the oral cavity of healthy adults.70 Although Candida was the most frequent genus isolated in 75% of the subjects, other fungi groups presented a relevant prevalence, such as Cladosporium (65%), Aureobasidium (50%), Saccharomycetales (50%), Aspergillus (35%), Fusarium (30%), and Cryptococcus (20%).70

Nevertheless, since there have been few reported longitudinal studies of mycobial community in early infancy, the role of this oral “mycobiome” and their identification in the oral cavity of children remains underexploited.

Viruses have also been found in the oral cavity, with their presence primarily viewed as a pathological nature. In the past decade, there have been only a handful of publications reporting the oral virome, which is in contrast to the oral microbiome, an area that demands critical attention. The oral cavity harbors 300–2 000 viral genotypes in any individual.71 The most common viruses isolated from the oral cavity include rotavirus, norovirus, HIV, hepatitis C virus, herpes simplex viruses 1 (HSV1) and HSV2, Epstein–Barr virus and influenza viruses.72 In addition to these commonly reported virus, some less abundant viruses, e.g. eukaryotic DNA viruses including herpesvirus HPV7 and Anelloviruses, as well as some RNA viruses, are also permanent constituents of human mouth.72,73

Several viral agents can infect oral mucosal cells; however, only a few cause clinical manifestations. In children, the severity of symptoms is related to the age at which the infection was acquired. Newborns could be infected by HSV1 and HSV2, which can cause herpetic gingivostomatitis, orofacial herpes, and aphthous stomatitis.74 Neonatal HSV infection is uncommon, with the reported incidence rates as 1.6–33 per 100 000 live births.75 HSV infection in a newborn can be very severe and even cause death due to the compromised and underdeveloped infant immune systems.76 Other viruses that could colonize in the oral cavity during early childhood are the Coxsackie A virus, which causes herpangina and hand, foot, and mouth disease; the Morbillivirus that causes measles; the Rubulavirus that causes mumps; and the human papillomavirus that causes oral papilloma (warts).77

For healthy adults, an individual’s oral microbiome is associated with many factors, including the time of the sample collection, age, gender, diet, extreme environment, etc.78. Similarly, the host and environmental factors also influence the assembly of the oral microbiome in early childhood. The most studied factors include genetics, terms of labor, delivery mode, antibiotics use during birth and early infancy, feeding method, and maternal oral microbiome characteristics. These influencing factors contribute to shaping both bacterial and fungal communities.78,79 The summary in Fig.
1 highlights the factors that shape children’s oral microbiome.

Even though few studies have identified genes that contribute to microorganism infections,80 the influence of human genes on the colonization and establishment of the oral microbiome remains under-investigated. Demmitt et al.81 examined the contributions of host genetics and environmental factors to salivary microbiome composition using an unbiased genome-wide association study (GWAS) analysis in 752 twin pairs from the Colorado Twin Registry. A method that used KGG4 that sums single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) significance across coding genes were used. Several loci reached genome-wide significance after correcting for multiple testing, including one locus on chromosome 7 near the gene IMMPL2 and one locus on chromosome 12 near the non-coding RNA gene INHBA-AS1 (ref. 81).

Human genetics also influence individual’s susceptibility to fungal infection. Abusleme et al.85 demonstrated that individuals with defects in STAT3 are prone to the dysbiosis of oral fungal and bacterial community, and susceptible to recurrent oral fungal infections. STAT3 is a protein coding gene, playing a critical role as transcription factors in the downstream of cytokine signaling from interleukin-6 (IL-6), IL-21, IL-10, and IL-23—a group of human immune mediators. Patients with autosomal-dominant hyper-IgE syndrome (AD-HIES) harbor loss-of-function (LOF) mutations in the STAT3 gene.86,87 In turn, a severe dysbiosis of fungal community was found in AD-HIES patients’ oral mucosa, with a dominance of C. albicans and minimal representation of health-associated fungi.85 The STAT3 defect in participants with AD-HIES was also associated with distinctive bacterial communities, particularly with a reduced microbial diversity and an enrichment of Streptococcus oralis and S. mutans. Moreover, increased abundance of cariogenic bacteria—S. mutans—was consistent with the increased risk for dental caries among patients AD-HIES.85

In medical context, preterm refers to the condition that infants born alive before 37 weeks of pregnancy.88 Sub-categories of preterm birth, based on gestational age, include extremely preterm (<28 weeks), very preterm (28–32 weeks), and moderate to late preterm (32–37 weeks).88 Globally, approximate 15 million babies are born preterm yearly.89

Moreover, antibiotic use in NICUs remains widely diverse and controversial. Antibiotics are effective in treating pathogenic bacteria-related infections but simultaneously deplete commensal bacteria and promote the growth of opportunistic fungal species. Studies have shown the association between neonatal antibiotics use and decreased levels of Clostridial colonization in infants’ gut when administered in a prolonged period.96 Intriguingly, a study by Gomez-Arango et al.97 indicated that maternal antibiotics use during delivery also impacts the infant oral microbiome development. In this study where the infant oral swabs were sampled in the first three days after delivery, the study results showed that Proteobacteria were abundant in infants with maternal intrapartum antibiotics exposure while Streptococcaceae, Gemellaceae, and Lactobacillales were dominant in unexposed neonates.97

Similar to what occurs to gut microbiota in early infancy, some studies found that the delivery modes—vaginal delivery or cesarean section—also influence the oral microbial community development in infants; however, the term of influence remains unclear. Immediately after birth, the bacterial niche in different habitats of the newborn (oral, nasopharyngeal, skin, and intestines) are very similar to each other.23 Nevertheless, as time goes by, bacterial communities colonized on infants born vaginally resemble mothers’ vaginal bacterial communities, predominantly Lactobacillus, Prevotella, Bacteroids, TM7, and Sneathia spp., whereas the bacterial profile of infants born by cesarean section resemble those present in mothers’ skin, predominantly Staphylococcus, Corynebacterium, Slackia, Veillonella, and Propionibacterium spp.23,98,99

A birth cohort study conducted in Ireland among 84 infants from birth to the first year of life revealed that birth mode did pose an impact on the infant microbiota, but only up to the first week of age.100 The influence disappeared beyond the first week after birth.100 Within the first week, higher bacterial community diversity measured by Shannon index (P = 0.037) and PerMANOVA assay (P = 0.047) was detected in the C-section group than those in the vaginally delivered infants.100 On the contrast, a Sweden birth cohort of 59 infants did not reveal associations between birth route and young children’s oral microbiome.101 The difference in the bacterial community in early infancy that associated with birth route might remain or reduce, or might even have long-term effects on childhood oral microbiome composition, metabolism, and implications to overall health.102 However, these projections still need to confirmed by more well-designed longitudinal birth studies.

Similar to the influence of feeding methods on the gut microbiota,103 the oral microbiota of formula-fed and breastfed infants have distinct characteirstics.104 The difference in infants’ oral microbiome may arise due to the milk-related bacteria transmission,105 effects of various milk components on the attachment of bacteria in the oral cavity,106 differed utilization of carbohydrates in breastmilk and formula by bacteria, and/or infant’s boosted innate immunity from breast milk and its effect on early oral microorganisms colonization.107

When considering the influence of feeding methods on infant oral microbiome, one limitation to be underlined is study groups from reported literatures were often not randomized, which might pose unknown group differences correlated to oral microbiota acquisition, in addition to the feeding methods. As a commonly limitation for non-randomized trials, these imbalanced factors between groups, e.g. race, ethnicity, age, gender, health conditions, caregivers’ oral and overall health, are confounding factors and could lead to biased results.

Colonization of oral mucosal surfaces begins at birth with the introduction of bacteria and fungi through a variety of paths, including maternal perineum–infant oral transmission during childbirth,23 parental exposures, digit sucking, diet, and horizontal transmission from caregivers and peers.29–31 Strain-resolved metagenomic profiling confirms transient maternal transmission of strains originating from multiple sources, with the vaginal, skin, oral, and gut communities all contributing to the early infant microbiome.113 However, a few days after birth, the contribution from the vaginal and skin microbiome have decreased, while gut microbes from the mom persist in the infant’s gut presumably through oral entry.113 By day 3 of life, 95% of the infant’s oral microbiome was shared with maternal microbiomes.113 Although evidence supports the maternal–neonate transmission of pathogenic microorganisms, e.g., Candida species immediately after birth into early infancy,114,115 more importantly, the maternal–neonatal transmission of microbes also serves an evolutionary survival function by preparing the infant to adapt to the environment by prepping the sterile infant gut with maternal microbes.116,117 Acquisition of maternal microbes gives the infant gut a head start through colonization with favorable symbiotic microbes, potentially protecting the infant from life-threatening respiratory and diarrheal infections that were a major cause of infant mortality in the early twentieth century and remain an important cause in some developing countries.

Similar to the bacterial community, maternal prints have been found in the infant oral mycobiomes.32 Infant and maternal oral mycobiomes were similar to each other when alpha and beta diversities were compared; the total numbers of observed taxa were comparable in infant and adult samples for throughout longitudinal observational points, regardless of body site (oral, skin, and anal).32 Among fungal species present in the oral cavity, C. albicans is the most prevalent species. C. albicans colonizes in the oral cavity of neonates as well, both vertical and horizontal transmission was implied to their emergence. The vertical transmission ranges from 14% to 41% when measured by different methods, e.g., electrophoretic karyotyping, restriction endonuclease analysis of genomic DNA, and DNA fingerprinting.119,120 Our study examined the relatedness of C. albicans among 18 preschool children and mother dyads using restriction endonuclease analysis of the C. albicans genome and found more than 60% of the child–mother dyads harbored identical C. albicans strains.121 While no caspofungin-resistant strains were identified when compared to the wild type, C. albicans isolated from more than 65% of child–mother dyads demonstrated similar susceptibility to the antifungal medication caspofungin.121

The oral microbiome remains its stability over time in healthy individuals, despite subjected to a variety of host and environmental challenges. The distinct oral microbial community is associated with a series of oral and systematic diseases.10,122–128 Although a majority of these studies are cross-sectional or case–control designed, with small sample sets which are incapable of establishing causative relationship between oral microbiome and diseases, changes in the characteristics of the oral microbiota may provide correlative insight and projection into the onset, progression, and recurrence of human diseases. Here, we further zoomed into the children’s health and summarized studies that have provided critical insights into the oral microbial markers of the oral and systemic health in children. The oral taxonomic characteristics associated with each disease status are summarized in Table
1.

Although largely preventable, ECC remains the single most common chronic childhood disease, with nearly 1.8 billion new cases per year globally.129,130 The microbial etiology of ECC is linked with poly-bacterial infection of teeth. Traditionally, S. mutans is considered as a prime culprit for ECC due to its acidogenicity, aciduricity, and ability to form extracellular glucans.131–137 Although at very low levels, S. mutans was detected in the oral cavity of the infants in early infancy, even before tooth eruption;138 and with a trend of the increasing amount with the presence of teeth and notably higher in children with ECC.59 Interestingly, a recent analysis of calcified dental plaque shows that the composition of oral microbiota remained relatively constant between Neolithic and Medieval eras. Cariogenic bacteria (e.g., S. mutans) became dominant beginning with a major production of processed flour and sugar, beginning with the industrial revolution.139 Well-designed longitudinal studies have demonstrated the predictive power of using S. mutans to predict ECC risk. Fontana et al.140 prospectively followed a cohort of 329 US children ((26 ± 6) months old) for 1 year and reported that children with more than 105 colony-forming unit per mL salivary S. mutans at the baseline were at higher risk for developing ECC. Piva et al.141 evaluated a cohort of 163 Brazilian children (3–4 years old) in a 2-year prospective period, and found higher S. mutans counts were associated with caries progression.

Besides cariogenic bacteria and yeast, S. sanguinis has received much attention in the context of caries prevention. S. sanguinis starts its oral colonization in the second half of the first year of infants, in association to tooth emergence,144 following a similar pattern of development regardless of children’s caries experience.59 Researchers believe S. sanguinis could be playing a benign role in the oral cavity, and have an antagonistic role in dental caries since it may compete with cariogenic S. mutans for colonization sites on tooth surface.144

The oral microbiome may play a vital role and serve as an indicator of infant development. A recent study40 revealed that oral microbiome harbors a better bacterial signature for predicting the weight gain in the early infancy when compared to the gut microbiome. In this study, via 16S rRNA sequencing, the authors analyzed the gut and oral microbiota of 226 young children at seven times points in the first two years of life, along with data collection on infant rapid weight gain.40 Specifically, parameters on infant’s weight and body length were collected to identify infants with rapid weight gain, and to derive growth curves with innovative Functional Data Analysis techniques.40 Authors revealed that growth curves were negatively associated with the oral microbial diversity, and positively associated with the Firmicutes-to-Bacteroidetes ratio of the oral microbiota.40 The study results suggest for the first time that the association between the oral microbiota and the temporal pattern of weight gain in early childhood might be stronger and more consequential than previously thought, and thus requires further characterization.40 However, the mechanism underlying these associations remains unknown.

CD, a chronic immune-mediated enteropathy, affects the small intestinal mucosa after the ingestion of gluten from wheat, rye, and their cross-related varieties in genetically susceptible individuals.145 The estimated prevalence of pediatric CD is between 1/100 and 1/400 (ref. 146). The symptoms of CD in children are characterized by the occurrence of diarrhea, failure to thrive, and abdominal bloating in young infants in the months following gluten introduction.146 Francavilla et al. examined the salivary microbiome and metabolome of 13 CD children with gluten-free diets (T-CD) and their healthy counterparties (HC). Their results suggest that CD is associated with dysbiosis of oral microbiota that could lead to oral metabolome. The salivary level of total cultivable anaerobes significantly (P < 0.05) differed between the T-CD and HC children. Children with T-CD had less diverse salivary microbiome and increased abundance of Rothia, Porphyromonas endodontalis, Gemellaceae, Prevotella nanceiensis, S. sanguinis, and Lachnospiraceae compared to their healthy controls.147 Children with T-CD had a decreased abundance of Actinobacteria, Actinomyces spp., Atopobium spp., and Corynebacterium durum. The relative abundances of these taxa are consistent with higher levels of organic volatile compounds (e.g., ethyl-acetate, nonanal, and 2-hexanone) in the saliva of affected children.147

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) reflects a different level of symptom severity in two core domains: deficits in social communication and interaction, and restricted repetitive behaviors.148 ASD occurs in all racial, ethnic, and socioeconomic groups and is more prevalent among boys.148 According to the Center for Disease Control and the Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network in the USA, the prevalence is 1 in 88 children.148 With the ASD etiology remaining puzzled, it is particularly important to diagnose and provide appropriate interventions to diseased children at an earlier time point. ASD is associated with several oropharyngeal abnormalities, including buccal sensory sensitivity, taste and texture aversions, speech apraxia, and salivary transcriptome alterations. Alterations in the gut microbiome have been established as features of ASD, which was speculated to impact individual’s behavior via the “microbial–gut–brain axis”.

To uncover the oral microbiome alterations in children with ASD, Hicks et al.149 used shotgun meta-transcriptomic data to identify changes in the salivary microbiome of 348 preschool children who were 2–6 years of age. These children were grouped into three developmental profiles: children with ASD, children with nonautistic developmental delay (DD), and children with typically developing (TD). This research group found five distinguished microbial ratios between ASD and TD children (79.5% accuracy), three distinguished microbial ratios between ASD and DD (76.5% accuracy), and three distinguished microbial ratios between ASD children with and without gastrointestinal disturbance (85.7% accuracy). When comparing the taxa between ASD and TD children, the abundance of two taxa were elevated in ASD children, they were Limnohabitans sp. 63ED37-2 with a false discovery rate (FDR) at 0.01 and Planctomycetales, with a FDR at 0.04. The abundance of four taxa were decreased in ASD children, particulary, Ramlibacter tataouinensis TTB310 with an FDR at 0.001, Mucilaginibacter sp. PAMC 26640 with an FDR at 0.001, Bacteroides vulgatus with an FDR at 0.05, and Gemmata sp. SH-PL17 with an FDR at 0.05. Furthermore, when the taxa abudance between ASD and DD children were compared, two taxa were elevated in children with ASD, Brucella (FDR = 0.05) and Enterococcus faecalis OG1RF (FDR = 0.05), while one taxa (Flavobacterium sp. PK15, FDR = 0.05) was decreased in ASD children. The study results indicate that gut microbiome disruption in ASD could extend to the oropharynx. Future routine assessment of children’s oral microbiome could be developed as a non-invasive and possible sensitive tool to diagnose ASD and assess its progression status.

As the most common form of vasculitis in children, Henoch-Schönlein Purpura (HSP) causes inflammation and bleeding in the small blood vessels of the skin, joints, intestines, and kidney.150 Over 75% of children diagnosed with HSP were younger than 10 years old, with a peak incidence at 4–6 years of age.150

Notably, the relative abundance of several taxa correlated with clinical manifestations of HSP. The more prolonged hospital stay was associated with a lower abundance of Butyrivibrio sp, but a higher abundance of Haemophilus sp.151 Haemophilus sp was also negatively correlated to the amount of IgE and IgM.151 Prevotella positively correlated with the amount of IgM.151 Prevotella nanceiensis was more abundant in children with HSP and positively correlated with the amount of IgA.151 These study findings that children with HSP have significantly different oral microbiota and a particular association between taxa abundance and HSP clinical parameters exist, suggest the potential of using the oral microbial signatures to identify high-risk populations for HSP and predict clinical progress of HSP children. Although this study does not imply causality between oral microbiota changes and HSP, it provides insight into identifying the types and pathways of bacteria that can be used to predict, prevent, or treat HSP.

Appendicitis is the most common disease that demands urgent surgery among pediatric patients.152 The lifetime risk of developing appendicitis is 7% in girls and 9% in boys.152 Symptoms of appendicitis could range from abdominal pain and vomiting caused by mild or moderate inflammation to life-threatening conditions caused by appendix perforation with extensive contamination.152 Pediatric perforated appendicitis rates are approximately 30% (20%–74%).153 Since younger children have difficulty to articulate their symptoms, a much higher perforation rate is seen among younger children. A cross-sectional study data revealed that the appendix preformation occurred among 100% patients less than 1-year-old and 69% patients at 5 years of age.154

To understand the potential role of oral microbial in pediatric appendicitis, Blod et al.49 rofiled the microbes from inflamed appendices and the gingival sulcus of 21 children who were undergoing appendectomy for acute appendicitis and 28 healthy controls using 16S rRNA sequencing. In addition to profiling the microbial community using sequencing, quantitative measures using RT-qPCR was performed to assess the presence of Fusobacterium nucleatum, Peptostreptococcus stomatis, and Eikenella corrodens. Furthermore, authors used an acid-killing assay to examine these bacteria’s viability to mimic gastric challenge. Although P. stomatis, E. corrodens, and F. nucleatum were detected in both appendicitis and healthy children, more viable P. stomatis were obbserved in the gingival sulci of children with acute appendicitis compared the healthy controls. For children with acute appendicitis, less viable E. corrodens and F. nucleatum presented in inflamed appendices than those found in the gingival sulci. As the oral cavity is the entry port of the gastrointestinal system, the authors proposed a possible oral-gastrointestinal migration of oral bacteria, and subsequently suggest the oral cavity could be a relevant microbial reservoir for developing acute appendicitis.

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a chronic inflammatory disease of the gastrointestinal tract, likely caused by an aberrant immune response to the microbiota and other environmental challenges in genetically susceptible individuals.155 Oral mucosal inflammation is commonly noted in patients with IBD, particularly Crohn’s disease (CD). In all, 0.5%–80% of adult patients with CD manifest oral pathology.156,157 In children, 42% of new diagnoses of CD had oral manifestations.158 Docktor et al.50 examined the oral microbiome (swab samples taken from the tongue and buccal mucosa) from a total of 114 children with CD, ulcerative colitis (UC), and healthy controls, and showed an overall decreased alpha diversity of oral bacterial community in children with CD when compared with healthy controls. In contrast, overall diversity of children with UC did not differ from the healthy controls.

When comparing the tongue samples collected from the CD children to healthy children, several key phyla were significantly reduced, Fusobacteria and Firmicutes.50 When comparing the tongue samples taken from the UC children to the control group, researchers noted a decrease in Fusobacteria in UC children, but an enrichment in Spirochaetes, Synergistetes, and Bacteroidetes.50 No individual phyla from the buccal mucosa samples were significantly different between CD/UC patients and their healthy controls.50 The loss of Fusobacteria and Firmicutes in children with CD were resonated in studies examining the intestinal microbiome.156,158,159 Docktor et al.50 commented that with the prevalence of oral pathology in CD and the ease of oral mucosal sampling, further study could explore the potential of using the oral microbiome as a diagnostic and prognostic tool for pediatric IBD.

As a breathing disorder during sleep, obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS) is characterized by recurrent episodes of complete or partial upper airway obstruction that interrupt nocturnal ventilation and alter normal sleep patterns.160–162 OSAS occurs among children of all age, including infants, with a peak incidence between 3 and 6 years of age.161 The prevalence of pediatric OSAS has been estimated to be approximately 3%.163 While associations between oral diseases and OSAS in the adult population were observed in several cross-sectional studies, limited research reported potential association among the pediatric population.

In a case–control study, Xu et al.164 compared the oral microbiome composition between 30 children OSAS and 30 health counterparts using 16S rRNA gene sequencing. Their results indicate that the oral microbiome composition was significantly different in pediatric OSAS compared to their healthy controls. Thermus, Pseudomonas, Lautropia, and Achromobacter showed higher abundances in the normal control group, whereas Veillonella, Prevotella, Mogibacterium, Campylobacter, and Butyrivibrio were more abundant in the patients with OSAS. In complementary to comparing the oral microbiome, this study group analyzed the urinary metabolome of the study participants and revealed that specific oral microbial changes were correlated with urinary metabolite perturbations in pediatric OSAS. However, the further causal relationship needs examination in longitudinally designed cohort studies. An additional concern lies that there is now ample data confirming that OSAS associated with obesity is highly prevalent in children.165 Whether the imbalanced oral microbiome demonstrated between children with and without OSAS is due to obesity or imbalanced diet that led to obesity remains unknown.

The mouth is the portal to the gut. Its microbial ecology represents a possible marker if not a risk factor for the disease. The recent advances in salivary biomarker diagnostics and oral microbiome analyses have broadened the discovery of microbial pathogens associated with oral and systematic diseases (e.g., dental caries, periodontal disease, autoimmune diseases, diabetes, and cancers). Although more attention has been paid to the association between gut microbiota and overall health, the oral microbiota has shown its relevance and possibility of being surrogates of gut microbiota, which could provide equivalent dialogistic power with better handling. Compared to the gut microbiome sampling, oral sampling is more psychologically acceptable more easily accessed by patients, as well as by the healthcare professional. Among vulnerable populations, such as infants and young children, oral samples make the perfect diagnostic medium due to its noninvasive and easy handling properties, which holds great promise to be used as diagnostic tools.

In summary, the complex interplay between the oral microbiome and microbiomes colonized at other body parts in early infancy, host immune factors, and health, suggests complex bidirectional, non-linear interactions that make causality challenging to tease apart making this a very fruitful area of scientific inquiry. The future use of oral microbiome to advance human health will depend on further validation of disease-specific microbial biomarkers and their incorporation into diagnostic and preventive programs that are sensitive and specific, rapid in result delivery and cost-effective for broad implementation. With the complementary of human genomics, proteomics, transcriptomics, metabolomics, the children’s oral microbiome may stand in the center stage of the future precision medicine and personalized medicine.

