SLC39A8 missense variant is associated with Crohn's disease but does not have a major impact on gut microbiome composition in healthy subjects

Gene-microbiome interactions are important in aetiology and pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel disease, a chronic inflammatory disorder of the gastrointestinal tract consisting of Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis. Scarce studies on gene-microbiome interactions show very little overlap in their results. Therefore, it is of utmost importance that gene-microbiome studies are repeated. We aimed to replicate the association between the SLC39A8 [Thr]391 risk allele and gut microbiome composition in patients with inflammatory bowel disease and healthy controls.

We collected faecal samples, peripheral blood and extensive phenotype data from 291 patients with inflammatory bowel disease and 476 healthy controls. Carrier status information was obtained from whole exome sequencing data, generated using the Illumina HiSeq. The gut microbiome composition was determined by tag-sequencing the 16S rRNA gene. Associations between carrier status and disease were tested using the Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney test. Associations between carriers and gut microbiome composition were determined using principal coordinate analyses, variance explained, alpha diversity and additive general linear models in inflammatory bowel disease, healthy controls and all groups combined.

Crohn’s disease patients were more often carriers of the missense variant (21/171, 12.3%) than controls (30/476, 6.3%) (OR = 2.1, P = 0.01). We could not identify associations between carrier status and overall gut microbiome composition and microbial richness in all tested groups after correcting for potential confounding factors. We did identify 37 different operational taxonomical units to be associated with carrier status among the tested groups. Two of these 37 were identified before in the discovery study.

We could confirm the genetic association of the SLC39A8 [Thr]391 risk allele with Crohn’s disease but we could only limited replicate the association in gut microbiome composition. Independent replication of gene-microbiome studies is warranted to identify true biological mechanisms.

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a common, chronic disorder of the gastrointestinal tract. Patients with this disease experience periods of inflammation alternated by periods of remission. The most common subgroups of IBD are Crohn’s disease (CD), ulcerative colitis (UC) and inflammatory bowel disease undetermined (IBDU)[1].

Given the importance of verifying gene-microbiome associations, we aimed to replicate Li et al’s association between the SLC39A8 [Thr]391 risk allele and gut microbiome composition in faecal samples in our Dutch cohort of patients with IBD and HC which is 4.5 times larger than the original cohort [5,13]. Despite the differences in sample collection methods (lavage vs stool samples) we hypothesize that the influence of the SLC39A8 missense variant is also present in our faecal samples, because of the large effect of this missense variant on the gut microbiome composition identified earlier by Li et al [13].

We included 767 individuals, comprising 171 patients with CD, 104 patients with UC and 16 patients with IBDU from the University Medical Center Groningen (UMCG) IBD cohort and 476 HC from the LifeLines DEEP general population cohort in the Netherlands [5,14]. Faecal samples, peripheral blood, and extensive phenotype data, including age, sex, BMI, and current medication use, were available for all participants. The Institutional Review Board of the University Medical Center Groningen approved both the IBD cohort and the LifelinesDEEP cohort (Institutional Review Board number 2008.338 for the IBD cohort and document number M12.113965 for the LifeLinesDEEP cohort) [5,14].

The determination of the presence of the SLC39A8 missense variant was obtained by using whole exome sequencing (WES). For each participant, peripheral blood samples stored in EDTA tubes (BD Vacutainer) were available. DNA extraction was performed using the Qjagon Autopure LS with Puregene chemistry (Qiagen NV, Venlo, Netherlands). Sample preparation was done by using Illumina Nextera prep kit and enrichment of the exonic sequences was performed by hybrid capture using Illumina rapid Capture Enrichment (37 mb target). The illumina hiSeq platform with 150 bp paired reads was used for sequencing. The mapping of reads to the human genome reference sequence (GRCh37) was performed by using BWA-MEM. An average sequencing depth of 20x covering 80 percent was used in the sequencing of all samples. The average of our obtained reads is 90,655,419 (range 51,590,508–201,639,082) for all the samples. Around 94 percent of the targeted regions were covered by 10 times or more and in the case of 20 times or more this percentage is 87 percent. An extensive quality control and variant calling process has been performed on all samples and is described in a previously published study [15].

The gut microbiome composition of stool samples was determined using tag-sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene as described previously [5,14]. In short: participants were asked to produce and freeze a stool sample within 15 minutes after production. The samples were collected from the patients’ homes on dry ice and stored in our –80°C freezer. Faecal DNA was isolated by making aliquots and for the isolation of microbial DNA the Qiagen AllPrep DNA/RNA Mini Kit cat #80204 was used. Illumina MiSeq paired-end sequencing of the V4 region of the 16S rRNA gene was performed. The forward primer 515F [GTGCCAGCMGCCGCGGTAA] and the reverse primer 806R [GGACTACHVGGGTWTCTAAT] was used for this step. The microbiome taxonomy was determined by operational taxonomic unit (OTU) picking using QIIME and Usearch (V.7.0.1090) based on similarity of 97%, and Greengenes (V.13.8) was used as a reference database [5]. This led to the identification of 12,556 OTUs. Samples with less than 10,000 counts were removed. In comparison with the discovery paper, the OTUs were filtered based on availability in at least 10 percent of the samples. Lastly, these OTUs were classified into 250 different taxa by summing the read counts and transform them into relative abundances. The codes used for these analyses are publicly available at:

https://github.com/WeersmaLabIBD/Microbiome/blob/master/16s_qiime2_pipeline.md

All statistical analyses were performed in each phenotypic cohort (CD, UC and HC) and all groups combined (all phenotypic cohorts including patients with IBDU). The Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney test was used to identify the possible association between the presence of the SLC39A8 [Thr]391 risk allele and disease status and the odds ratio was used to determine the quantity of this effect. Overall microbiome composition (beta diversity) was assessed by Bray-Curtis, Jensen-Shannon, Jaccard unweighted Unifrac and weighted Unifrac measurements. Associations between the SLC39A8 [Thr]391 risk allele and the overall composition of the gut microbiome were estimated by calculating the proportion of variance explained by the mutation on the different beta diversity distance matrix, using a PERMANOVA test as implemented in the adonis function of the vegan package in R [16]. Additionally, we analysed the alpha diversity by calculating the Shannon, Chao1 and Simpson index as well as the number of observed species per sample using vegan and phyloseq R packages. Differences in alpha diversity between carriers and non-carriers were analysed through the non-parametric Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney test. All associations were evaluated with and without taking into account the microbiome confounding factors: age, sex, sequencing depth and for the disease cohort also the disease duration (measured as: years having IBD = fecal sample date—first diagnosis date). For all these tests, p-values of <0.05 were considered statistically significant. The codes are available at:

https://github.com/WeersmaLabIBD/Microbiome/blob/2df040c67c8b75e514abe896def1672bdcb2dee0/SLC39A8_16S

Possible associations between the individual operational taxonomical units (OTUs) and the SLC39A8 [Thr]391 risk allele status were determined in the described groups by using univariate and multivariate additive general linear models in the software tool MaAsLin as described previously [5]. Covariates in the multivariate models comprised 11 confounding factors known to influence the gut microbiome composition: age, sex, body mass index, proton-pump inhibitor use, as well as antibiotic use and IBD medication (mesalazines, steroids, thiopurines, methotrexate and TNF-α inhibitors) [5]. For patients with CD and UC, the amount of years having the diagnosis IBD was also added as a covariate in the linear models. All analyses were corrected for multiple testing by using the false discovery rate (FDR, Benjamini Hochberg method) incorporated in the Q-package in R. An FDR of <0.05 was considered statistically significant. In the discovery papers, only analyses in individual OTUs correcting for less confounding factors was performed [13]. In this study, we corrected for more factors, to prevent identifying false-positives by the influence of confounding factors.

We identified 21 carriers of the SLC39A8 missense variant in patients with CD (12.3%), 7 carriers in patients with UC (6.7%), 1 carrier in patients with IBDU (6.3%) and 30 carriers in HC (6.3%). Because only 1 patient with IBDU was carrier of the missense variant, the differences in the clinical characteristics between carriers and non-carriers of the SLC39A8 [Thr]391 risk allele was not assessed in this group as depicted in Table 1. Smoking is defined as current smoker at time of faecal sampling. Active disease is defined as a score of higher than 4 of the Harvey-Bradshaw index (disease severity measure for CD) or a score higher than 2.5 of the Simple Clinical Colitis Activity Index (disease severity measure for UC). There were no statistically significant differences between carriers and non-carriers of the SLC39A8 missense variant and the clinical characteristics in the described groups (Table 1). We did identify a trend in which carriers of the missense variant have had longer the diagnosis IBD at time of faecal sampling than non-carriers in patients with CD (means of 15 vs 12 years, P = 0.066, as depicted in Table 1). Therefore, we took this factor into account in the analyses of the gene-microbiome interaction. Patients with CD were more often carriers of the SLC39A8 risk allele than HC (OR = 2.1, P = 0.01). This was not the case for patients with UC, nor for patients with IBDU compared to HC (P = 0.8271 and P = 0.9949 respectively).

SD standard deviation; BMI body mass index; PPI proton pump inhibitors; Anti-TNFα tumour-necrosis-factor-α inhibitors; CRP C-reactive protein; Fcal Fecal calprotectin; NA not applicable.

In overall gut microbiome composition, none of the tested groups showed any differential clustering or distribution between mutation and non-mutation carriers in the principal coordinate analyses of beta diversity (Fig 1 for within CD, S1–S3 Figs for within UC, HC and all groups combined). We did identify a statistically significant difference between carrier status and beta diversity in all groups combined in the unweighted Unifrac calculations of beta diversity, without correcting for any potentially confounding factors (P = 0.024, S1 Table). Since the missense variant is enriched in CD, we also added diagnosis in the corrected analysis of beta diversity and carrier status. After correction, carrier status was not statistically significant anymore on beta-diversity in all groups combined using unweighted Unifrac (P = 0.464, S2 Table). Furthermore, we could not identify any statistically significant changes between carrier status of the missense variant and alpha diversity in all tested groups, both in corrected and uncorrected analyses (Fig 2 for within CD, UC and HC, S4 Fig for all groups combined and S3 Table).

We were able to identify associations between carrier status of the SLC39A8 missense variant and individual OTUs; 2 OTUs in the univariate analyses and 37 in the multivariate analyses (S4 Table). In the univariate analyses we identified in both CD and UC 1 associated OTU (OTU-IDs = 2210025 and 4374663, FDR = 0.002 and 0.01 respectively) and none in HC or all groups combined. In the multivariate analyses we identified 5 OTUs in CD, 5 in UC, 14 in HC and 14 in all groups combined (S4 Table). For example, the family Lachnospiraceae was statistically significantly increased in all tested groups in SLC39A8 missense variant carriers compared to non-carriers, represented by 10 different OTUs divided over the tested groups. Only 2 of these 10 OTUs (OTU-ID 329703 and 4343184, FDR = 0.02 and 0.03, respectively), were also statistically significantly associated with carrier status in non-overweight healthy controls in the discovery paper [13]. Another example is in patients with UC, HC and all groups combined, in which the family Ruminococcaceae was increased in carriers compared to non-carriers. Ruminococcaceae was represented in 12 different OTUs divided over the mentioned phenotypic cohorts, in which 1 OTU (OTU-ID 195950, FDR = 0.048) showed overlap with the findings of the discovery paper13. From the 877 associated OTUs from the discovery paper [13], we were only able to identify 5 of them to be statistically significantly associated with carrier status of the SLC39A8 missense variant in our cohort (S4 Table). However, we could not identify any statistically significant associations between the SLC39A8 [Thr]391 risk allele and the individual microbial taxa in the tested groups, in either the univariate- or multivariate analysis in which we corrected for covariates.

The aim of this study was to replicate the finding of Li et al’s association between the SLC39A8 [Thr]391 risk allele and gut microbiome composition in our independent cohort of patients with CD, UC, IBDU and HC, which was 4.5 times larger than the original cohort. This provides an increased power in order to detect true associations between carriers and microbial changes. The SLC39A8 gene is known as a transporter of Zinc [17]. Zinc deficiency has been associated before with a boost of inflammatory responses and with the increase of oxidative stress, indicating the role of Zinc in immune functions [18,19]. The role of Zinc has also been studied in the context of IBD, in which an in vitro study has shown that Zinc affects the integrity of the intestinal mucosa [20]. In our previous study we have shown multiple factors to be associated with the gut microbiome composition in the context of IBD [5]. Given the large effects of the missense variant on the gut microbiome composition observed by the discovery paper, the association of the missense variant to Crohn’s disease and the role of Zinc on the immune system, we hypothesized that this missense variant could also be of influence in the altered gut microbiome composition in IBD we observed earlier [5,13,17–20].

Genome-microbiome associations are hard to discover, since the presumed effect of individual genomic variants on the gut microbiome is small, whereas the effect of environmental factors on the gut microbiome can be much larger. Recently, we reported that the variance of the gut microbiome is partly explained by over 100 phenotypes and environmental factors, including medication use and diet [11]. In addition, correcting for multiple testing in genome-wide, microbiome-wide association studies is complex, since the number of tests is hundreds of times larger than in GWAS because of the addition of hundreds more microbial features.

Therefore, we argue that in future gene-microbiome studies much larger sample sizes, more stringent statistical analyses (especially with regard to mean counts of OTUs and correcting for confounding factors), replication in independent cohorts and elaborate descriptions of the methods used are needed to pinpoint genome-microbiome associations in both IBD and HC.

