Microbiome and Breast Cancer: New Role for an Ancient Population

There are many risk factors associated with breast cancer (BC) such as the familial history of BC, using hormone replacement therapy, obesity, personal habits, and other clinical factors; however, not all BC cases are attributed to these risk factors. Recent researches show a correlation between patient microbiome and BC suggested as a new risk factor. The present review article aimed at evaluating the role of the microbiome as a risk factor in the occurrence of BC, investigating the proposed mechanisms of interaction between the microbiome and human genes involved in BC, and assessing the impact of the altered composition of breast, gut, and milk microbiome in the physiological status of normal breast as well as cancerous or non-cancerous breast lesions. The study also evaluated the growing evidence that these altered populations may hinder chemotherapeutic treatment. The role of microbiome in the development and maintenance of inflammation, estrogen metabolism, and epigenetic alterations was properly investigated. Finally, clinical and therapeutic applications of the microbiome- e.g., probiotics, microbiome genome modulation, and engineered microbiome enzymes in the management of BC were reviewed.

Breast cancer (BC) is the most common cancer among women worldwide. It includes Luminal A, Luminal B, Her2-enriched, and triple-negative subtypes based on the expression of estrogen, progesterone and Her2 receptors, and Ki67 protein (1). Genetic factors, hormone replacement therapy, lifestyle, eating habits, and age are among the BC risk factors (2); however, they cannot explain all the BC cases and other possible risk factors should be considered. In past decades, microbial composition of human body (microbiota) raised so much attention in different areas, including cancer biology. There is a dynamic and complex relationship between the human host and microbiota. Bacteria and their metabolites can manipulate different signaling pathways- e.g., E-Cadherin/β-catenin (3), cause DNA double-strand breaks (4), promote apoptosis, alter cell differentiation (5), and interact with toll-like receptors (TLRs) of the innate immune system to trigger inflammatory signaling pathways and help maintain the hemostasis of the body (6). The interaction between the human microbiome and cancer is referred to as “oncobiome” (7). Moreover, the human host can also affect the microbiota and their mechanisms (8).

There are fewer studies on microbiome and BC than other cancers. Particular composition of gut, breast tissue, and milk microbiome and the critical evidence of interaction with the inflammatory system, estrogen metabolism, and genetic and epigenetic alterations were also discussed in the current review. Moreover, the effects and mechanisms of microbiome on different therapeutic approaches such as hormone, chemo-, radio-, and immuno-therapy of BC were scrutinized. Although there are some reviews on microbiome and breast cancer (14–18), little is known about the clinical applications of the microbiome such as probiotics, microbiome genome modulation, and engineered microbiome enzymes in BC therapy, which also were discussed at the end.

It was believed that breast tissue is sterile, but now it is known that breast tissue has its specific microbiome, which is different from those of other tissue such as gut (8). Since breast is made up of fatty tissue with extensive vasculature and lymphatic drainage, it can be a favorable environment for the growth of bacteria (19). Early studies focusing on pathogenic viruses such as human papillomavirus (HPV) showed a correlation between HPV infection and BC (20, 21). In a study, about 32% of mammary tumors had an association with Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) or human herpesvirus-4 (HHV-4) infections (22). These results were controversial since no other studies confirmed them (23, 24). Investigations show a trilateral relationship between HPV infection, and signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) activity, and interleukin 17 (IL-17) level. HPV infection activates STAT3 signaling, which in turn raises IL-17 level. Therefore, HPV can be a factor in the development of pro-inflammatory responses in breast tissue and, hence, contribute to BC progression (25). Further studies are needed to prove the possible role of breast virome, the viral community in breast tissue, in maintaining the physiological status of breast tissue.

This evidence suggests that bacteria may maintain the healthy status of breast tissue by stimulating host inflammatory responses. Reduction of bacterial load in a healthy individual may exacerbate the risk of BC. These findings demonstrated an unknown link between dysbiosis and BC, and the potential diagnostic and therapeutic implications of these discoveries should be investigated in further investigations. Although many studies were performed on the body-wide impacts of microbiota, there is still no clear pattern about the direct effect of these microorganisms on the risk of BC.

Findings of the bacterial biodiversity in human breast milk and its changes over time are limited. However, culture-independent molecular techniques such as qPCR and NGS approaches allow valuable complementary assessments of the human milk microbiota.

A significant difference in the microbiome composition of nipple aspirate fluid between healthy individuals and patients with BC suggested the potential role of the ductal microbiome in BC incidence. The analysis of nipple aspirate fluid in patients with BC revealed a relatively high proportion of Alistipes genus, while an unclassified strain of the Sphingomonadaceae family was more abundant in healthy individuals. Moreover, BC-related microbes increase beta-glucuronidase activity that may increase cancer risk (31). It is also proved that chemotherapy results in significant deviations of healthy microbial populations and their metabolomic profiles. A decrease in Bifidobacterium, Eubacterium, Aureus, and Clobacterium species and an increase in Acinetobacter, Xanthomonadaceae, and Stenotropomonas species were observed in the milk of healthy females and those of the ones undergoing chemotherapeutic treatment for Hodgkin's lymphoma (58).

The human gastrointestinal tract supports the growth of beneficial microbiota owing to their ability to protect the body against pathogens (59). Their contribution to immune system development and maintenance (60), the fermentation of indigestible fibers into short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) (61), production of essential amino acids (62) and vitamins (63), absorption of minerals (64), and deactivation of toxins (65) and carcinogens (66) are among their benefits. Animal model studies showed associations between the microbiome and the development of many diseases, including cancer (67, 68). Diet can contribute to the development of various diseases, including cancer (69), since it has a direct role in controlling the composition of the microbial community. Accordingly, a plant-based diet stimulates bacterial diversity (70), while animal-based regimen decreases the Firmicutes population (the common bacterial phylum in breast tissue) in digestive system. Shifting to a plant-based diet would increase Firmicutes population (71). Thus, changes to the diet might contribute to the development of diseases through alternation in microbial metabolism and production of toxic metabolites.

Therefore, it can be concluded that modifying dietary patterns affects the microbiome population and indirectly affects disease occurrence (91).

Using antibiotics can affect the target pathogen and the commensal inhabitants of the human host. The extent of the impact on non-target microbial populations depends on the particular antibiotic used, its mode of action, and the degree of resistance in the community. Bhatt et al. found that irregular use of antibiotics increases the probability of dysbiosis and lower bacterial diversity (92). Knekt et al. showed that the overuse of antibiotics might reduce the plasma level of lignan enterolactone; therefore, it might directly affect the microbiome populations and increase the BC risk (93). However, it is acknowledged that selection of antibiotics leads to antimicrobial resistance, but it is believed that the commensal microbiota is normalized a few weeks after treatment secession (11).

According to another study, the proportions of Blautia and F. Prausnitzii and absolute numbers of Blautia and Bifidobacterium species in the gut microbiome are directly correlated with the clinical stage of BC. For instance, patients with stage 1 BC had a lower number of gut Blautia sp. in comparison with the ones with stage grade 3 (41). The presented shreds of evidence showed that the gut microbiome plays a fundamental role in the development of various diseases, including cancer. Therefore, therapeutic targeting of the gut microbiome should be explored as part of the preventative and therapeutic approaches.

Correlations between the human microbiome and BC open up new horizons for the prognosis and treatment of cancer. Hence, researchers focus on the therapeutic application of microbiome (Figure 2).

Although using probiotics inhibited tumor growth, induced apoptosis, and also enhanced the immune system in in vitro and in vivo studies, using them as a promised treatment in the clinical practice is not established yet. Although not confirmed, it seems that the tissue-specific microbiome cannot be changed even with long-term applications of probiotics; hence, the aforementioned positive effects might be obtained by modulating the gut microbiome and subsequently preventing tumorigenesis in the breast.

TLRs are deregulated in some types of cancers and can drive a pathological immune activation in response to the normal microbial mass (121). For instance, it is suggested that activation of TLR5 by S. typhimurium flagellin in BC cells mediates the pro-inflammatory responses to obtain an effective anti-tumor activity, which may serve as a novel therapeutic target for BC therapy (122). Successful inhibition of this pathway would be a unique therapeutic avenue worth exploring.

Another suitable therapeutic approach is the potential of the bacterial β-glucuronidases enzyme (123, 124) released by the gut microbiome, and is required for the healthy digestive system and xenobiotic metabolism (125, 126). Small changes in the structure of inhibitors can cause particular conformational changes in the enzyme active site and different catalytic activities, which might serve as targets to decrease the anticancer drug-induced toxicity in the intestinal tract; in other words, they can reduce the side effects of anti-breast cancer drugs (123). As this enzyme has substantial roles, beneficial engineered bacteria with modified proteins might be therapeutically used to minimize drug side effects. This area needs more detailed information at basic and clinical levels to confirm the positive effects of the microbiome and its metabolites on gene-based therapy in patients with cancer.

The microbiome affects chemo-, immuno-, and radio-therapy for BC. In the absence of commensal microbes, the activity of platinum-based drugs is diminished, although they enter the cells. DNA damage and double-strand breaks are essential in platins. The production of ROS promotes these mechanisms via microbes (127). For example, Lactobacillus acidophilus can restore the cisplatin antitumor activity in germ-free mice (9).

To date, few studies addressed the link between the gut microbiome and BC chemotherapy. NCT03586297 demonstrates the associated dominance of specific gut and intratumoral microbiome with the pathologic response in newly diagnosed patients with TNBC receiving AC-T neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Another trial (NCT04138979) recruited 80 participants to explore more information about the intestinal microbiome of patients with BC undergoing chemotherapy. These studies can prove that gut microbiome analysis holds the potential to predict patient response to chemotherapy before treatment and personalize medicine. However, further studies are required to understand the biochemical interactions between therapeutic agents and bacteria. In addition, new combinations of chemotherapy with probiotic treatments should be taken into consideration.

Microbiome engineering may open new horizons in prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of cancer. As mentioned above, alterations in gut bacterial populations may increase the risk of cancer. Therefore, designing antibiotics that target a particular spectrum of the microbiome might help regulate the gastrointestinal microbiome as a possible way to reduce the BC risk (135). Since cancer occurrence is affected by suppression of the immune system and many proinflammatory pathways (136), it is not surprising that the microbiome and bacterial metabolites might have a direct effect on the incidence or progression of cancer (137, 138). It may occur through changes in the activation of signaling pathways (139) as well as the innate and acquired immune responses (60, 140).

Microbiome diversity across different people caused by pathological, physiological, and environmental differences is a crucial challenge when trying to define beneficial or pathological microbial signatures. The complex diversity of these microorganisms makes it challenging to identify specific cancer signatures that are stable over time.

The microbiota plays a crucial role in preserving the health status of the human body, and their impairment causes pathobiological changes, including BC. Although the evidence of the correlation of microbiome with BC is undeniable, there are essential questions to unlock the exact role of the microbiome in the development and treatment of BC. Strains, dosage, and regimen of probiotics based on the clinical feature of BC and probiotics interaction with the conventional treatment are not determined entirely yet. Further studies are needed to find the exact relationship between microbiome and cancer. In other words, it needs to be clarified whether microbiome alteration leads to cancer or cancer occurrence leads to microbiome alteration, whether dysbiosis is carcinogenic or if there is a way to regulate dysbiosis. To answer these questions, large-scale studies including animal models, retrospective and prospective ones, as well as clinical trials should be designed. Engineered bacteria such as probiotic products might be new modalities to develop a therapeutic approach on clinical scale.

This manuscript was originally submitted to the Cancer Metabolism section of Frontiers in Oncology.

RE and KM-A: conceptualization. RE, ZE-S, SH, and FB: drafting of the manuscript. RE, SH, and ZE-S: designing figures and tables. RE, SH, ZE-S, and KM-A: review and editing of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

