Characterization of Gut Microbiota and Exploration of Potential Predictive Model for Hepatocellular Carcinoma Microvascular Invasion



The association between gut microbiota and microvascular invasion (MVI) in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) remains unclarified. Hence, the microbiome analysis of patients with HCC might predict MVI development as an accurate, non-invasive, and convenient assessment. The aim of this study was to investigate the characteristics of gut microbiota in patients with HCC-MVI and establish a microbial prediction model of HCC-MVI based on a microbiome study.

Fecal samples were collected from 59 patients with HCC (24 of the total with MVI disease and 16 healthy controls) and were further analyzed by 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing followed by a comprehensive bioinformatic analysis. The diagnostic performance of microbiome characteristics in predicting MVI was assessed by receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves. The correlation between gut microbiota and tumor microenvironment (TME) in the HCC-MVI group was further analyzed by using immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence assay.

A significant differentiation trend of microbiota composition and structure was observed between the HCC-MVI group and those without vascular invasion (HCC-NVI). Compared with HCC-NVI group and healthy controls, gut bacteria Klebsiella, Proteobacteria, Prevotellaceae, and Enterobacteriaceae were significantly enriched, whereas Firmicutes, Ruminococcus, and Monoglobaceae were significantly decreased in patients with HCC-MVI. Klebsiella was considered to be the key microbiome signature for patients with HCC-MVI. The area under the curve (AUC) of the established HCC-MVI microbial prediction model was 94.81% (95% CI: 87.63–100%). The percentage of M2-type tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) was increased in the HCC-MVI group compared with the HCC-NVI group (p < 0.001). M2-type TAMs in TME were negatively correlated with Shannon and Simpson index of HCC-MVI gut microbiota (all p < 0.01). In addition, predicted KEGG pathways showed that the functional differences in the metabolic pathways of microbiota varied among the groups.

The results indicated that differences existed in the fecal microbiome of patients with HCC-MVI and healthy controls. The prediction model of HCC-MVI established with certain gut bacterial signatures may have the potential to predict HCC-MVI outcome, and the characteristics of the fecal microbiome in patients with HCC may be associated with TME, though future larger-cohort studies are required to validate this supposition.

Liver cancer is considered to be the fifth leading cause of cancer-related death (1, 2). The risk of recurrence after resection is up to 70% after 5 years, and the 5-year survival rate is as low as 18% (3). Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most prevalent form of liver cancer (4), and most patients with HCC have metastatic disease or vascular invasion at their initial diagnosis (5–7). HCC tumors are heterogeneous, and patients at the same disease stage may have very different treatment outcomes (1).

The underlying mechanism of MVI in patients with HCC which induces metastasis and recurrence is very complicated and remains largely unclear (26). To the best of our knowledge, the correlation between gut microbiota and HCC-MVI remains uninvestigated, despite numerous reports linking gut dysbiosis with HCC pathogenesis. We hereby hypothesized that gut microbiota has a potential influence on HCC-MVI development, which may give credit to its role in cancer metastasis. Therefore, in this clinical study, we wanted to further investigate the relationship between the gut microbiota and HCC-MVI to gain a better understanding of the underlying interaction. To validate the previous research and provide deeper insights into the mechanism of fecal microbiome affecting HCC patients' MVI development, the current study was intended to further apply 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing and microbiome analysis to investigate the differences in taxonomic and derived functional profiles in the fecal microbiota from patients with HCC and healthy controls, clarify the predictive role of a key microbial signature in HCC-MVI, and further demonstrate its relevance to host immunity.

In this study, we identified 123 patients between January 2020 and December 2020 who had an initial presentation of hepatitis B virus (HBV)-related HCC at the Department of Liver Cancer Center, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital. HBV-related HCC was defined here as seropositive for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), non-hepatitis C, and non-alcohol-related liver disease. The initial diagnosis of primary HCC is determined by pathology. Macrovascular invasion (MaVI) diagnosis is based on imaging (CT/MRI). The diagnosis of MVI is based on the postoperative pathological diagnosis. Patients with HCC without vascular invasion are grouped as HCC-NVI. Gender- and age-matched healthy volunteers with no history of diseases were enroll (1) concomitant with other malignant tumors; (2) nonnative patients who have received antitumor therapy; (3) combined with chronic diseases such as hypertension, diabetes, and gastrointestinal diseases; (4) use or take antibiotics, proton pump inhibitors, probiotic products 1 month before sampling; (5) missing clinical parameters. This study was approved by the Medical Ethics Committee at the Tianjin Cancer Hospital and written informed consent was obtained from all participants.

Fecal specimens (10 ml) were thawed and centrifuged at 7,500 g, 4°C for 10 min. Total genomic DNA was extracted by DNA Extraction Kit (Tiangen, China) from fecal samples. The 16S rRNA genes of distinct regions (16S V3-V4) were amplified using specific primers with the barcode. The PCR reactions were performed by 0.2 μM of forward and reverse primers, 15 μl of Phusion® High-Fidelity PCR Master Mix (New England Biolabs, USA), and 10 ng of template DNA. PCR cycling was carried out by the following program: 98°C 1 min, 25 cycles of 98°C 15 s, 55°C 30 s, 72°C 30 s, and 72°C 5 min. After the PCR process, the products were detected by operating electrophoresis on a 2% agarose gel. Then, Qiagen Gel Extraction Kit (Qiagen, Germany) was used to purify the mixture PCR products. Sequencing libraries were produced by TruSeq® DNA PCR-Free Sample Preparation Kit (Illumina, USA) following the manufacturer's recommendations, and the index codes were added. At last, the library was sequenced on an Illumina NovaSeq platform and 250 bp paired-end reads were generated.

The HCC tissues were serially sectioned at a thickness of 3–5 mm. Then, the tissues were dewaxed, deparaffinized in xylene, and rehydrated. The samples were then boiled for 15 min in a microwave oven for the purpose of increasing antigen retrieval. Then, 3% hydrogen peroxidase was used to block the endogenous peroxidases for 30 min. The slides were incubated with primary antibody CD8+ (PeproTech, 67786-1, 1:8000) overnight. Biotin-free horseradish peroxidase-labeled polymer of the Envision Plus detection system (Dako, Denmark) was used in the process of detection. Double immunofluorescence staining was performed as previously described. Paraffin-embedded sections were incubated with the following primary antibodies: F4/80 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, SC-365340, 1:500), CD206 (PeproTech, 18704-1-AP, 1:800), and CD86 (CST, 91882S, 1:100) at 4°C overnight. Then, the sections were incubated at 37°C with the matched fluorescently labeled secondary antibodies (1:500; Invitrogen; CA, USA) for 30 min.

According to the QIIME (V1.9.1) quality control process, quality filtering of raw tags was conducted under specific filtering conditions for the purpose of obtaining the high-quality clean tag. Uparse software (Uparse v7.0.1001) was used for the analysis of the sequences. Similar sequences higher than 97% were defined by the same operational taxonomic units (OTUs). Silva Database (http://www.arb-silva.de/) based on the Mothur algorithm was applied to annotate taxonomic information of each representative sequence. All the indices were calculated with QIIME and displayed with R Software (Version 2.15.3). Cluster analysis was preceded by principal component analysis (PCA), which was used to reduce the dimension of the original variables by FactoMineR package and ggplot2 package. Principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) was displayed to get principal coordinates and visualized with the WGCNA package, stat packages, and ggplot2 package. To determine the enrichment in the assigned taxonomic and functional profiles, LEfSe analysis was performed. Taxonomic levels with LEfSe values higher than 4 at a p < 0.05 were statistically significant. Operating characteristic curves (receiving operational curve, ROC) were constructed, and then the area under the curve (AUC) was calculated to evaluate the discriminatory ability of the random forest model. General statistical analysis was performed in Prism v8.2.1 (GraphPad Software, Inc.), and one-way ANOVA with Tukey's multiple comparisons test was used to determine differences between the groups. Spearman's rank correlation was performed in R (v3.6.1) to analyze the relationships between the microbiome and disease status.

All p-values were corrected using Benjamini–Hochberg multiple test correction. p-values of < 0.05 were considered statistically significant.

Fecal samples were collected from a total of 75 subjects including 16 healthy controls (NC), 20 patients with HCC-NVI, 24 patients with HCC-MVI, and 15 patients with HCC-MaVI (Figure 1). The demographic and clinical data of the four groups of participants including 59 patients with HCC and 16 healthy controls were analyzed and displayed in Table 1. Based on the published clinical studies employing microbiome analyses of four or more groups, we performed sample size calculation using G*power software and estimated that at least 15 participants in each group would provide an estimated effect size of 0.405, which is adequate to detect clinically meaningful differences between the subgroups with a power of at least 80% with a two-tailed p-value of < 0.05. Comparisons of all four groups and three HCC groups demonstrated significant differences among the levels of total bilirubin (TBIL), which is regarded as an indicator for liver dysfunction (Supplementary Figure 1A) (1). Although there was no significant difference in alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) level among the three HCC groups, a statistically significant difference in AFP level among all the four groups was observed when healthy controls were taken into consideration (Supplementary Figure 1B). No significant difference in age, gender, BMI, and other available clinical parameters was elicited among these four groups.

Richness and evenness analysis was performed in the fecal microbiome of the patients with HCC and healthy controls (NC) using the Shannon and Simpson index to display the alpha diversity (Figures 2A,B). No significant difference was detected. When compared with the NC or HCC-NVI group, the microbial alpha diversity within the HCC-VI (HCC-MVI or HCC-MaVI) group showed significant statistical differences (Figures 2C,D). However, the beta diversity in the patients with HCC and NC group exhibited significant differences under the multiple response permutation procedure (MRPP; A = 0.0291, P = 0.001). The result of MRPP in NC, HCC-MVI, and HCC-MaVI groups all showed significant differences (all A > 0, P < 0.001).

The PCA and unweighted Unifrac principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) analysis indicated that the NC and HCC groups had no clustering with members of their own group (Figures 3A,B). Subgroup analysis demonstrated that no identified microbiota clusters were observed in NC, HCC-NVI, HCC-MVI, and HCC-MaVI groups with PCA and unweighted Unifrac PCoA analysis (Figures 3C,D).

According to the relative abundance of the microbiota in the NC group, HCC samples, and their subgroups, classification and analysis were carried out at the levels of phylum, class, order, family, and genus. At the phylum level, the relative abundance of Firmicutes and Actinomycetes in the NC group was significantly greater than that of the HCC group (P = 0.004; 0.002), while the Bacteroidetes was significantly enriched in patients with HCC (P < 0.001; Figure 4A and Supplementary Figure 2). Firmicutes showed a significant decrease in the HCC-VI group when compared with the HCC-NVI group and the NC group. The relative abundance of Proteobacteria in the HCC-MVI group was greater than that of the HCC-NVI group and the NC group; the relative abundance of Bacteroides in the HCC-MaVI group was higher than that of the HCC-NVI group and the NC group, while the relative abundance of Actinobacteria was lower (Figure 4B and Supplementary Figure 3).

Under the phylum level, the abundance of Bifidobacterium was decreased in patients with HCC (P = 0.002), while Prevotella and Klebsiella were increased compared with the NC group. Compared with the HCC-NVI group and the NC group, the abundance of Prevotellaceae and Enterobacteriaceae was significantly increased in the HCC-MVI group while that of Ruminococcaceae was decreased. The abundance of Ruminococcaceae, Bifidobacteriaceae, and Veillonellaceae was significantly decreased in the HCC-MaVI group while Bacteroidaceae showed a substantial increase (Figure 4C). Compared with the HCC-NVI group and the NC group, the abundance of Prevotella and Klebsiella was significantly increased in the HCC-MVI group. The abundance of Bifidobacterium significantly decreased and Prevotella significantly increased in the HCC-MaVI group (Figure 4D). Differential abundance of microbes at the class, order, family, and genus levels are displayed in Supplementary Figures 4–10. Briefly, Clostridia and Bacterodia exhibited higher abundance in HCC groups at the class level, Bacteroidales was significantly increased in HCC groups at the order level, the abundance of Prevotellaceae in HCC groups was significantly increased while Bifidobacteriaceae was significantly decreased at the family level, and Faecalibacterium showed the highest abundance in either NC group or HCC groups at the genus level.

In addition to diversity, the LEfSe analysis was applied to identify microbiome signatures that were differentially enriched among the NC, HCC-MVI, and HCC-MaVI groups. The result showed that genus_Agathobacter, genus Citrobacter, genus_Klebsiella, and species_Klebsiella_pneumoniae were significantly enriched in HCC-MVI samples. Accordingly, several microbes, such as Prevotellaceae, Bacteroidia, Prevotella, Bacteroidales, and Bacteroidota exhibit enrichment in patients with HCC-MaVI (p < 0.05, LDA score > 4; Figures 5A,B).

A random forest model was applied to predict HCC-MVI using 20 bacterial families (including Clostridiaceae, UCG_010, Tannerellaceae, Ruminococcaceae, Eubacterium coprostanoligenes group, Synergistaceae, Monoglobaceae, Rikenellaceae, unidentified Gastranaerophilales, Rhodobacteraceae, Dysgonomonadaceae, Bifidobacteriaceae, Burkholderiaceae, Enterobacteriaceae, Morganellaceae, Atopobiaceae, Marinifilaceae, Erysipelatoclostridiaceae, Bacteroidaceae, and Desulfovibrionaceae) with a significant difference among groups, which was filtered out based on mean decrease accuracy and mean decrease gin analysis. The receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis was performed to validate the prediction accuracy of this potential model for HCC-MVI with the calculated area under the curve (AUC) being 94.81% (95% CI: 87.63–100%), illustrating a good predictive performance of this model (Figure 6 and Supplementary Figure 11).

Intratumoral interactions between the cellular and structural components of the tumor microenvironment (TME) can regulate cancer cell survival, local invasion, and metastatic dissemination (27). Immunohistochemical staining was thus applied to analyze the positive rate of CD8+ T cells in the TME group of liver cancer with or without MVI. Compared with the HCC-NVI group, the positive rate of CD8+ T cells in the HCC-MVI TME was significantly decreased (41.3 vs. 20.8% P = 0.001; Figures 7A,B).

An immunofluorescence study was applied to further analyze M1 and M2 tumor-associated macrophage (TAM) cells in the TME of patients with HCC. The results indicate that compared with the HCC-NVI group, the positive rate of M1 TAM in the HCC-MVI group was significantly lower (32.5 vs. 54.0%, P < 0.001), whereas the positive rate of M2-type TAM cells in the HCC-MVI group was significantly increased (51.1 vs. 31.0%, P < 0.001; Figure 8).

Cumulative contribution analysis (CCA) is used to explore the correlation among the positive rate of CD8+ T cells, M1- and M2-type TAM cells in TME, and the intestinal microbiome of different vascular invasions. As shown in Figure 9A, the cumulative contribution of TME indicators is 37.29% for CCA1 and 22.17% for CCA2, and the results indicate that there is a significant correlation between M2-type TAM and HCC-MVI group intestinal microbiome.

Based on Spearman correlation analysis, correlation among CD8+ T cells, M1/M2-type TAM cells, and HCC-MVI group intestinal microbiome was explored in TME. The positive rate of M2-type TAM cells is negatively correlated with the alpha diversity of the HCC-MVI intestinal microbiome (P < 0.01, Figure 9B). The positive rate of M2-type TAM in its TME increases once the diversity of the HCC-MVI intestinal microbiome decreases or the microbiome becomes disordered (dysbiosis).

Based on Tax4Fun, we further explored the functional alterations of the microbiome in the HCC-MVI and HCC-NVI groups (Supplementary Figure 12). The function of the HCC-MVI intestinal microbiome was significantly concentrated in pathways, including replication and repair, translation, energy metabolism, nucleotide metabolism, glycan biosynthesis, and metabolism, while the intestinal microbiome function of HCC-NVI patients was significantly enriched in pathways such as membrane transport, signal transduction, and cell motility (all p < 0.05). Based on the KEGG database, we further explored the correlation between the functional pathway of HCC-MVI microbiome and the positive rate of M2-type TAM in TME, and the mTOR signaling pathway was found to be positively correlated with a positive rate of M2-type TAM in TME (correlation coefficient 0.37, P = 0.01; Table 2). Taken together, these results suggest that the increase of TAM M2 positive rate in HCC-MVI TME may be involved in the mTOR signaling pathway.

In this study, we comprehensively explored the effects of the fecal microbiome on vascular invasion in patients with HCC, correlating them with clinical data and assessing whether a microbiome study can gain insight into a potential HCC-MVI prediction model. We showed that HCC-MVI significantly affects the relative abundance of several gut bacteria and that a microbial prediction model (based on 20 significant signature microbes) has the potential for predicting and discriminating high-risk patients with HCC-MVI. We also demonstrated that the characteristics of the fecal microbiome in patients with HCC may be associated with TME.

In conclusion, the present study highlights that gut microbiome alterations may have an influence on HCC-MVI prediction and relate to M2-type TAM of TME. Moreover, it shows that the microbial prediction model is able to efficiently predict HCC–MVI development. These preliminary results need to be confirmed and expanded in larger HCC cohorts and other cancer populations. The animal study is also needed to understand whether the differential microbiome affects the development of HCC-MVI by exploring possible mechanisms or the other way around. If confirmed, they might open the way to a quick and low-cost non-invasive diagnosis with many potential perspectives not only in hepatic vascular invasion diseases. Therefore, this clinical study provides a strong potential of translational implications from bench to bedside helping the clinicians in terms of disease prediction and diagnosis.

The data presented in the study are deposited in the China National Microbiology Data Center, accession number NMDCX0000120 (https://nmdc.cn/resource/attachment/detail/NMDCX0000120).

The studies involving human participants were reviewed and approved by Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital. The patients/participants provided their written informed consent to participate in this study.

WLu, EE-O, XZ, and NZ conceived the study. NZ, ZW, JL, and SZ recruited participants. ZW, JL, SW, and YL conducted the analysis. TL and WLi analyzed fecal samples. ZW, LG, and YL wrote the article. All authors revised and approved the written manuscript.

This research was supported by the Tianjin Science and Technology Program (No. 19YFZCSY00020).

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fmed.2022.836369/full#supplementary-material

