Multivariate associative patterns between the gut microbiota and large-scale brain network connectivity



Research on the gut–brain axis has accelerated substantially over the course of the last years. Many reviews have outlined the important implications of understanding the relation of the gut microbiota with human brain function and behavior. One substantial drawback in integrating gut microbiome and brain data is the lack of integrative multivariate approaches that enable capturing variance in both modalities simultaneously. To address this issue, we applied a linked independent component analysis (LICA) to microbiota and brain connectivity data.We analyzed data from 58 healthy females (mean age =  21.5 years). Magnetic Resonance Imaging data were acquired using resting state functional imaging data. The assessment of gut microbial composition from feces was based on sequencing of the V4 16S rRNA gene region. We used the LICA model to simultaneously factorize the subjects’ large-scale brain networks and microbiome relative abundance data into 10 independent components of spatial and abundance variation.LICA decomposition resulted in four components with non-marginal contribution of the microbiota data. The default mode network featured strongly in three components, whereas the two-lateralized fronto-parietal attention networks contributed to one component. The executive-control (with the default mode) network was associated to another component. We found that the abundance of Prevotella genus was associated with the strength of expression of all networks, whereas Bifidobacterium was associated with the default mode and frontoparietal-attention networks.We provide the first exploratory evidence for multivariate associative patterns between the gut microbiota and brain network connectivity in healthy humans considering the complexity of both systems.

The gut–brain axis (GBA) is a bidirectional biochemical signaling that takes place between the gastrointestinal tract (GI tract) and the central nervous system (CNS).1 The microbiota–GBA is used to describe the complex effects of the commensal gut bacteria (the microbiota) in the interplay between the gut and the brain. Recently, many studies have outlined the important implications of understanding the relation of the gut microbiota with human brain function and behavior. Several intermediary pathways have been proposed, specifically, bi-directional interactions between microbiota and the brain are plausible via modulation of vagal nerve activity, via neuromodulators or their precursors such as serotonin or tryptophan, via the Hypothalamic–Pituitary–Adrenal System (HPA-axis) and via interactions with the immune system.1–4

One substantial methodological challenge is the multivariate and simultaneous integration of gut microbiome and brain data that enables capturing variance in both modalities simultaneously. To address this issue, we applied a linked independent component analysis (LICA)16,17 to microbiota and brain connectivity data (Figure 1). LICA enables data reduction in several modalities simultaneously and thereby can demonstrate joint inter-individual variation patterns in different modalities. We chose to investigate four very well characterized and often replicated brain networks.15 In the previous work, we used this selection to investigate the impact of fasting on functional connectivity at rest.18 We limited our study to a set of four networks of interest (the lateralized fronto-parietal (left/right) attention networks, FPN; the executive control network, ECN; and the default mode network, DMN) due to their importance in the neuroimaging field, their comparatively clear and cognitive functional profile and their importance in mental disease or previous microbiome research.14,15,18–20 This pre-selection enables us to better conceptually understand the explorative associations between gut and these brain networks, limiting the number but not the type of interactions.

For 58 subjects, the spatial template maps of right and left frontoparietal-attention networks (FPN), executive control (ECN), default mode network (DMN)15 were projected onto the subjects resting state fMRI time-courses to create network maps per subject. The ECN largely consists of middle frontal and superior frontal gyri, paracingulate cortex and dorsal posterior parietal cortex.15,21 The ECN has been demonstrated to overlap spatially with brain activity observed in cognitive control tasks, emotion tasks and response inhibition.15 The DMN is the large-scale brain network that was identified first and it is probably the most often studied of all so-called resting-state networks. DMN modulations have been implicated in a broad range of disorders.22–25 The most prominent feature of the DMN is its task-negative nature; the areas of the DMN deactivate when an individual is engaged in most tasks.26–28 It has been associated to a broad range of cognitive processes such as self-referenced thought and self-monitoring,26 passive, broad attention,23,29 auto-biographical memory retrieval,30,31 imparting meaning to the current sensory input depending on prior experiences,32 mind-wandering and future thinking32,33 as well as homeostatic functions.26,27,34,35 As the name of these networks suggest, the fronto-parietal-attention networks encompass fronto-parietal brain regions, which are commonly and reliably associated with brain activity in attention tasks15 and are modulated with varying degree of attention demand.36,37

Gut microbiome composition was based on sequencing of the V4 region of the 16S rRNA gene on the Illumina HiSeq platform. We used the LICA model to simultaneously factorize the subjects’ brain networks and gut microbiome relative abundance into 10 independent components.16,17

From the 10 components, six showed a non-marginal (proportion >0.2) contribution on both the gut microbiota relative abundance and the brain connectivity patterns (Component 0, 1, 3, 4, 6 and 7ö Figure 2). From these six components, the first extracted component (component 0) was explained by a single subject; therefore, this component was disregarded for further analyses. Additionally, sanity checks on brain connectivity showed that, for component 4, equal values for all voxels in the brain data. This renders the interpretation of this component hardly possible and could potentially be related to residual noise being picked up and explained. This component was therefore also discarded.

Component #7 was associated with variability in the DMN again and to roughly 25% of the microbiota. The spatial pattern of between-subject variation could be interpreted as elevated connectivity of the DMN to parts of the so-called salience network (such as dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dorsal ACC) and ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC)), which has in the previous literature been associated with effects of elevated stress on DMN resting state connectivity.19,20 Ruminocuccus_2 was more abundant and Blautia was less abundant in individuals that showed this elevated connectivity pattern of DMN to dorsal ACC and VPLFC. We therefore in the discussion call it the DMN-Ruminocuccus+-Blautia− component.

In this study, we provide the first evidence for multivariate associative patterns between the gut microbiota and brain network connectivity in healthy humans. We used a novel multivariate modality integration technique to explain inter-individual differences in brain connectivity in four canonical networks and the gut microbiota. We see our exploratory results as a map that could show high potential to guide future research on the relation of gut–brain interactions in a hypothesis-generating manner. We have linked ECN connectivity to an abundance of Prevotella_9 and Blautia; DMN connectivity to Prevotella_9, Blautia, Ruminococcus_2, Bifidobacterium, and Bacteroides; fronto-parietal attention network connectivity to Prevotella_9, Bifidobacterium, Faecalibacterium, Christensenellacea_R-7_group, and certain genera belonging to Lachnospiracaceae. DMN connectivity that has been linked to stress is associated with Ruminocuccus_2 and Blautia. The spatial associations in the components to core hubs of the respective networks can be seen as a conceptual validation of our approach.15,20,38 Furthermore, we observe the between-subject variation in functional connectivity in core hubs of the respective networks in three of the four components as a link between an individual’s connectivity strength and the relative abundance of certain microbiota. These findings can be taken as an indication that certain microbial genera are associated with the normal expression of all four canonical resting state networks and their natural variation between healthy subjects.

Third, we investigated a very homogenous, healthy, and young group of only female participants. Although this naturally limits the generalizability of the results, we believe that our data still serves an orientating purpose and is therefore valuable. In replication attempts, this homogeneity and special characteristic of our sample should be considered. We would like to reiterate that we see a strong need to replicate the current results in larger and more diverse samples.

In summary, we provided the first evidence for multivariate associative patterns between large-scale brain network functional connectivity of four very well-established brain networks and the relative abundance of gut microbiota in a sample of healthy female individuals. This link provides a map for future research, involving the full complexity of both measures into account. For example, interventions targeting improvement in attention (for example in neurodevelopmental disorders) could investigate the influence on the bacterial genera associated to the attention networks. Moreover, it can provide a roadmap to investigate how the effect of probiotic intervention trials can modulate brain networks (and associated cognitive functions) in relation to the changes in certain genera of the gut microbiome. Furthermore, future research might investigate the mechanistic nature of our multivariate associative patterns and aim to assess the generalizability to other healthy samples as well as their potential disruption in the diseased brain.

We analyzed pre-intervention data from a probiotics intervention study on 64 healthy female participants (mean age = 21.5 (0.45) years).56 In total, 58 of the 64 participants were included in the analyses. Six participants were excluded from the final analyses, due to high depression scores (N = 1), missing feces samples (N = 2), and movement exceeding 4 mm between acquisitions (n = 3). For more detailed characteristic of the samples and exclusion criteria as well as the ethical declaration, please see the Material and Methods section of Papalini and colleagues.56 Briefly, participants with relevant medical history of e.g. psychiatric and/or gastrointestinal disorder were excluded. Also, use of antibiotics and diet like e.g. vegan diet were part of the exclusion criteria.

Participants were screened for compatibility with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). MRI data were acquired using a 3 T MAGNETOM Prisma system, equipped with a 32-channel head coil. After three short task-related fMRI scans (see Papalini et al.), 9 min of resting state fMRI was acquired. 3D echo planar imaging (EPI) scans using a T2*weighted gradient echo multi-echo sequence (Poser, Versluis et al. 2006) were acquired (voxel size 3.5 × 3.5 × 3 mm isotropic, TR = 2070 ms, TE = 9 ms; 19.25 ms; 29.5 ms; 39.75 ms, FoV = 224 mm). The slab positioning and rotation (average angle of 14 degrees to AC axis) optimally covered both prefrontal and deep brain regions. Subjects were instructed to lie still with their eyes open and refrain from directed thought. A whole-brain high-resolution T1-weighted anatomical scan was acquired using a MPRAGE sequence (voxel size 1.0 × 1.0 × 1.0 isotropic, TR = 2300 ms, TE = 3.03 ms, 192 slices).

MRI data preprocessing: FSL (FMRIB, University of Oxford, UK; www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl;57 was used for pre-processing, data-denoising, and generation of subject-specific network maps. Pre-processing steps included three-dimensional movement correction, and spatial smoothing using a 5 mm full-width at half maximum (FWHM) Gaussian kernel to reduce inter-subject variability and a high-pass filter (> 0.007 Hz) was applied. All pre-processing steps, except temporal filtering, were conducted before AROMA data denoising.58,59 Briefly, ICA-AROMA is designed to identify motion-related artifacts by matching single subject ICA components to four robust and standardized features. The data is denoised by linear regression of ICA components identified as noise by AROMA and subsequently the high pass filter was applied. Prior to all group analyses, data were normalized to MNI space and re-sampled to 2 mm3 resolution using FMRIB’s Nonlinear Image Registration Tool (FNIRT).

Dual (spatial and temporal) regression was used to generate subject-specific spatial maps of well-studied, canonical large-scale brain networks15 from the individuals’ data. These canonical large-scale brain networks consist of 10 resting state networks for which the template can be freely downloaded (https://www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/datasets/brainmap+rsns/). We downloaded the 10 well-matched resting state networks for use as templates in this study. The z-maps of these networks are temporally concatenated in one 4D file and used as input for the dual regression. These maps were used in a linear model fit against the individual fMRI data, resulting in the subject-specific temporal dynamics. Subsequently, these time-course matrices are employed in a linear model fit against the subject’s fMRI data set to estimate subject-specific spatial maps. From these subject-wise expressions of the 10 networks, we selected four networks of interest (the left and right lateralized fronto-parietal attention networks, FPN; the executive control network, ECN; and the default mode network, DMN), due to their importance in the neuroimaging field, their comparatively clear functional profile and their importance in mental disease or previous microbiome research.14,15,18–20 The different spatial maps for all participants are combined into a single 4D file per target network. In this way, we generated four files for the four respective networks of interest that contain one spatial z-map per subject that indicates for each voxel the connectivity strength of the respective network in that individual. These four network files were used as inputs to the LICA.

Fecal samples were collected by using OMNIgene•GUT kit (DNAGenotek, Ottawa, CA) within 24 hours after the MRI scan.60 Collected fecal samples were transported to the laboratory and aliquoted into 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes and stored at −80 ℃ for microbiome analysis. DNA was isolated from the fecal pellets using the Maxwell® 16 Instrument (Promega, Leiden, The Netherlands) as described previously.61 Briefly, in the 2-step PCR protocol the 16S rRNA gene V4 variable region was targeted by using 515 F (GTGYCAGCMGCCGCGGTAA) and 806 R (GGACTACNVGGGTWTCTAAT) primers, and unique barcodes were used to identify each sample. Sequencing was performed on the Illumina HiSeq PE300 platform by GATC Biotech AG (Konstanz, Germany). The sequences were processed using NG-Tax62 analysis pipeline as described previously.63 NG-Tax identified the taxonomy of the samples based on 16S sequences using three core elements: (i) barcode-primer filtering, (ii) operational taxonomic unit (OTU) picking, in which unique sequences with the relative abundance above 0.1% were clustered into OTUs based on a sequence similarity ≥98.5%, and (iii) taxonomic assignment using the SILVA reference database (version 128).64 This resulted in an Operational Taxonomical Unit (OTU) table containing 844 OTUs. We applied a prevalence-filtering at the genus level, selecting genera present in at least 30% of the samples. After this step, the OTU-table containing 644 OTUs was used for the downstream analyses. The gut microbiome composition tables at the phylum and genus taxonomic levels were provided by the ‘phyloseq’ package available in R.65 In sum, the composition table is the result of the normalization step where the read counts where transformed into relative abundance.

We used the LICA model17 to simultaneous factorize the functional network maps (of ECN, FPNs and DMN) and the microbiome data of 58 subjects into independent sources (or components) of variation. In the brain networks, spatial variation was explained; while in the microbiome data, variation in relative abundance of bacterial genera was explained. In brief, LICA is an extension of Bayesian ICA66 to multiple input sets, where all individual ICA factorizations are linked through a shared common mixing matrix that reflect the subject-wise contribution to each component (Figure 1).

This operation is represented in Figure 1. Factorization provides a set of spatial maps (one per feature modality and component), a vector of feature loadings that reflects the degree to which the component ’represents’ the different modalities, and a vector that reflects the contribution of the individual subject to a given component. All mathematical derivations involved in the LICA factorization can be found in the original paper describing the original algorithm.17 Further details and code implementing each feature extraction procedure as well as the LICA factorization are publicly available at.67 Given the sample size, we forced a 10 components solution. We disregarded components estimated with marginal (proportion <0.2) contribution of the microbiome or brain networks, respectively.

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).

NK and EA conceived the study, EA and AAV conceived the project and acquired funding, JST conducted the microbiome analyses, AL and CB conceived the integratory analyses and conducted these, NK conducted processing and analysis of the fMRI data and the LICA results, AL, EA, AAV supported and supervised LICA results integration, NK and JST wrote the first draft of the manuscript, all authors contributed and agreed to the final version of the manuscript.

The study was conducted following the Declaration of Helsinki with human subjects and the complete procedure was approved by the local Ethics Committee (CMO Arnhem-Nijmegen, NL55406.091.15) and registered at the Dutch trial register (protocol number: NTR5845). Written informed consent was obtained from each participant.

All data, documentation and code will be shared via the DondersSharingCollection (https://doi.org/10.34973/3j3h-ts61).

