Non‐zero‐sum microbiome immune system interactions

Fundamental asymmetries between the host and its microbiome in enzymatic activities and nutrient storage capabilities have promoted mutualistic adaptations on both sides. As a result, the enteric immune system has evolved so as not to cause a zero‐sum sterilization of non‐self, but rather achieve a non‐zero‐sum self‐reinforcing cooperation with its evolutionary partner the microbiome. In this review, we attempt to integrate the accumulated knowledge of immune—microbiome interactions into an evolutionary framework and trace the pattern of positive immune—microbiome feedback loops across epithelial, enteric nervous system, innate, and adaptive immune circuits. Indeed, the immune system requires commensal signals for its development and function, and reciprocally protects the microbiome from nutrient shortage and pathogen outgrowth. In turn, a healthy microbiome is the result of immune system curatorship as well as microbial ecology. The paradigms of host–microbiome asymmetry and the cooperative nature of their interactions identified in the gut are applicable across all tissues influenced by microbial activities. Incorporation of immune system influences into models of microbiome ecology will be a step forward toward defining what constitutes a healthy human microbiome and guide discoveries of novel host–microbiome mutualistic adaptations that may be harnessed for the promotion of human health.

Immune circuits of microbiome perception and response mediated by gut innate and adaptive immune systems, epithelial cells, and enteric nervous system have evolved to protect not only the host, but commensal microbiome as well. The immune curatorship together with the laws of microbial ecology defines the healthy microbiome.

The host–microbiome mutualistic networks are fundamentally asymmetric in their interactions. The collective genomes of microbiome members harbor at least two orders of magnitude more genes than the human genome. The latest estimates of the size of microbial genomic space based on the analysis of 2182 gut microbiome metagenomes put it at 22,254,436 non‐redundant consensus genes, although about half of which are unique to a single sample [1]. In contrast, the size of the human genome is estimated to be 42,611 genes and only about half of them are protein‐coding [2]. Therefore, the enzymatic capacity of the microbiome is much greater than the host. Furthermore, while the genome of the host is stable throughout its life, the collective genome of microbiome adapts in response to external factors (e.g., diet change) and evolves under the influence of both positive [3] and negative [4] selections. The host‐microbiome genetic asymmetry has provided powerful evolutionary incentives for the host to harness the enzymatic potential of the microbiome to access otherwise unavailable small molecules and energy sources. In addition to the genetic host–microbiome asymmetry, the unique positioning of the microbiome at the interface between the host and environment creates additional evolutionary forces for the host to develop the capability to curate the microbiome's composition, both through positive reinforcement by supporting the beneficial members as well as through negative pressure by deselecting parasitic and pathogenic members of the microbiome. To achieve this goal, the host mucosal immune system employs a highly efficient, layered defense strategy featuring passive measures, such as the mucus barrier that creates a bacteria‐free zone separating the enteric epithelium from the microbiota [5, 6, 7], as well as active measures, such as the production of antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) and secretory IgA antibodies. The limited resources of the mucosal immune system are deployed in a coordinated and timely manner, notably through the involvement of intestinal epithelial cells (IECs), myeloid cells, innate lymphoid cells (ILCs), and the enteric nervous system (ENS), together with adaptive immune cells. For instance, in mice upon infection by pathogens, the ENS affects the development of IECs [8], activates ILCs [9, 10], and simultaneously engages damage‐control transcriptional programs in macrophages [11].

At the fundamental level, the host–microbiome mutualism is based on cooperative behavior between two entities in which the actions of one depend on those of the other with the overall goal being homeostasis. Mathematically, given that an interaction between two entities has a defined goal and follows logical rules, such an interaction can be analyzed and an optimal strategy for each participant as well as important characteristics, such as boundary conditions where the interaction breaks down, may be calculated. The framework for the analysis of strategic interactions is termed “game theory” [14]. The theory was first developed from considerations of simplified strategic interactions namely zero‐sum games (e.g., poker) in which the sum of wins and losses of all players equals zero or in other words described strictly competitive interactions. Later the theory was expanded onto non‐zero‐sum interactions such as cooperation and it became clear that any kind of strategic interaction could be represented as a “game” and viewed in a framework of the theory [15]. The nature of immune system–microbiome interactions is not a zero‐sum sterilization of non‐self, but can be viewed as a non‐zero‐sum cooperation between interdependent evolutionary partners [16]. The non‐zero‐sum interaction with the microbiome mediates robustness and tunability in the immune network. This self‐reinforcing mutualistic host–microbiome coevolution is well captured by the concept of the microbiome as an extra organ of the human body [17]. A baseline understanding of their interdependent interactions also provides insights into how its collapse influences disease risk and what are potential targets for future lifestyle, drug, probiotic, prebiotic, and live biotherapeutic interventions. Herein, we summarize recent progress toward deciphering the principles of microbiome–immune bidirectional interdependent interactions in the intestine. As causality studies are predominantly only possible in animal models, unless stated otherwise research reviewed herein was performed in mice.

During the past decade, there have been significant advances in our understanding of the gut microbiome and immune system bidirectional interactions. Molecular and cellular investigations have identified numerous cell types and molecules critical for microbial recognition and circuitry of signaling cascades to mount homeostatic and inflammatory immune responses. In particular, IECs, ENS, myeloid cells, and ILCs have been revealed to play critical roles as force multipliers to handle the otherwise uneven host‐microbiome standoff (Fig. 1,
2,
3).

Despite their non‐hematopoietic origin, IECs constitute a major part of the mucosal innate immune system in the context of both health and disease. A single cell layer of IECs forms the border that separates the host from the microbiome and the environment. Therefore, IECs need to simultaneously fulfill roles of a physical barrier guarding self from non‐self as well as a conduit facilitating the bidirectional interaction between the host's immune system and the microbiome. Despite the single‐cell layer organization, intestinal epithelium is functionally subdivided into distinct biogeographical niches spanning from the tip of villi to the bottom of the crypts. The bottom of the crypts serves as a niche for LGR5+ intestinal stem cells (ISCs), early progenies of ISCs, as well as Paneth cells that secrete AMPs into the lumen, preventing most bacteria from reaching the ISCs niche [18]. The villus body fulfills the absorptive, sensory, and secretory roles.

Already in invertebrates, the epithelium features some of the simplest and therefore probably the most evolutionary ancient innate immune programs that are composed of just two steps: perception and reaction. Representative examples include production of AMPs upon microbial sensing [37] (Fig. 1). In contrast, mammalian epithelial programs additionally include integration with the adaptive arm and therefore represent a more recent innovation in immune‐microbiome co‐evolution. Representative examples include the program regulating epithelial proliferation based on the microbiome composition [44] and the program adjusting epithelial permeability in response to diurnally fluctuating luminal antigenic load [45]. Importantly, programs at all levels of complexity pursue not the one‐sided advantage for the host over the microbiome, but rather the collective benefits for the host and a diverse and stable microbiome (Fig. 1A‐C).

Recent advances in studies of the ENS have firmly established it as a critical component of the mucosal immune system in health and disease [67, 68, 69]. Structurally, the ENS network is composed of two main plexuses—the myenteric plexus (also termed Auerbach's plexus), located within the muscularis layer between the longitudinal and the circular muscles; and the submucosal plexus (also termed Meissner's plexus), located between the mucosa and the circular layer of muscles. The ENS innervates all layers of the intestinal tissue from the epithelial layer through the lamina propria, submucosa, muscularis, serosa, and the mesentery throughout the gastrointestinal tract. The total number of neurons in ENS is estimated to be on par with that of the spinal cord [69]. The diverse aspects of intestinal homeostasis such as gastric acid secretion, intestinal motility, barrier integrity, fluid and nutrient absorption, regulation of local blood flow, and interactions with the gut immune and endocrine systems are all collectively managed by reflex arcs of local ENS, reflex arcs that pass through extrinsic sympathetic and sensory ganglia, as well as reflexes that circle through the CNS [69]. The bidirectional communication between the ENS and the CNS is established via three major routes: (1) parasympathetic vagal neurons that connect the ENS to the hindbrain, (2) sympathetic nerves that connect the ENS through the sympathetic visceral ganglia to the spinal cord, and (3) the pelvic pathways that connect the ENS directly with the spinal cord. Despite this interconnectivity, the ENS can manage the gastrointestinal functions even if the connection with the CNS is severely reduced (e.g., in the case of a vagotomy) [69]. In contrast, neuropathies involving failure of a part of the ENS, such as Hirschsprung disease [70] or Chagas disease [71], are potentially fatal.

Epithelial and neuronal cells form the main sensory networks that perceive and interact with the microbiome. Similar to epithelial‐microbiome interaction programs, the immune reflexes of the ENS, both intrinsic and extrinsic, as well as of all levels of complexity function not solely for the benefit of the host but instead promote and rely on the health of the commensal microbiome. At steady state, intestinal peristalsis–crucial for both the microbiome and the host's homeostasis–requires sensing of the microbiome by enteric neurons [81]. During an infection that displaces commensals out of their ecological niches, ENS reflexes stimulate innate and adaptive immune responses to cleanse the pathogen, freeing the ecological niches for commensals to recolonize [76]. Commensals in turn produce metabolites vital for ENS homeostasis [80]. The commensal microbiome also promotes damage control programs within the ENS and CNS [11, 77], making the host more resilient to infections, reflecting the fact that the host's health is in the microbiome's best interest. Thus, the ENS and microbiome non‐zero‐sum interactions counter infections and promote intestinal homeostasis (Fig. 2A‐C).

The interaction between myeloid cells and the microbiome runs deep and starts before birth and continues throughout life. This is exemplified by the observation that antibiotic treatment of pregnant mice leads to a reduced number of neutrophils in their offspring, which could be prevented by microbial colonization of the pregnant mice [82]. Transitory colonization of pregnant female mice increases the number of ILC3s as well as F4/80+CD11c+ mononuclear cells in pups [83]. Furthermore, adult GF mice have a profound defect in myelopoiesis, characterized by a reduction of both yolk sac‐ and BM‐derived myeloid progenitors [84]. These defects can be restored by microbial recolonization, suggesting that healthy myelopoiesis requires continuous microbiome interaction throughout life rather than solely during the developmental stage [84]. Mechanistically, it has been proposed that the microbiome stimulates myelopoiesis via TLR signaling [85] and by producing metabolites such as SCFAs [84, 86]. In addition to influencing myelopoiesis, the microbiome drives maturation of neutrophils [87] and basophils [88]. The microbiome also affects the tissue‐specific adaptation of myeloid cells. The microglia of the brain of GF mice display an immature phenotype, which is phenocopied in SPF mice deficient for an SCFA receptor FFAR2 [89]. In the skin, the development of monocyte‐derived DCs depends on the presence of a skin microbiome [90]. The functional polarization of lung‐resident macrophages is modulated by the composition of the intestinal microbiome via prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) [91]. Similarly, the tolerogenic polarization of intestinal macrophages and DCs requires continuous SCFA‐mediated signaling [92, 93].

ILC3s are indispensable in integration of signals from the microbiome, IECs, ENS, as well as both the innate and adaptive arms of the immune system in order to promote mucosal homeostasis. ILC3s reinforce the intestinal barrier, promote immunological tolerance to commensals, and bolster colonization resistance to pathogens. Stimulated by the microbiome, myeloid and epithelial cells produce IL‐23 and IL‐1β [112, 113, 114]. In response, ILC3s release IL‐17 and IL‐22 in the steady state, and IFN‐γ and GM‐CSF under inflammatory conditions [115]. Cytokine release from ILC3s is drastically reduced in GF mice [95, 96, 116]. In addition to indirectly receiving microbial signals via myeloid and epithelial cells, ILC3s are capable of sensing the microbiome directly via the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) [117, 118, 119]. Regardless of the mode of ILC3 activation, ILC3‐derived IL‐22 has a profound reinforcing effect on the intestinal mucosal barrier. IL‐22 promotes ISC regeneration in the stem cell niche [120] and tight junction formation in the absorptive compartment of the epithelium [121]. IL‐22 also stimulates the release of AMPs, production of mucus [29, 122, 123], as well as fucosylation of the apical surface of IECs [12, 65]. Concordantly, mice deficient in ILC3s [124] or AhR [125] exhibit enhanced colonization of mucosal surfaces by SFB. In addition to AhR and IL‐23 signaling, IL‐22 production by ILC3s is stimulated by PGE2 [126]. Accordingly, PGE2 blockade results in an intestinal barrier failure and a systemic translocation by commensal microbes [126]. Furthermore, the ILC3‐mediated IL‐22 response can also be initiated by the ENS. The glial‐derived neurotrophic factor produced by enteric glial cells stimulates the RET tyrosine kinase receptor on ILC3s, resulting in the production of IL‐22 [127]. Moreover, ILC3s express vasoactive intestinal peptide receptor 2 and react to VIP produced by the ENS [9, 10]. As food consumption is a strong stimulator for the production of VIP from the ENS, the function of ILC3s is dynamically controlled in a coordinated manner and has a circadian pattern [9, 10]. On the other hand, microbiota‐stimulated ILC3s regulate the diurnal expression of the circadian transcription factor NFIL3 (also known as E4BP4) in IECs [128]. NFIL3 controls expression of a circadian lipid metabolic program and regulates lipid absorption in IECs [128]. In addition to their mucosal barrier reinforcing role via secretion of IL‐17 and IL‐22, ILC3s produce GM‐CSF and IL‐2, which contribute to the development of Treg cells and the maintenance of a tolerogenic state in the mucosal immune system [116, 129‐131]. Moreover, the CCR6+ subset of ILC3s is capable of antigen presentation to CD4 T cells [132] and iNKT cells [133]. MHC‐II expression by ILC3s leads to the control of mucosal IgA responses, thereby contributing to editing the intestinal microbial composition and sustaining its diversity [134]. The activity of ILC3s is also controlled by CD4 T cells. Without CD4 T cells, ILC3s exhibit extensive and persistent Stat3 activation and IL‐22 production, resulting in impaired host lipid metabolism by decreasing lipid transporter expression in the intestine [135]. Taken together, ILC populations interact with the microbiota and multiple host cells to contribute to mounting immune response against pathogens as well as shaping the mature commensal microbiome to help to maintain tissue homeostasis (Fig. 3A–E).

It has long been known that the gut microbiome contributes both to the development and to set the tone of adaptive immune cells. This is exemplified by the overall diminished state of the adaptive immune system in GF mice, characterized by underdeveloped intestinal lymphoid tissue architecture [136], reductions in intraepithelial lymphocytes (IELs) [137], and in IgA‐producing B cells [138]. In addition, recent studies have shown that the microbiome directs the functional maturation of T cells, such as Th17, Treg, follicular helper T (Tfh), and CD8 T cells, and determines the gut antibody repertoire [139, 140, 141, 142]. The adaptive immune system in turn curates the composition of the microbiome, with the goal of sustaining maximal diversity thus promoting broad colonization resistance and preventing infections with pathogens. Therefore, the interaction between adaptive immune cells and the microbiome is bidirectional and mutualistic (Fig. 4).

B cells are curators of a healthy and diverse intestinal microbiome [143, 144]. Intestinal B lineage plasma cells produce several grams of a diverse array of secretory IgA per day [144, 145]. Although less effective as compared with IgA+ B cell responses, IgG1 responses specific to commensal species, such as Akkermansia muciniphila, can also be induced in the intestine [146]. In contrast to the T cell‐dependent IgG1 response, IgA‐producing cells develop in both T cell‐dependent and ‐independent ways. The diversity of the IgA repertoire, and antigen recognition possibilities, are increased by somatic hypermutation in germinal centers in a T cell‐dependent manner. The high diversity of the IgA repertoire helps to sustain high diversity of the microbial composition (Fig. 4A). Therefore, it has been considered that T cell‐dependent pathway is mostly responsible for the microbiome curatorship[144]. However, recent studies provide evidence that T cells do not substantially modulate the specificity of IgA [147, 148]. As IgA‐producing cells in tissues other than the small intestine are severely reduced in the absence of the microbiota and T cells, T cells are likely required more for the generation of extraintestinal IgA‐producing cell populations [148]. In any case, IgA‐producing cells in the intestinal and extraintestinal tissues typically show microbiota‐reactive and polyreactive specificities [148]. It has been shown that microbial exposures at the intestinal mucosa generate polyreactive but oligoclonal responses, different from the diverse IgG repertoire responses to systemic microbial exposures [149]. Moreover, priming thresholds differ depending on exposure routes; a higher dose exposure is needed to shape the mucosal IgA repertoire than that of systemic IgG [149]. As intestinal IgA induced by luminal microbes is predominantly specific to cell‐surface antigens [149], a broad, but distinct, subset of microbiota is bound by IgA antibodies in vivo. In particular, Enterobacteriaceae as well as mucus‐resident bacteria are heavily coated with IgA [48, 150]. IgA binds to commensal species and promotes their growth [144, 145]. On the other hand, IgA also induces agglutination, enchained growth, neutralization, and immune exclusion of microbes. Although it remains unclear what factors determine whether the IgA‐coating enhances or diminishes the fitness of microbes in the intestine, accumulating evidence indicates that IgA‐coating leads to alterations in microbial gene expression, motility, and/or spatial localization.

While microbes are required for induction of IgA, it appears that the opposite is true for IgE. IgE is elevated in the sera of GF mice and decreases upon colonization with commensal microbes [142]. GF mice begin to produce IgE shortly after weaning age to high levels and maintain these levels unless colonized with microbes within the first week of life.

Both circulating and tissue‐specific populations of CD4 T cells are influenced by the intestinal microbiome. This is exemplified by the observation that a significant proportion of circulating CD4 T cells are specific to intestinal microbes in the steady state [151]. Among gut‐resident CD4 T cells, several subsets depend on the presence of specific members of the microbiome. For instance, a subset of Treg cells depends on the metabolic activity of specific members of the gut microbiota [152, 153, 154]. In particular, microbes that ferment dietary fiber into SCFAs promote the development of Treg cells [153, 155‐157]. In addition, microbiome‐derived specific secondary bile acids can modulate the function and differentiation of Treg cells [158, 159, 160]. For example, isoallolithocholic acid (isoalloLCA) and isodeoxycholic acid (isoDCA) enhance the differentiation of naïve T cells into Treg cells [158, 159]. Mechanistically, vitamin D receptor and Nuclear Receptor Subfamily 1 Group H Member 4 [NR1H4, also known as Farnesoid X Receptor (FXR)] are implicated in recognition of secondary bile acids and regulation of gene expression in antigen presenting cells and/or T cells for Treg cell differentiation [158, 160].

The interactions of B and T cells with the microbiome provide perhaps the clearest example of non‐zero‐sum dynamics. These two compartments require microbial signals for development and activation and reciprocally promote microbiome homeostasis. In contrast to B cells, the contributions of the T cell compartment to microbiome homeostasis are indirect but broad. T cells cooperate with antigen‐presenting epithelial cells, myeloid cells, and ILCs to protect the host from infections and promote IgA curatorship for microbiome diversity (Fig. 4B‐G).

As the microbiome envelops all surfaces of the human body and mediates interactions with the environment, it is perhaps not surprising that it is involved in health and disease of virtually all organ systems. The microbiome participates in the maintenance of tissue homeostasis through its direct contact at the gastrointestinal [183, 184], respiratory [185], urogenital [186], and skin surfaces [187]. In addition, the microbiota produces a wide variety of molecules that can reach millimolar concentrations in the blood [188, 189, 190, 191, 192], thereby influencing remote organ systems such as the central and peripheral nervous systems [193], liver [194], adipose tissue [195, 196], skeletal muscles [197], and the cardio‐vascular system [198, 199]. Although the immune system no doubt serves as a major conduit of microbiome influences across multiple organs, major knowledge gaps still remain. The concept of microbiome‐immune non‐zero‐sum interactions based on studies of host–microbiome interactions at the intestine is likely to be applicable across multiple organ systems and therefore may help guide formulation of hypotheses to be tested in future studies. Innate and adaptive immunological programs as well as IECs and ENS that evolved to support host‐microbiome mutualism in the intestine may have counterparts in other organ systems that interact with microbiome directly and indirectly via immune system and microbiome‐derived metabolites.

Another avenue of promising future research lies in utilizing the concept of immune system–microbiome mutualism to better define what constitutes a healthy microbiome (Fig. 5). Defining a healthy microbiome is a long‐term goal of the field of microbiome research and will require to model the dynamics underpinning the seemingly endless compositional variability between individuals. Existing models of microbiome ecology successfully describe select aspects of bacteria‐to‐bacteria interactions by mapping limits of selfish behavior in a network [200], modeling an effect of the ratio of cooperative to competitive interactions on diversity and stability [201], applying game theory to metabolic interdependencies between microbes [15] and strategies of nutrients utilization [202], calculating an effect of cross‐feeding on colonization resistance [203], studying the relationship between nutrients availability and diversity [204], and defining rules of assembly of infant microbiome [205]. However, by design these models are limited to bacteria‐to‐bacteria interactions. Studies reviewed herein and elsewhere demonstrate that a healthy microbiome is the result of active host immune system curatorship as well as the outcome of microbial ecology. Incorporation of microbiome‐editing programs by innate and adaptive immune cells, IECs, as well as ENS will be an important step towards development of a model of healthy human microbiome (Fig. 5).

K.H. is a scientific advisory board member of Vedanta Biosciences and 4BIO CAPITAL. T.T has no commercial or financial conflict of interests.

