Longitudinal multi-omics analyses link gut microbiome dysbiosis with recurrent urinary tract infections in women

















Recurrent urinary tract infections (rUTIs) are a major health burden worldwide, with history of infection being a significant risk factor. While the gut is a known reservoir for uropathogenic bacteria, the role of the microbiota in rUTI remains unclear. We conducted a year-long study of women with (n=15) and without (n=16) history of rUTIs, from whom we collected urine, blood and monthly fecal samples for metagenomic and transcriptomic interrogation. During the study, 24 UTIs were reported, and additional samples collected during and after infection. The gut microbiome of individuals with a history of rUTI was significantly depleted in microbial richness and butyrate-producing bacteria compared to controls, reminiscent of other inflammatory conditions. However, Escherichia coli gut and bladder populations were comparable between cohorts in both relative abundance and phylogroup. Transcriptional analysis of peripheral blood mononuclear cells revealed expression profiles indicative of differential systemic immunity between cohorts. Altogether, these results suggest that rUTI susceptibility is in part mediated through the gut-bladder axis, comprising gut dysbiosis and differential immune response to bacterial bladder colonization, manifesting in symptoms.

Urinary tract infections (UTIs) are among the most common bacterial infections worldwide and a significant cause of morbidity in females, with uropathogenic Escherichia coli (UPEC) being the primary causative agent 1. One of the strongest risk factors for UTI is a history of prior UTIs 2, but the biological basis and risk factors for long-term recurrence remain unclear in otherwise healthy women. 20–30% of women diagnosed with a UTI will experience a recurrent UTI (rUTI), with some suffering six or more per year. Over one million women in the United States are referred to urologists each year because of rUTIs, and the rapid spread of antibiotic resistance in uropathogens is making treatment more challenging.

Here, we present results from the UTI microbiome (UMB) project, a year-long clinical study of women with a history of rUTI and a matched cohort of healthy women. Our unique longitudinal study design allowed us to explore the importance and interdependence of the gut microbiota and E. coli strain dynamics in rUTI, susceptibility to infection, and host immune responses that may impact these dynamics. Using multi-omic techniques, we determined that: i) compared to healthy controls, women with a history of rUTI had a distinct, less diverse gut microbiota, depleted in butyrate producers and exhibiting characteristics of low-level inflammation; ii) differential immunological biomarkers suggest rUTI women may have a distinct immune state; iii) E. coli strains were transmitted from the gut to the bladder in both cohorts, though no UTI symptoms occurred in healthy controls; and iv) UTI-causing E. coli strains often persistently colonized the gut and were not permanently cleared by repeated antibiotic exposure. Thus, susceptibility to rUTI is in part mediated through a syndrome involving the gut-bladder axis, comprising a dysbiotic gut microbiome with reduced butyrate production and apparent alterations of systemic immunity. Our work shows that UPEC strains persist in the gut despite antibiotic treatment, which itself may exacerbate gut dysbiosis.

Women with a history of rUTI were recruited to the UMB study, along with an age- and community-matched control cohort comprising healthy women (Methods). A total of 16 control and 15 rUTI women participated in the year-long study, providing monthly home-collected stool samples, as well as blood, urine and rectal swabs at enrollment and subsequent clinic visits for UTI treatment (Figure 1a). Participants completed monthly questionnaires on diet, symptoms, and behavior (Supp Data). There was a greater proportion of white women in the rUTI cohort, and self-reported antibiotic use was higher in this group in line with UTI treatment; otherwise, few dietary or behavioral differences were apparent (Extended Data Table 1).

Urine samples collected at the time of clinical UTI diagnoses were plated on MacConkey agar; bacterial growth was detected (> 0 CFU/ml) from the majority (15/19; 79%, Supplementary Table 1). To determine the cause of infection, we sequenced 13 urine cultures, as well as uncultured urine, from all UTI diagnoses, defaulting to results from cultures when available. E. coli dominated 12/13 (92%) sequenced outgrowths; the remaining sample was dominated by Klebsiella pneumoniae. Sequencing uncultured urine from the remaining UTI samples identified uropathogens in a further four samples, including E. coli (2), Enterococcus faecalis and Staphylococcus saprophyticus, while two yielded no bacterial sequence (Supplementary Table 1). Based on sequencing, we defined 14 E. coli UTIs, comprising 82% of infections for which a bacterial cause could be inferred, broadly reflecting previous estimates of the proportion of all UTIs caused by E. coli 1.

It is increasingly recognized that the gut microbiota plays a role in a range of autoimmune and inflammatory diseases 18, as well as susceptibility to infection 16, and can alter inflammation in distal organs 19. While previous studies have highlighted differential abundances of non-uropathogenic gut taxa as risk factors for bacteriuria in kidney transplant patients (reduced Faecalibacterium and Romboutsia 9) and UTIs in children (reduced Peptostreptococcaceae 8), it is unclear if these are risk factors for recurrence in otherwise healthy adult women. To explore this, we sequenced and analyzed the metagenomes of 367 longitudinal stool samples from both rUTI (n=197) and control (n=170) women (Figure 1b; Methods). Rectal swabs, collected during clinic visits, were not used to determine microbiome profiles.

This loss of gut microbial richness, diversity, and butyrate-producing bacteria is also a hallmark of exposure to broad spectrum antibiotics, including ciprofloxacin 25–27, which was used to treat more than a third of UTIs in our study. Thus, we sought to determine whether antibiotic effects may contribute to the observed shifts in microbiome composition in rUTI women (‘rUTI dysbiosis’). Though antibiotic exposure in the previous two weeks was associated with a significant reduction in microbial richness (p=0.05), this loss of richness was not sustained. Samples taken 2–6 weeks after antibiotic exposure were not significantly different from baseline levels (p=0.2). Furthermore, we saw no association between the reported number of antibiotic courses and average richness (Figure 2c), and no differences in the overall gut microbiome stability between cohorts, despite more frequent antibiotic treatment among UTI women (Extended Data Figure 3). We observed no differences in richness or in the abundance of butyrate producers between rUTI women with different antibiotic exposures (Extended Data Figure 4a–b). Within the rUTI group, the frequency of infections was not associated with microbial richness or the relative abundance of butyrate producers. The microbial richness of women suffering UTIs during the study did not differ significantly from that of rUTI women not reporting infections (p=0.4; Figure 2b–d). While we did not detect a lasting impact from individual antibiotic courses – there were few long-term trends among rUTI women over the study (Extended Data Figure 4c) – it is still possible that repeated antibiotic use over years may have contributed to the observed rUTI dysbiosis.

The depletion of butyrate-producing taxa and microbial richness, key characteristics of rUTI dysbiosis, are also observed in other gut inflammatory conditions, including nosocomial diarrhea 28, IBS 29, and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) 20, particularly Crohn’s disease 30, and thus may be indicative of gut inflammation in rUTI women. While IBD is a multifactorial disorder for which the causative role of gut microbes is incompletely understood 31, mouse models have helped demonstrate a causal relationship between gut dysbiosis and inflammation 32. We compared our data to longitudinal gut microbiome data from adults with and without IBD in the Human Microbiome Project 2 (HMP2) study 33, which shared the same extraction and sequencing protocols (Methods). Relative to each study’s control group, we found that the ten most significantly depleted species in the rUTI gut, including butyrate producers F. prausnitzii and E. hallii, were also depleted in the IBD gut. We further observed a significant overall correlation in the estimated change of species-level abundances associated with rUTI and IBD (Extended Data Figure 5), suggesting more general similarities.

There were also some notable differences. Bacteroides, significantly elevated in the rUTI group, did not differ between cohorts in the HMP2 study (Extended Data Figure 5), and were also decreased among IBD patients in other studies 34. E. coli was significantly elevated in IBD patients in the HMP2 study, but showed no difference in average relative abundance between our cohorts (Figure 2e). Diminished Bacteroides alongside elevated Enterobacteriaceae was also observed in patients with nosocomial diarrhea 28. Diarrhea, also a symptom of IBD, is associated with reduced gut transit time and is known to enrich for organisms common in the upper gastrointestinal tract, including Enterobacteriaceae 35, at the expense of anaerobic organisms such as Bacteroides 36. As such, rUTI women with low-level inflammation and no diarrhea may lack the depletion of Bacteroides and elevation of Enterobacteriaceae observed in diarrhea-associated conditions. It is also possible that the considerable differences in treatment regimens; i.e. antibiotics vs. anti-inflammatories, contribute to divergences of a common underlying inflammatory signal.

rUTI dysbiosis also shares similarities with immunological syndromes affecting distal sites. For example, depletion of butyrate producers has been associated with rheumatoid arthritis, a systemic autoimmune disease which can be partially ameliorated in animal models with oral butyrate supplementation 37,38. Patients with chronic kidney disease also exhibit similar dysbiosis, including reduced Parasutterella and Akkermansia, the latter of which is inversely correlated with interleukin-10 levels, an anti-inflammatory cytokine 39. We hypothesized that rUTI dysbiosis may also have an immunomodulatory role, potentially eliciting a differential immune response to bacterial invasion of the bladder. Thus, we explored immunological biomarkers from blood samples collected at enrollment and UTI, quantifying (i) a Luminex panel of human cytokines, chemokines, and growth factors involved in inflammation and T cell activation, and (ii) cell types and the transcriptional activity of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) (Methods).

Our small cohort size provided limited statistical power to identify differential expression between cohorts based on PBMC RNA Seq data, and no large-scale differences were observed (Extended Data Figure 6a). However, we found two genes that were upregulated in the PBMCs of the rUTI cohort (FDR < 0.1), ZNF266 and the long non-coding RNA LINC00944 (Supplementary Table 5). ZNF266 has been previously linked to urological health, as a potential PBMC biomarker for overactive bladder and incontinence in women 42. LINC00944 has been associated with inflammatory and immune-related signaling pathways, as well as tumor invading T lymphocytes in breast cancer, and markers for programmed cell-death 43. Resting NK cells were significantly reduced at the time of UTI relative to baseline levels (p=0.02; Extended Data Figure 6c). NK cells help suppress bladder infection by UPEC in mice 44, so the loss of NK cells in the periphery may suggest a migration to the bladder at time of rUTI.

Previous work has implicated gut dysbiosis and a depletion of butyrate-producing bacteria in enhanced susceptibility to gut colonization by pathogens, including Salmonella 45 and C. difficile 46. While we could not quantify absolute species abundances, we observed no significant difference in the average relative abundance of E. coli between cohorts (Figure 2e), suggesting the rUTI dysbiotic gut is no more hospitable to E. coli colonization than controls. Further, we found no relationship between the relative abundances of Escherichia and butyrate producers in either cohort, suggesting that depletion of butyrate-producing bacteria does not enhance gut colonization by Escherichia (Extended Data Figure 7). We considered the possibility that a temporal increase, or bloom, in E. coli relative abundance is a rUTI risk factor. Of the samples collected in the 14 days preceding an E. coli UTI, 75% exhibited E. coli relative abundance at or above average levels in the gut (Extended Data Figure 8a–b). However, elevated E. coli levels were not predictive of UTIs; none of the 22 E. coli blooms (defined as E. coli relative abundance >10-fold higher than the intra-host mean) occurred in the two weeks prior to UTIs. Thänert et al. identified intestinal blooms of uropathogens preceding some UTIs, but similarly noted that blooms often occurred in the absence of infection 7, leading us to conclude that elevated levels of E. coli may facilitate transfer to the bladder but rarely manifest in infection. However, without frequent urine collection, we cannot rule out asymptomatic bladder colonization.

Mapping urine metagenome assemblies to a curated virulence factor database showed that UTI-causing strains were enriched in virulence factors (including iron uptake systems (sit, chu, iro, ybt operons), colibactin (clb), and type 6 secretion systems) relative to an E. coli species-wide database, though many of these were also present in the one urine sample from a control participant for which we had sufficient coverage to assess gene content (Methods, Supplementary Table 7). This transition of a likely urovirulent strain to the bladder of healthy women without eliciting UTI symptoms is consistent with previous studies which have been unable to identify genetic markers of urovirulence in mice 49, or consistently discriminate between UTI and asymptomatic bacteriuria strains in women 50. Nevertheless, the divergence in clinical outcomes after bacterial bladder invasion may still arise due to phenotypic differences in E. coli strains reaching the bladder that are not readily apparent in genome comparisons. rUTI dysbiosis could have an impact on UPEC gene expression; it has been shown that higher SCFA levels are associated with down-regulation of E. coli virulence factors including fimbrial and flagellar genes 51. However, such transcriptional analyses fall outside the scope of this study.

While it is well known that UTIs are most commonly caused by UPEC resident in the gut, their longitudinal dynamics of these strains within the gut are less well understood, despite the importance of such insights into developing rUTI prophylaxis. We applied StrainGE to all urine samples to identify UTI-causing strains and their gut dynamics, in particular at the time of UTI and after antibiotic exposure. Four rUTI women suffered multiple confirmed E. coli UTIs, though only one was a same strain recurrence (individual 8; Figure 3b). Comparisons of sequence data from urine samples and cultured rectal swabs from UTI clinic visits revealed that nearly all (11/12) E. coli UTIs, for which we had same-day rectal swabs, contained the same UTI strain, underscoring frequent gut to bladder transmission. The dominant E. coli strain in four of the rectal swab outgrowths was not the UTI-causing strain, suggesting some UTIs may be caused by minority strains. Only one UTI (individual 5, Figure 3) was caused by a strain never observed in another sample from that individual. This phylogroup B1 strain likely arose from a source other than the gut, such as the urinary tract or the vagina, also implicated as UPEC reservoirs 7,52.

We anticipated that antibiotic exposure - particularly ciprofloxacin - would impact gut carriage of E. coli strains, and may explain the lower frequency of persistent colonizers in the rUTI group. Indeed, E. coli strains were detected by StrainGE significantly less frequently in stool samples from the two weeks following antibiotic use (OR=0.3 (0.13, 0.68); p=0.004). However, many strains apparently cleared by antibiotics were observed again at later time points; in fact, none of the UTI-causing strains observed in the gut was permanently cleared following antibiotic exposure. It has previously been shown that coexistence of susceptible and resistant strains of the same lineage through acquisition/loss of mobile resistance elements can allow UPEC populations to rapidly adapt to repeated antibiotic exposure and persist in the gut 53. While low-level persistence that is undetectable from sequencing data is a possibility, we plated a subset of post-treatment stool samples onto MacConkey agar to culture E. coli. In many cases, we observed no growth, suggesting absence rather than low-level persistence (Supplementary Table 8). Furthermore, profiling of 12 UTI-causing strains isolated from proximate stool samples demonstrated that the majority were susceptible to the antibiotics to which they were exposed (Supplementary Table 9). While a single stool sample is not completely representative of the gut microbiota, this suggests that UTI-causing strains may be frequently reintroduced to the gut from alternative sources following antibiotic clearance of the bladder and gut.

Our study design, data collection and culture-independent metagenomic sequencing approach allowed us to characterize dynamics of the gut-bladder axis in healthy and rUTI women. We propose that rUTI susceptibility is dependent, in part, on perturbation of the gut-bladder axis, which represents a previously undescribed syndrome, comprising gut dysbiosis and differential host immunology. While this study was not designed to identify causal links between gut dysbiosis, immune response and rUTI susceptibility, the proposed model is consistent with our findings and provides a benchmark to be tested in future studies. Compared to healthy controls, women suffering rUTI exhibited gut dysbiosis characterized by depleted levels of butyrate-producing bacteria and diminished microbial richness. This dysbiosis did not appear to impact E. coli dynamics within the gut; relative abundances and strain types were similar between cohorts, suggesting that gut carriage of urovirulent bacteria in itself is not a risk factor for rUTIs. Notably, E. coli was commonly identified in the urine of healthy women, including strains arising from UPEC-associated clades and harboring similar virulence factors. Based on our observations, rUTI gut dysbiosis is consistent with low-level gut inflammation, and is reminiscent of other disorders in which microbiome-mediated immunomodulation plays a role in disease severity.

While identifying the origins of rUTI dysbiosis is outside the scope of this study, repeated antibiotic exposure is a plausible mechanism through which dysbiosis is maintained. The relatively short study period precluded us from establishing whether dysbiosis is the direct result of long-term antibiotic perturbation. In addition to the potentially detrimental impact of antibiotic use on the gut microbiota, we found that treatment also failed to clear UTI-causing strains from the gut in the long term. rUTI treatment protocols targeting UPEC strains in the gut with minimal disruption to other gut microbiota, such as small molecule therapeutics 54, may offer improved prospects. While more evidence is required to fully characterize the causal mechanisms between dysbiosis and infection, our work highlights the ineffectiveness and potential detrimental impact of current antibiotic therapies, as well as the potential for microbiome therapeutics (e.g. fecal microbiota transplants 10) to limit infections via restoration of a healthy bacterial community in the gut.

This study was conducted with the approval and under the supervision of the Institutional Review Board of Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis, MO. Women from the St. Louis, MO area reporting three or more UTIs in the past 12 months were recruited into the rUTI study arm, while women with no history of UTI (at most one UTI ever) were recruited into the control arm via the Department of Urological Surgery at Barnes-Jewish Hospital in St. Louis, MO. We excluded women who: i) had inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) or urological developmental defects (e.g., ureteral reflux, kidney agenesis, etc.), ii) were pregnant, iii) take antibiotics as prophylaxis for rUTI, and iv) were younger than 18 years or older than 45 at the time of enrollment. All participants provided informed consent. Microbiological information for previous UTIs was not available. A total of 16 control and 15 rUTI women aged between 18 and 45 were recruited to the study; participants were remunerated with gift cards for participation. 14 women in each cohort completed the entire study collection protocol; no participants who completed the study were excluded from downstream analyses. Participants who did not complete the study were included in cohort-level comparisons, but excluded from longitudinal analyses. No statistical methods were used to pre-determine sample sizes but our sample sizes are similar to those reported in previous publications, e.g. 55,56. As an observational study with no intervention, with cohort membership based on predetermined criteria defined above, no subject randomization was required. Data collection and analysis were not performed blind to the conditions of the experiments.

Participants provided blood and urine samples, as well as rectal swabs, at the initial clinic visit. UTIs were diagnosed during clinic visits; additional UTIs (not presenting at the study clinic) were inferred based on symptoms (painful urination, increased urgency/frequency of urination, cloudy urine) and antibiotic consumption reported in the monthly questionnaire. Women visiting the clinic during the study with UTI symptoms provided rectal swabs, blood and urine samples, and were requested to submit stool samples as soon as possible (within 24 hours) after the clinic visit, as well as at a two week follow-up time point.

All participants provided monthly stool samples for 12 months. Samples were collected at home, and submitted via mail following procedures developed in the Human Microbiome Project 2 33. Briefly, participants collected a fresh fecal sample in a disposable toilet hat and then aliquoted two teaspoon-sized scoops of stool each into a tube containing phosphate buffered saline and a tube containing 100% ethanol. Samples were overnight to the Broad Institute where they were stored at −80C until sample processing. All stool samples were shipped Monday to Thursday within each week to limit samples long term exposure to ambient temperature; samples were stored in patients’ home freezers until shipment, if necessary. Questionnaires were completed with all monthly and clinical sample collections; these captured self-reported antibiotic and drug use, dietary intake, sexual intercourse and UTI symptoms. Participants who did not provide stool samples and questionnaires at the beginning of each month were given phone call or email reminders to provide samples.

A total of 15 mL of blood was collected from each patient during initial enrollment and UTI visits. The blood was stored on ice for less than 30 minutes and then mixed with an equal amount PBS with 2% fetal bovine serum (FBS). Peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMCs) were then isolated using SepMate PBMC isolation tubes (Stemcell Technologies) with Ficoll-Paque PLUS density gradient medium (Cytiva). Serum was collected during the PBMC isolation process and stored at −80C until use. PBMCs were washed with PBS plus 2% FBS and pelleted via centrifugation at 10,000 × g at room temperature for 5 minutes. PBMC cell pellets were then flash frozen and stored at −80C until RNA extraction.

Rectal swabs were collected in the clinic and stored on ice for less than 30 minutes. Rectal swabs were washed in 2 mL of PBS. 1 mL of PBS was centrifuged at 10,000 × g at room temperature for 2 minutes and the PBS supernatant was removed. The bacterial/fecal pellet was then flash frozen and stored at −80C until DNA extraction. The remaining 1 mL was then used to make serial dilutions and then plated on both Luria Broth (LB) and MacConkey agar and incubated overnight at 37°C to quantify colony forming units (CFUs). After bacterial enumeration, bacteria from MacConkey and LB plates were scraped to collect bacterial outgrowths. Bacterial cells were washed with PBS, pelleted at 10,000 × g at room temperature for 2 minutes, flash frozen and then stored at −80°C until DNA extraction.

Mid-stream urine samples were collected in sterile containers and stored on ice for less than 30 minutes. 10 mL of urine was centrifuged at 10,000 × g at room temperature for 5 minutes. The resulting pellet was washed in PBS, pelleted again, and then flash frozen and stored at −80°C until DNA extraction. 1 mL of urine was used to make serial dilutions and then plated onto both LB and MacConkey and incubated overnight at 37°C to enumerate CFUs. After outgrowth, the plates were scraped to collect bacterial colonies, which were then washed with PBS, pelleted at 10,000 × g at room temperature for 2 minutes, flash frozen and then stored at −80°C until DNA extraction.

RNA was extracted from stored PBMCs using TRIzol Reagent (cat. no. 15596–026 and 15596–018; Life Technologies), according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, 0.75 mL of TRIzol was added per 0.25 mL of sample and cells were lysed by several rounds of pipetting. Samples were incubated for five minutes at room temperature. Chloroform was added to the samples at the recommended concentration and samples were incubated shaking for 15 seconds and set to rest for 2–3 minutes at room temperature. After incubation, samples were centrifuged at 12,000 × g for 15 minutes at 4°C. The aqueous phase was collected for RNA isolation. RNA was precipitated using 100% isopropanol and incubated at room temperature for 10 minutes, followed by centrifugation at 12,000 × g for 10 minutes at 4°C. The precipitated RNA was washed according to the protocol using 75% ethanol and resuspended in RNase-free water. Extracted RNA was stored at −80°C until further use.

DNA was extracted from rectal swabs and urine samples plated on MacConkey agar using the Wizard Genomic DNA Purification Kit (Promega), according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, samples were resuspended in 600 uL of Nuclei Lysis solution and incubated at 80°C for five minutes, then cooled to room temperature. RNase solution was added to samples and incubated for 15 minutes at 37°C, then cooled to room temperature. 200 uL of Protein Precipitation solution was added to the RNase-treated sample, vortexed for 20 seconds, and incubated on ice for 5 minutes. After incubation, samples were centrifuged for 3 minutes at 16,000 × g and the supernatant was transferred to a 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tube containing 600 uL of isopropanol. Samples were gently mixed and centrifuged for 2 minutes at 16,000 × g. The supernatant was removed and the DNA pellet was washed with 70% ethanol. Samples were centrifuged for 2 minutes at 16,000 × g, ethanol was aspirated and DNA pellets were air-dried for 15 minutes. The DNA pellet was rehydrated with DNA Rehydration solution and incubated at 65°C for 1 hour. Extracted DNA was stored at 4C for short-term storage and at 80°C for long-term storage until further use.

Total nucleic acid from stool was extracted following the HMP2 protocol 33, the basis of which is the Chemagic MSM I with the Chemagic DNA Blood Kit-96 from Perkin Elmer. DNA samples were quantified using a fluorescence-based PicoGreen assay.

Libraries were constructed from extracted DNA from stool, urine, rectal swabs, and plate scrapes using the NexteraXT kit (Illumina). Then, libraries were sequenced on a HiSeq 2500 (Illumina) in 101 bp paired-end read mode and/or a HiSeq X10 (Illumina) in 151 bp paired-end read mode. Sequence data was then demultiplexed. Samples that were sequenced multiple times on different runs were pooled together. Reads were processed with KneadData (v0.7.2, https://huttenhower.sph.harvard.edu/kneaddata/) to remove adapter sequence and trim low base qualities (with Trimmomatic), as well as to remove human-derived sequences (by aligning to human genome with bowtie2).

Custom Luminex magnetic bead assay kit was obtained from R&D systems (product LXSAHM). Analytes from Human Inflammation and Human T Cell Response panels were chosen for the custom kit of 39 analytes: CXCL1/GROalpha, IL-1alpha, M-CSF/CSF1, LIF, Ltalpha/TNF-b, MIF, APRIL, CCL11/Eotaxin, CCL4/MIP-1b, CXCL8/IL-8, IFN-g, IL-1b, IL-11, IL-13, IL-17A, IL-18, IL-21, IL-27, IL-31, IL-4, IL-6, MMP-1, TNF-a, BAFF/BlyS, CCL2/MCP-1, CX3CL1/Fractalkine, CXCL5/ENA-78, GM-CSF, IL-10, IL-12p70, IL-15, IL-17E/IL-25, IL-2, IL-22, IL-28A/INF-12, IL-33, IL-5, IL-7, MMP-3. Detection of the analytes in human plasma samples was performed using the Curiox DropArray system for miniaturization of magnetic bead multiplex kits. Plasma samples were diluted 2-fold for the assay. Results were read and quantified using a BioPlex multiplex plate reader and Microplate Manager software (v5).

Plasma eotaxin (CCL11) levels from rUTI and control patients were measured using the Eotaxin (CCL11) Human Simple Step ELISA kit (cat. No. Ab185985; Abcam), according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, plasma samples were diluted into sample diluent and 50 uL of sample and 50 uL of antibody cocktail were added to 96 well plate strips. Plates were sealed and incubated shaking for one hour at room temperature. Wells were washed three times with 1x wash buffer and inverted to remove excess liquid. 100 uL of TMB substrate was added to each well; plates were covered to protect from light and incubated shaking for 10 minutes. Stop solution (100 uL) was added to each well and plates were incubated shaking for one minute. The OD450 was measured and recorded to determine the concentration of Eotaxin in pg/mL.

Bacterial community composition was determined using MetaPhlAn2 (v2.7.0 with db v20) 57 on KneadData-processed sequences. Functional profiling was performed by HUMAnN2 (v2.8.1, database downloaded in October 2016) 23 on KneadData-processed sequences. Diversity metrics and Bray-Curtis distances were derived from the MetaPhlAn2 relative abundance output using the vegan package in R [https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/vegan/].

Sequences from PBMC extracted mRNA were aligned to the human reference genome (hg19, Bioproject PRJNA31257) using the STAR aligner 58. Picard-Tools (https://broadinstitute.github.io/picard/) was used to mark duplicate reads. Read counts per gene were generated with subread featureCounts 59. Read counts were normalized into Counts Per Million (CPM) using edgeR 60. This normalized read count matrix was then used as input for CIBERSORT using the LM22 signature gene set 61. Results from CIBERSORT reported the relative abundance of 22 different immune cell types, including both PBMC and non-PBMC cell types, and it was used to remove three samples that were contaminated with 5% or greater of non-PBMC cell types. The CIBERSORT filtered set of samples was used to perform differential gene expression analysis using DESeq2 62. Baseline healthy control samples were compared to baseline rUTI samples. Due to limited sample numbers and potential confounding, we included only samples collected from caucasian women in this analysis. Results driven by single outlying data points were not considered.

In order to track E. coli strain dynamics we used Strain Genome Explorer (StrainGE), which we extensively benchmarked for use on low abundance species in the context of typical Illumina sequencer error 47. We applied the StrainGST module of StrainGE to identify representative E. coli strains in all stool, urine and rectal swabs, using an E. coli reference database generated from RefSeq complete genomes, as detailed in that paper. Strains mapping to the same representative reference genome in this database typically have an ANI of at least 99.9%. To provide further evidence that same-strain calls from sample pairs from the same host were indeed matches, we ran the StrainGR module of StrainGE, which calculates alignment-based similarity metrics. We used benchmarked thresholds to determine strain matches; strain pairs with a common callable genome >0.5%, Jaccard gap similarity >0.95 and average callable nucleotide identity >99.95% were deemed matches.

Urine samples provided at the time of UTI diagnosis were plated on MacConkey agar. Sequence data was generated from DNA extracted from uncultured urine, and/or outgrowth on selective media. The cause of UTI was deemed to be the most abundant uropathogen, using outgrowth data where available, uncultured urine otherwise. Species were determined to be uropathogens based on UTI prevalence studies, e.g. 1.

Urine metagenomes for which E. coli represented the dominant species were assembled using SPAdes 63. To detect virulence factors in E. coli references (see StrainGST section above) and assembled genomes from study samples, we used the Virulence Factor Database (VFDB) for E. coli and the type 6 secretion system (T6SS) database (SecReT6) in genome-wide BLAST+ searches. Though VFDB contains T6SS genes, we removed them in favor of the T6SS-specific database for a T6SS-specific analytical pipeline. Other VFDB hits from blastn were filtered for ≥90% identity and ≥90% coverage. All E. coli genomes were separated by phylogroup for enrichment analysis, where Fisher’s Exact test was used to determine the significance of virulence factor enrichment in a certain phylogroup. T6SS hits were filtered for ≥90% identity and ≥90% coverage and the system was considered present where at least 12 different adjacent T6SS genes were present. Again, an enrichment analysis was performed using Fisher’s Exact test to determine the significance of T6SS presence in certain phylogroups.

We used questionnaire responses to determine if any dietary or behavioral factors were associated with rUTI. We first compared the proportion of participants in each cohort who responded positively to binary variables (e.g. dairy consumption, alcohol etc. in the previous two weeks) in more than 50% or responses, and used a Fisher’s Exact test to determine significance. We next fit mixed effects logistic regression models to determine temporal risk factors for UTIs. Samples collected within 3 days of UTI diagnosis were classified as ‘time of UTI’; this binary variable was fit as a function of host (random effects term) and each dietary or behavioral response variable collected in the questionnaire. Variables with limited or no variance were excluded.

We fit mixed effects linear regression models to compare the structure, diversity and function of the gut microbiome between cohorts, following similar approaches employed by previous studies, e.g. 64. For this purpose, we used sequence data from all collected stool samples, but did not include rectal samples. An arcsine square root transformation was applied to relative abundance values. Features (transformed relative abundances, diversity, microbial richness) were fit as a function of host (random effects term), cohort (categorical variable), and terms for antibiotic use and race (categorical variable) to adjust for potential confounding effects. To assess change in relative abundances at relevant timepoints, we also fit models including covariates for ‘pre-UTI’ (14 days preceding UTI diagnosis), ‘time of UTI’ (three days either side of UTI diagnosis), or post antibiotics (<14 days post antibiotic exposure) as binary variables. All taxa with more than 10% non-zero values were fitted using the lme4 function in R. Significance of associations was determined using Wald’s test, and p-values were adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing using Benjamini-Hochberg correction at each taxonomic level.

We compared the stability of the microbiome between cohorts by assessing the distributions of within-host pairwise Bray-Curtis (BC) dissimilarities between individuals. Since rUTI women had, on average, slightly more frequent sampling than control women, due to the additional follow-up samples after UTI diagnoses, this metric may be biased towards smaller values in this cohort. However, we observed no significant trend between BC dissimilarity and time between samples, suggesting no detectable long-term trends. Furthermore, we detected no difference in the distribution of time-adjusted BC distances (BC divided by number of days between samples) between cohorts.

To compare rUTI dysbiosis to an IBD gut state, we downloaded MetaPhlAn2 output from the HMP2 study 33, (ibdmdb.org). We extracted longitudinal samples from adults with IBD (diagnosis=‘UC’ or ‘CD’) and non-IBD controls (diagnosis=‘nonIBD’). We fit linear mixed effects models with standardized relative abundances as a function of host (random effects term), race (race=‘white’; binary term) and recent antibiotic use. Fitted coefficients for the IBD and rUTI cohorts are then plotted in Extended Data Figure 5.

Metagenomic sequence data are available from the Sequence Read Archive under Bioproject PRJNA400628. PBMC RNASeq data are available from the database of Genotypes and Phenotypes (dbGaP) under project number phs002728. Questionnaire data, output files from MetaPhlan2, Humann2, StrainGE are available from github.com/cworby/UMB-study.

Custom R scripts to analyze outputs are available from github.com/cworby/UMB-study.

Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interests.

