Gut microbiome diversity influenced more by the Westernized dietary regime than the body mass index as assessed using effect size statistic

Human gut microbiome dysbiosis has been associated with the onset of metabolic diseases and disorders. However, the critical factors leading to dysbiosis are poorly understood. In this study, we provide increasing evidence of the association of diet type and body mass index (BMI) and how they relatively influence the taxonomic structure of the gut microbiota with respect to the causation of gut microbiome dysbiosis. The study included randomly selected Alabama residents (n = 81), including females (n = 45) and males (n = 36). The demographics data included age (33 ± 13.3 years), height (1.7 ± 0.11 meters), and weight (82.3 ± 20.6 kg). The mean BMI was 28.3 ± 7.01, equating to an overweight BMI category. A cross‐sectional case–control design encompassing the newly recognized effect size approach to bioinformatics analysis was used to analyze data from donated stool samples and accompanying nutrition surveys. We investigated the microbiome variations in the Bacteroidetes‐Firmicutes ratio relative to BMI, food categories, and dietary groups at stratified abundance percentages of <20%, 20%, 30%, 40%, 50%, 60%, and ≥70%. We further investigated variation in the Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes phyla composition (at the genus and species level) in relation to BMI, food categories, and dietary groups (Westernized or healthy). The Pearson Correlation coefficient as an indication of effect size across Alpha diversity indices was used to test the hypothesis (H0): increased BMI has greater effect on taxonomic diversity than Westernized diet type, (Ha): increased BMI does not have a greater effect on taxonomic diversity than Westernized diet type. In conclusion, we rejected the (H0) as our results demonstrated that Westernized diet type had an effect size of 0.22 posing a greater impact upon the gut microbiota diversity than an increased BMI with an effect size of 0.16. This implied Westernized diet as a critical factor in causing dysbiosis as compared to an overweight or obese body mass index.

Scientific investigations have demonstrated that the development of many metabolically based human diseases such as obesity, is associated with taxonomic changes occurring among the particular species of bacteria constituting the gut microbiota. This residential population permanently resides within the distal large intestines of all humans and other animals. Their primary role, among an array of other life sustaining biological functions, is that of a dietary energy extractor assisting the human host in gaining nutrients from the otherwise indigestible components of fresh, plant‐based foods (Diamant, Blaak, & de Vos, 2011; Kau, Ahern, Griffin, Goodman, & Gordon, 2011). The gut microbiota are highly susceptible to both biological and environmental influences. To varying degrees, several factors including the method of fetal delivery, neonate feeding, human genetics and disease, certain medical interventions and environmental exposures, such as having an abundant access to and the regular consumption of processed foods, are all known contributors to the taxonomic shifts within the microbiota populations. This occurrence is a disorder referred to as gut microbiome dysbiosis, and one that has been associated with the onset of many human diseases and disorders (Backhed, 2005; Cordain et al., 2005; Dalal & Chang, 2014; Davis, Barrow, Javan, & Robertson, 2015; Davis, Ogunbi, Ogunbi, & Robertson, 2015; De Filippo et al., 2010; Flint, Duncan, Scott, & Louis, 2014; Moreno‐Indias, Cardona, Tinahones, & Queipo‐Ortuño, 2014; Ramezani & Raj, 2013; Truswell, 2013; Xu & Knight, 2014).

In the present study, we specifically aimed to investigate variation in the abundance of the Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes phyla composition at the genus and species level in relation to BMI, food categories, and dietary groups (Westernized or healthy). We also investigated microbiome variations in the Firmicutes:Bacteroidetes ratio relative to BMI, food categories, and dietary groups at stratified abundance percentages of <20%, 20%, 30%, 40%, 50%, 60%, and ≥70%. The Pearson Correlation coefficient as an indication of effect size across Alpha diversity indices was used to test the hypothesis (H0): increased BMI has greater effect on taxonomic diversity than Westernized diet type, (Ha): increased BMI does not have a greater effect on taxonomic diversity than Westernized diet type.

This study was implemented within the state of Alabama and approved by the Alabama State University Institutional Review Board, approval number 2014CSMT002A. The study materials including dietary surveys and accompanying stool sample collection kits were randomly distributed among and collected from only Alabama residents, May 2015 through December 2015.

A cross‐sectional case–control study design was used to investigate study aims. Through this model, we were able to directly investigate known factors of gut microbiome dysbiosis causation to determine if a Westernized dietary regime had a greater association with lower gut microbiota diversity more so than the obese BMI group compared to nonobese and the healthy diet group (Yardley & Bishop, 2015).

Without regard to weight status, race, sex, or geographic location within the state, noninstitutionalized, otherwise healthy Alabama residents, ≥19 years of age, capable of understanding ‘informed consent’ on their own accord were randomly selected for study inclusion. The target sample size was determined based upon a fully parametric, bio‐statistical methodology derived from the Dirichlet‐multinomial distribution model recently presented by human microbiome researchers using a case–control study model similar to present study where researchers also incorporated the use of the effect size equation. As reported, to obtain a standard 5.0% significance level and a 99.99% power in accurately detecting a small effect size across our study groups, present study required a target sample size of at least fifty (n = 50) participants and at least ≥20,000 DNA sequencing reads per sample (La Rosa et al., 2012). Present study included a total study population of 81 participants and the taxonomic data were analyzed at ≥22,000 reads/sample.

Using a blended survey format allowed for the direct investigation into the specific foods (e.g., processed and fresh) being consumed by participants and the frequency of consumption as well as their BMI status (Yardley & Bishop, 2015). The specific questions that were used in the survey were formatted based upon nationally known food and health surveys including, (i) the Harvard University Health Professionals Follow‐up Study Questionnaire, (ii) the 2013–2014 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey and (iii) the Dish‐based Semi‐quantitative Food Frequency Questionnaire for Assessment of Dietary Intakes (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2015; Keshteli et al., 2014; Willett, 2014 ). Broad survey categories included questions relating to participant demographics, physical symptoms, eating behaviors, health status, and food consumption frequency. Descriptions of these categories are summarized in Table 1. To specifically assess the participant's overall diet type as well as the actual foods they consumed, the survey included a section for 24‐hr dietary recall (e.g., all foods eaten the day before stool collection), a participant generated list of their favorite foods (e.g., consumed over a month), and an assessment of the frequency of consumption of predetermined processed and fresh foods that were consumed by the participant on a weekly basis.

The responses provided by the participants were numerically coded and transformed using a standard qualitative–quantitative approach (Bower, 2013; Nollet, 2004; Srnka & Koeszegi, 2014). The responses related to the questions of consumption frequency including (never, monthly, 1–2 Week, 3–4 Week, 5–6 Week, 7–8 Week, 9–10 Week, >11 Week) were coded as (0.05, 1.05, 20.00, 30.00, 50.00, 80.00, 90.00, 100.00), respectively.

A degree of difference line scale was utilized to numerically differentiate the food items reported by the participants within the 24‐hr diet and favorite foods survey sections (Davis, Barrow, et al., 2015; Davis, , Ogunbi, et al., 2015). As shown in Figure 1, a 100‐point scale was used to first categorize the individual food item as either processed (−100 scale) or fresh (+100 scale). Using the 10‐point increments within each side of the scale, the food was further categorized based upon the degree of processing or freshness by using known food markers at the −100 and +100‐point scale ends, (e.g., fast food bacon double cheeseburger = −100; raw fruit or water = +100). Overall, the degree of difference line scale allowed for a truer representation of the participants’ diet type compared to what they initially reported. This scale also allowed for assessing of the food quality with the negative and positive values representing the degree of food processing or freshness. Lastly, we also derived a total food score for each participant equating to the summation of the values for all food‐related survey categories. The highest positive total food score a participant could receive was 2650.00. This score implied that the participant only consumed a natural, fresh diet and that they did not consume any processed foods or sugared beverages. The total food scores for study population ranged from +1656.45 to −1116.50.

Study participants were provided with an at‐home stool collection kit. Each kit contained a copy of our research brochure, an instruction sheet, informed consent, the dietary survey as well as the necessary accessories for the participant to carry out an aseptic stool sample collection. Fresh stool was collected using the Fisher Scientific Commode Specimen Collection System (Cat# 02‐544‐208). The collected sample was then placed into a Fisher Scientific C & S ParaPak (Culture & Sensitivity) Transport Vial (Cat# 23‐290‐147) (Fisher Scientific, 2015). Upon completion of sample collection, participants were instructed to place the vial into the liner bag contained within the Fisher Science Therapak™ Biological Substance Category B Ambient Shipping System (Cat# 22‐130‐025), and to then follow the instructions printed on the box for proper marking and sealing.

In accordance with the United States Postal Service, Mailing Standards‐Division 6.2 Infectious Substances, the Therapak containing the ParaPak C&S specimen vial along with the signed consent form and completed survey, were mailed in a premetered U.S. Priority Mail (2–3 day) enforced envelope directly from the participant's home to our laboratory (United States Postal Service, 2015). To further protect the identity of the participant, the outer U.S. Priority Mail envelope was preaddressed from our laboratory, as well as to our laboratory. After an initial quality assurance inspection, the signed consent forms were removed and stored separately from the dietary assessments and stool samples. Each sample and associated survey were assigned a corresponding laboratory ID code consisting of the consecutive number in line of intake at the laboratory, the day‐month of signing the consent form and the reported dietary group as either Westernized diet group, healthy diet group or obese group (e.g., ID: 113‐07/22‐WD).

Following the manufacturer's protocol, an aliquot (200 μl) of homogenized stool sample was used for microbial DNA extraction using a Zymo ZR Fecal DNA MiniPrep™ Isolation Kit (Cat# D6010). The DNA extract was immediately stored at −20°C (Zymo Inc, 2016). In this bead‐beating based protocol, an example of a lysed stool sample from a high fat diet showing thick lipid layer along the top (left sample), and another from a high fat diet with smaller lipid film, but containing a more mucoid consistency (right sample) are depicted within the supplemental material (see Attachment 1).

The NEB LongAmp Taq PCR kit (Cat# E5200S) was used to carry out the PCR reactions. The unique degenerate barcoded primers used in the PCR reaction to amplify the V4 region of the 16S rRNA gene, are shown in Figure 2. The original primer stocks (50 nmol scale with a desalting purification) were sequentially diluted with 10 mmol/L Tris.Cl pH 8 first to 100 μmol/L and then to 10 μmol/L (working stock) for use in the PCR reactions. The 3′ degenerate primer also contained a (6‐bp) “barcoded” index sequence (NNNNNN) to distinguish the individual samples and study groups postsequencing. The PCR products were examined for specificity using 1.0% agarose/Tris‐borate‐EDTA gel electrophoresis and visualized by UV illumination and photography at (300‐380 bp). The Qiagen QIAquick Gel Extraction Kit was then used to purify the amplicons (Kumar et al., 2014).

The Illumina MiSeq 2000 nextgen sequencing platform was used for sequencing of the amplicons generated from the stool microbial DNA (Illumina, Inc., 2016). Quantitative Insights Into Microbial Ecology (QIIME), an open source bioinformatics pipeline, was used for the analysis of the sequenced DNA sequencing data. QIIME generated operational taxonomic units (OTUs) were deduced at standard 97.0% accuracy from the microbial DNA sequencing data and included both alpha and beta diversities.

We analyzed the participant scores associated with categories of Fresh Food Consumption Frequency, Processed Food Consumption Frequency, 24‐hr Dietary Recall, Favorite Foods Report, and Total Food Score. Multiple sources of information such as these allowed for a deeper investigation into the relationships between the gut microbiota, diet, and disease including overweight, obesity, and gut microbiome dysbiosis.

The abundance percentages for the Bacteroidetes‐Firmicutes (B‐F) phyla were determined for each participant at abundances of ≤19.99%, 20%, 30%, 40%, 50%, and >70%; the high and low cut‐offs were derived based upon the natural cut‐offs across the study population that allowed for meeting statistical analysis requirements. At each stratified percentage, we compared the B‐F ratio with factors of BMI and diet type along with the various food scores.

The second study aim included the incorporation of the effect size value determined based upon the results of the Pearson coefficient and traditional (p‐values). While we did not expect to find large effect sizes, the specific parameters for determination of the hypothesis were defined as, large effect values ranged from 0.4 to ≥0.8, and a small effect size values ranged from ≤0.2 to 0.3 (La Rosa et al., 2012).

Descriptive statistical analyses were conducted using IBM® SPSS® Statistics software package version 22, supplied through Information Technology, Department of Alabama State University.

Values for different demographic parameters (expressed as means and standard deviations) were as follows: age (33 ±13.3 years), height (1.7 ±0.11 meters), weight (82.3 ±20.6 kg), and BMI (28.3 ± 7.01), which equated to an overall overweight BMI. Sixty percent of the participants were of Caucasian race followed by African Americans with 28.0%, Hispanics 6.0%, mixed races 6.0%, and Korean with 3.0%. Assigned dietary categories included 53.0% participants in the Westernized Diet (normal) group, 16% in Westernized diet (obese) group, and 31.0% in the healthy diet group. A total of 49.1% were residents of Montgomery County. Other counties represented in present study included Autauga, Bullock, Chilton, Coffee, Cullman, Elmore, Geneva, Jefferson, Russell, St. Claire, Shelby, Tuscaloosa, Marion and Mobile. The study participants’ detailed demographic data are summarized in Table 2.

Overall, the study population was characterized by the following mean demographic parameters: mean height 1.7 ± 0.11 meters, mean weight 82.3 ± 20.62 kg, mean age 33 ± 13.3 years, and mean BMI 28.3 ± 7.01. Average BMI across the study population equated to overweight. Two participants were excluded due to recent antibiotic usage. No participant reported the use of probiotic; 85% participants used no fiber supplements.

Initial investigations into the abundance of the B‐F phyla across the total study population revealed a greater abundance of Firmicutes with a mean of 53.0 ± 0.18, compared to the Bacteroidetes (38.0 ± 0.18). This finding was expected as 53.0% of the study population consumed a Westernized Diet and overall, the study population had an average overweight BMI. Both factors of increased BMI and Westernized diet consumption have previously been associated with an increase in the Firmicutes (Kim, Gu, Lee, Joh, & Kim, 2012; Sonnenburg & Bäckhed, 2016). However, as shown in Figure 3 the abundance distribution plots of the B and F phyla provided evidence that both were overall normally distributed across the population.

Individual ANOVA tests comparing the total percentages of B‐F abundance were used to determine variation in prevalence between the two phyla at stratified percentages in relation to BMI categories of normal‐underweight and overweight‐obese.

The continued ANOVA results showing the means of the B‐F phyla in relation to the 24‐hr diet and favorite food scores are summarized in Table 5. Each test was statistically significant at p = .001. The highest available food score available across the related survey categories was 2650.00. The value implies that all foods consumed by the individual were fresh and that they did not consume any processed foods or sugared beverages. By using this parameter, one can determine the degree of food processing or freshness of the foods reported in the 24‐hr diet and favorite foods categories by evaluation of the means associated with each food category. Overall, the means at each of abundance percentages were low, which implied the consumption of processed foods. As shown in Table 5, at the 50.0% to 70.0% range the Bacteroidetes were associated with the highest negative means in the 24‐hr diet category and despite the Firmicutes being associated with higher positive means at the same abundance range within the favorite foods category, the means are very low in terms of the total available food score (2650.00). At the midrange and lowest abundances ranging from 30.0% to <19.99%, the Firmicutes were associated with lower (negative) means, which again implies processed food consumption.

ANOVA tests of the B‐F abundance percentages across the 24‐hr Diet and Favorite Foods categories were significant [p = .001].

Investigations into the B and F at the genus and species level in relation to food type (e.g., fresh or processed) and BMI categories (e.g., normal, overweight, obese) are summarized in Table 6 Using QIIME‐generated abundance data, the most prevalent gut microbiome species in association with each BMI group and food type along with the related total food scores were determined for each of the categories. As shown within the table, there were four phyla including the Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes, Proteobacteria, and Actinobacteria found among the most abundant microbial groups in relation to food type and BMI group. The specific genera and species per phyla were as follows: Actinobacteria (Collinsella aerofaciens), Bacteroidetes (Bacteroides plebeius, Odoribacter sp.), Firmicutes (Blautia obeum, Acidaminococcus sp., Catenibacterium sp., Dialister sp.), and the Proteobacteria (Succinivibrio sp., Proteus sp.). Closer investigations revealed that the abundance was tied between the obese BMI and processed food groups. For example, the Collinsella aerofaciens were abundant among the obese BMI and within processed food category equating in both groups to a total of 6.5% of the gut microbiota population of the individuals in the group. However, as indicated by the high negative total food scores within the BMI weight groups, it is apparent the species has a greater relationship with processed food consumption than with an increased BMI. Considering each species in the same manner, collectively the evidence further suggests that the Westernized diet type drives gut microbiota species selection more so than an obese BMI. These findings suggest that the previously known associations between increased Firmicutes and an increased BMI, may be occurring because the overweight or obese person is consuming a processed to highly processed diet type as found among this study population.

Viewing Figure 5, overall there were more genera/species found among the processed food group (represented by red bars), compared to the obese BMI (in teal blue bars) and the majority of the genera/species found specifically among the obese BMI were also found among the processed food group. The processed food category had a greater association with species of the phylum Firmicutes including Blautia sp., Coprococcus sp., Dialister sp., Blautia obeum, Megasphaera sp., Lachnospira sp., Oscillospira sp., Roseburia sp., and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii. Within the obese BMI, there was an association with the species of the Firmicutes phylum namely, Dialister sp., Ruminococcus gnavus, Blautia obeum Megasphaera sp., Oscillospira sp., and the phylum Verrucomicrobia species namely Akkermansia muciniphila. However, as there were more red bars (processed foods) and blue bars (fresh foods) compared to purple bars (overweight BMI) and teal blue bars (obese BMI) found in relation to certain gut microbiota species, we surmised again that dietary regime more so than BMI is driving the gut microbiota species selection within this study population.

Bray–Curtis Test results associated with gut microbiota beta diversity are visualized within the principal coordinates analysis plot shown in Figure 6. These revealed there was statistically significant (p = .05) taxonomic dissimilarity across the dietary groups (healthy diet group, Westernized diet‐normal, and Westernized diet‐obese). Considering the cluster pattern however, it is indicated that the samples are grouping in relation to diet type as they are aligning along with the healthy diet group (red dots) and there is no distinct cluttering by BMI. This finding provided further indication that diet type may be driving the diversity of gut microbiota populations more so than an increased BMI.

An ANOVA test using the means of the Alpha diversity Shannon Index ENS (effective number of species) associated with processed food, fresh food, and BMI categories did not reveal any statistical difference between the groups (p = .53). The highest ENS mean value was found in association with the obese BMI (228.2 ± 134.1). ENS values for the other categories included the normal BMI (179.9 ± 103.1), overweight BMI (218.1 ± 134.), fresh food group (220.0 ± 134.2), and processed food group (90.2 ± 109.7). As shown in Figure 7 the ENS increases with an obese BMI and decreases with the consumption of processed foods.

Here, effect size (ES) was used to test the proposed hypothesis. To accomplish this, Pearson's Correlation statistics was performed for each alpha diversity matrix including those of the Shannon Index, Simpson's Index of Diversity, Chao1, and the whole tree diversity (Meehan & Beiko, 2014). These results are summarized in Table 8. As shown, no test resulted in a p‐value of any statistical significance with the values ranging from 0.06 to 0.74. However, there was variation found between correlations in terms of ES, ranging from 0.04 to 0.23. The effect size of the total food score, fresh foods, processed foods, 24‐hr diet, and favorite foods survey categories ranged from 0.16 to 0.31 with a total average of 0.22. The average effect size of obese and overweight BMI equated to 0.16. Considering the study hypothesis, we failed to accept the (H0), and concluded that the processed food type with an ES of 0.22 had a greater effect upon the overall diversity of the gut microbiota than an increased BMI with an average ES of 0.16. Through alpha and beta taxonomic investigations, we also demonstrated that the total abundance percentage chosen by an investigator could potentially influence the interpretation of their findings. We also demonstrated that using just one abundance percentage value without incorporation of metadata might not truly represent the nature of the B‐F ratio within the population or individuals being investigated.

Pearson's Correlation statistics was performed for each alpha diversity matrix to determine the correlation between increased BMI, food scores, and decreased ENS. As indicated, no test resulted in a p ‐value of any statistical significance with the values ranging from 0.06 to 0.74. However, there was variation found between correlations in terms of effect size, ranging from 0.04 to 0.23.

The same was found when investigating the association between ENS and favorites foods (e.g., consumed over a month) as depicted within Figure 13. As before, the lowest ENS was also found associated with processed food types. Collectively, we concluded that diet type has a greater effect upon the diversity of the gut microbiota than an increased BMI. Despite the Person's Correlation p‐values not being statistically significant, the effect size of processed food consumption upon the overall diversity of gut microbiota was greater than that of an obese BMI (See Table 9 for reference).

It is increasingly being recognized that diet may be an important modulator of gut microbiota (Sonnenburg & Bäckhed, 2016). While perturbations associated with small dietary changes on a day‐to‐day basis may be reversible, long‐term dietary habits may cause more long‐lasting microbiota changes. For instance, long‐term intake of traditional fiber‐rich diets versus Westernized fat‐rich diet may have more irreversible changes, which may be transferred over generations (Sonnenburg et al., 2016). In this context, researchers are still elucidating the taxonomic characteristics of a ‘healthy’ gut microbiota as well as seeking to determine the primary factor, such as the regular consumption of processed food or having an obese BMI that contributes to gut microbiome dysbiosis and ultimately human disease causation (Sonnenburg et al., 2016).). Understanding that processed foods contain an excess amount of energy and that such foods have the propensity to cause inflammatory responses, the gut microbiota genus and species that were once thought to be ‘healthy’, may in fact be utilizing alternative metabolic pathways and or inducing negative host or gut microbiota inflammatory responses as the host diet evolves from a fresh, whole food diet to a Westernized diet type. Because gut microbiome dysbiosis is initially asymptomatic, these subtle changes within the gut microbiome go unnoticed by the human host and or their primary care physicians until metabolic disorders such as overweight and eventually obesity occur. While many future studies are necessary to make any definitive conclusions, our overall findings suggested that the specific dietary regime imparts a greater impact upon the B‐F ratio and ultimately the collective diversity of the gut microbiota population compared to an obese BMI (see Figure 5). Additionally, several findings gleaned from present study are of significance to the scientific community in fulfilling research gaps as our data have illustrated in some instances contradictory results from those previously published, and in other cases have helped move forward in understanding gut microbiome dysbiosis causation.

As commonly found among individuals who consume a diet type rich in processed foods as well as in those with an increased BMI, our initial investigations revealed that the Firmicutes phylum predominated the study population at 52.4% compared to the Bacteroidetes at 39.0% (Sun & Chang, 2014). Contrary to published findings however, we found that the B and F phyla were evenly distributed across the study population. Additionally, we found the Firmicutes phylum was only statistically significant at the 40.0% abundance range among the normal weight BMI, and at the ≤19.99% abundance range within the obese BMI group (see Table 3) (Conlon & Bird, 2014). However at the genus/species level, the Bacteroides spp. prevailed with a total abundance of 18.0%. While a gut microbiota population consisting of predominately the Bacteroidetes phylum is considered to be healthy, here we found this phylum was most prevalent among OW or OB persons who consumed a Westernized diet type (see Table 7).

The Lachnospiraceae family and Prevotella copri species have both been associated with human disease including overweight, obesity, and intestinal disorders (Meehan & Beiko, 2014). Nevertheless, species of the Lachnospiraceae family are also thought to be beneficial to the human host through the production of the short‐chain fatty acid butyric acid (as butyrate), reported to reduce chronic inflammatory conditions and the risk of colon cancer. While the Lachnospiraceae family has been associated with an obese BMI, here we found that the OW and OB participants in this group consumed highly processed foods as indicated by the total food scores of −1424.95, −550.0, and −58.75. The presence of Lachnospiraceae among these individuals may be indicative of the response to the increased consumption of highly processed foods resulting in a need by human and or gut microbiota to reduce the inflammatory conditions within the host (Butyrates, 2016). Lastly, it has been reported that the presence of the species P. copri is associated with a reduction in the prevalence of the Bacteroides and other beneficial gut microbiota as well as with the pathogenesis of human disease (Scher et al., 2013). Individuals in this group were normal weight (NW), all with low total food scores. The presence of species such as P. copri, could be indicative of early gut microbiome dysbiosis occurring as the individuals’ diet evolves to a Westernized diet type, but before systemic adiposity manifests as overweight and eventually obesity.

Through the use of an effect size‐based hypothesis test investigation, we found concluding evidence suggesting that a Westernized dietary regime had a greater influence upon the taxonomic characteristics of the gut microbiota more so than an overweight or obese BMI (Chan, Estaki, & Gibson, 2013; Davenport et al., 2015; Festi et al., 2014). Initial Pearson's Correlation test p‐values did not provide any statistically significant results when comparing the association of a lower Shannon Index effective number of species with an increased (obese) BMI and processed food consumption. However, testing the study hypothesis we concluded that Westernized diet type with an effect size of 0.22 had a greater effect upon gut microbiota diversity than increased BMI with effect size of 0.16. Collectively, study findings suggested that using such parameter provides a more accurate representation in investigating bioinformatics and participant metadata as well as how some of these factors in turn, contribute to the causation of gut microbiome dysbiosis (Debelius, 2015; Greenhalgh, Meyer, Aagaard, & Wilmes, 2016; Morgan & Huttenhower, 2012; Shetty, Marathe, & Shouche, 2013).

As the Westernized dietary regime has become a common staple within the United States, there is increasing interest in understanding the role of diet in gut microbiome in human disease causation as well as a factor that can potentially impact future gut microbiome studies (Debelius, 2015). However, it is a challenge to identify appropriate comparison groups to investigate the effects of a Westernized dietary regime. The Amish population who reside within the small town of Faunsdale, Alabama (total town population of 95) is one promising group that has a unique lifestyle compared to the general U.S. population. While Amish group was reluctant to participate in this study, as shown in supplemental material Attachment 2, a family from that group was willing to discuss with us their traditions and lifestyle. As we spoke over lunch however, it was apparent that consumption of processed foods is inevitable even among groups who have traditionally refrained from consuming such foods (Cuyun Carter et al., 2011). In general, the larger the sample size, the better will be the interpretation of the reported effects. Importantly, to realize the power of both the effect size and p‐value in interpretation of reported effects, future extension of this initial study to a larger cohort, which may help improve the p‐values, may be pursued.

Another major challenge within present study was the fact that gut microbiome‐based studies have historically been technologically driven with stool sample data being gathered and analyzed without regard for inclusion of participant metadata and a standardized approach, making cross‐comparison and investigations into disease causation difficult. Therefore, it has been suggested that future gut microbiome studies capture more metadata that can be used to better understand the overall functionally of the gut microbiota and to assist scientists in gaining applicable bioinformatics data in terms of human health and or gut microbiome dysbiosis causation (Gevers, Pop, Schloss, & Huttenhower, 2012; Marchesi, 2014; Morgan & Huttenhower, 2012; Nguyen, Vieira‐Silva, Liston, & Raes, 2015). In this context, we tried to collect as much metadata as was feasible. However, the greatest limiting factor of gut microbiome studies still lies within overcoming the quantum physics observer effect theory, suggesting that the very act of observation affects the reality of that which is being observed. This theory applies to present study, as it is difficult to obtain a sample of the gut microbiome of an individual without the use of an invasive method that potentially disturbs the biofilms encasing gut microbiota that are attached to the intestinal walls. While obtaining a stool sample is noninvasive and easily carried out by the participant, researchers are ultimately getting only limited insight into the true dynamics of the core gut microbiota (Staley, 1997).

The study demonstrates that the Bacteroidetes‐Firmicutes abundance percentage chosen by an investigator could influence the overall interpretation of the findings, considering that both Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes phyla were associated with processed and fresh food consumption as well as with an increased BMI. To better understand which of these factors (e.g., processed food or obese BMI) is influencing the taxonomic structure of the gut microbiota, the use of the effect size statistic proved necessary. Overall, we also demonstrated that without the incorporation of participant metadata and universal effect size values, it is difficult to hone in upon what biological or environmental factors are actually impacting the gut microbiota. The use of these methodologies within this study led to the final conclusion that processed food consumption has a greater influence upon the gut microbiota structure and was associated with lower ENS diversity of the population, more so than an increased BMI (Ravel et al., 2014; Faloney et al., 2016; Forum 1, 2013). Additionally, present study has provided a deeper understanding of gut microbiome dysbiosis and human obesity causation and our findings along with subsequent future studies may set the stage for streamlining gut microbiome investigations through use of standardized approaches and methodologies; such developments would be serving as a springboard to reaching the next level of understanding of role of gut microbiome in causation of human disease.

The authors have no competing interests to declare.

