Does Soil Contribute to the Human Gut Microbiome?

Soil and the human gut contain approximately the same number of active microorganisms, while human gut microbiome diversity is only 10% that of soil biodiversity and has decreased dramatically with the modern lifestyle. We tracked relationships between the soil microbiome and the human intestinal microbiome. We propose a novel environmental microbiome hypothesis, which implies that a close linkage between the soil microbiome and the human intestinal microbiome has evolved during evolution and is still developing. From hunter-gatherers to an urbanized society, the human gut has lost alpha diversity. Interestingly, beta diversity has increased, meaning that people in urban areas have more differentiated individual microbiomes. On top of little contact with soil and feces, hygienic measures, antibiotics and a low fiber diet of processed food have led to a loss of beneficial microbes. At the same time, loss of soil biodiversity is observed in many rural areas. The increasing use of agrochemicals, low plant biodiversity and rigorous soil management practices have a negative effect on the biodiversity of crop epiphytes and endophytes. These developments concur with an increase in lifestyle diseases related to the human intestinal microbiome. We point out the interference with the microbial cycle of urban human environments versus pre-industrial rural environments. In order to correct these interferences, it may be useful to adopt a different perspective and to consider the human intestinal microbiome as well as the soil/root microbiome as ‘superorganisms’ which, by close contact, replenish each other with inoculants, genes and growth-sustaining molecules.

The large diversity of microbiota in soil affects its microbial ecology, including its primary productivity and nutrient cycling. In addition, soil is part of the habitat of humans, providing space for living, recreation and food production [1]. From early childhood, we are in contact with soil; we taste it, we inhale it, and we drink water which has passed through soil. Moreover, we ingest plants grown on soils together with soil microbiota. Since pre-history, humans have also willingly consumed soils as a supplement to their otherwise nutrient-poor local diet, a habitude called “geophagy”. They have used certain soils as detoxifying agents necessary for making certain food products edible, and for medicinal purposes, usually as treatments for gastrointestinal ailments [2].

In this context, we discuss the soil microbiome and its potential link to the (human) intestinal microbiome and assess the possible interrelation of the human intestinal microbiome and the soil microbiome.

Since the start of the Human Microbiome Project in 2007, aiming at sequencing all microbes (eukaryotes, archaea, bacteria, viruses) inhabiting human body sites, the Human Microbiome Project has developed into a major field of biomedical research focussing mainly on the intestinal microbial community that plays a major role in human health and diseases [3,10]. The intestinal microbial community represents an ecosystem of a trillion microbial cells with an aggregate 9.9 million microbial genes across the fecal microbiome [11]. The greatest number of cells within the human gut is found in the colon which supports a diverse and dense population of microbes, dominated by anaerobes that utilize carbohydrates [12]. By comparison, the lowest number of cells found in the small intestine (Table 1) is due to properties that limit bacterial reproduction such as high levels of acids and antimicrobials [12]. Also, short transit times in the small intestine limit bacterial reproduction [13]. The colonization of the human gut starts at birth, with the rapid expansion of microbial diversity, influenced by endogenous and exogenous factors [3], such as human genetic variation as well as diet, infections, xenobiotics, and exposure to environmental microbial agents including the large plant and soil microbiome [3]. With respect to the numerous and diverse functions of the intestinal microbiome in human health, it is evident that it is also involved in numerous gastrointestinal (GI) and non-gastrointestinal diseases, such as obesity/metabolic syndrome, atherosclerosis/cardiovascular diseases, neurologic/psychiatric diseases and others [3]. It is therefore one of the most dynamic topics in biomedical research [3]. Moreover, major advances in recent years provide increasing individual diagnostics, preventive as well as therapeutic options for patients with inherited or acquired malignant or non-malignant diseases, because the individual microbial community is central for the interplay between microbes and hosts and is involved in a large number of normal biological/physiological processes [3]. All in all, it can be stated that, in recent years, the intestinal human microbiome has become one of the most dynamic areas of biomedical research and holds an enormous potential for interventions, regarding human health and disease [3].

The main factors that presumably determine the human intestinal microbiome are (i) host genetics and metabolism (heritage), (ii) lifestyle (environment) in particular, and (iii) diet and nutritional habits [12,20,21].

The microbial diversity in the human gut is a coevolution between microbial communities and their hosts [30]. “Ancient” microbes evolved symbiotically or commensally with humans and are most likely beneficial rather than pathogenic [31,32].

The importance of the environment is also shown by the fact that with increasing age, the variation between individuals decreased [36]. Further, a pronounced difference in the phylogenetic composition of the gut microbiome from different regions became evident, with lowest bacterial diversity in the urban US citizens compared to rural Amerindian and Malawian populations [36]. The highest diversity of bacteria and genetic functions ever reported in a human group was found in a remote secluded population of hunter-gatherers in the Amazon jungle [41]. From the above, we conclude that short-term as well as long-term changes of the microbiome do occur on an individual level as well as on a community level and contact with soil plays a role in both scales.

The living environment of urban dwellers shows a lower natural biodiversity and exposure to environmental microbes [42]. The loss of contact with outdoor-associated natural beneficial microbiota indirectly affects the human gut microbiome and may have negative consequences on human health [43]. Our ancestors were in close contact with soil, due to their lifestyle, i.e., practicing agriculture and animal husbandry. Research documents that children encountering early contact with environments that are less hygienic such as outdoor settings and farms are less susceptible to develop autoimmune diseases [44]. This is supported by the ’hygiene hypotheses’, which suggest that environments with rich microbial diversity protect against allergies and autoimmune disorders [45,46]. Accordingly, not only commensal microbes but also soil pathogens appear to potentially contribute to human immune tolerance by stimulating immunoregulatory pathways [47]. Nevertheless, it is important to note that modern hygiene, antibiotics, and modern agricultural practices have contributed tremendously to a major reduction in human disease burdens and mortality.

Therefore, we assume that the modern human lifestyle and the loss of direct contact with soil cause interruptions in the microbiological cycle in urban environments in contrast to pre-industrial rural environments. Soil is therefore a key primary source of a healthy intestinal microbiome of humans. However, the exact way how soil and the environment shape the human gut microbiome and how lifestyle changes affect the gut microbiome needs to be further elucidated. It is a dynamic research topic with relevance for preventive medicine.

Besides the urban lifestyle and loss of contact with nature, our diet has also changed within the last decennia. In order to preserve food for long transport, storage and distribution, it is often sterilized. In addition to more processed nutrition, the intake of more energy-rich food, abundant in sugars and fat, decreases the biodiversity of the intestine [65]. Often, this results in a vicious cycle as the promoted microbes in the gastrointestinal tract are under selective pressure to manipulate host eating behavior and may generate cravings for unhealthy foods that suppress their microbial competitors [65].

We conclude that on top of antibiotic medication, the elimination of microbes from food via processing has direct impacts on the human gut microbiome. Anyhow, the intake of diverse food rich in fibers and secondary plant metabolites, with living microbiota, from a diverse soil environment may positively influence the gut.

Globally, soils are highly diverse, as are their microbes. There are only a few species that can be found in all soils, while there are numerous rare species that only occur in particular soils or geographical areas [47]. This enormous heterogeneity of soil biodiversity and its relation to geographical areas was addressed by several research groups [74,75,76] and a global soil biodiversity atlas and homepage was elaborated (https://www.globalsoilbiodiversity.org/atlas-introduction/). Thus, it has become possible to compare the geographical data of soil microbiomes with human gut microbiomes [43].

From the above-mentioned structural and functional similarities between the soil rhizosphere and the human gut microbiome, we conclude that both can be considered as functional ecosystems, which interact which each other. This interaction has been decreasing in recent times, potentially reinforcing losses of biodiversity, which have occurred in both systems.

Recent research data indicate that the modern lifestyle/environment is the most active driver in shaping the human intestinal microbiome despite the confounding influence of dietary habits, culture, and host genetics. The soil (rhizosphere) microbiota clearly influence the quality and storage of our food apart from the impact of post-harvest processing. In this context, more research is necessary to demonstrate how biodiversity of beneficial microbes in our food can be preserved. Furthermore, specific ways of agricultural practices, especially soil management, may improve the current food quality.

A rich soil microbiome would also have several advantages for the terrestrial ecosystem through increased nutrient use efficiency and uptake, which may improve plant yields as well as plant resistance and resilience against global climatic change and biotic stressors. The fact that the gut microbiome of hunter-gatherers has a higher species richness than that of humans that are nourished by Westernized food argues for agricultural practices that promote sustainable soil use and human health. Regarding food security under the aspect of predicted changes in human demographics and environmental change, it is of paramount importance to ensure the biologically sustainable use of land and soil.

The soil contributes to the human gut microbiome—it was essential in the evolution of the human gut microbiome and it is a major inoculant and provider of beneficial gut microorganisms. In particular, there are functional similarities between the soil rhizosphere and the human intestine. In recent decades, however, contact with soil has largely been reduced, which together with a modern lifestyle and nutrition has led to the depletion of the gut microbiome with adverse effects to human health. Therefore, we suggest increasing research on the geographical and functional relationships to identify the causes and effects between soils and gut microbiota in order to benefit human health and the environment.

