The gut microbiome in drug‐resistant epilepsy

Drug‐resistant epileptic patients make up approximately one‐third of the global epilepsy population. The pathophysiology of drug resistance has not been fully elucidated; however, current evidence suggests intestinal dysbiosis, as a possible etiopathogenic factor. Ketogenic diet, whose effect is considered to be mediated by alteration of gut microbiota synthesis, has long been administered in patients with medically refractory seizures, with positive outcomes. In this review, we present data derived from clinical studies regarding alterations of gut microbiome profile in drug‐resistant epileptic patients. We further attempt to describe the mechanisms through which the gut microbiome modification methods (including ketogenic diet, pre‐ or probiotic administration) improve drug‐resistant epilepsy, by reporting findings from preclinical and clinical studies. A comprehensive search of the published literature on the PubMed, Embase, and Web of science databases was performed. Overall, the role of gut microbiome in drug‐resistant epilepsy is an area which shows promise for the development of targeted therapeutic interventions. More research is required to confirm the results from preliminary studies, as well as safety and effectiveness of altering gut bacterial composition, through the above‐mentioned methods.



The term microbiota‐gut‐brain axis describes the complex bidirectional communication pathways linking the CNS with gut bacteria. This system has become a focus of neuroscience lately, as evidence provided by animal and human studies has documented the crucial role of the microbiota in regulating CNS homeostasis, cognitive development, and behavior. Over the last decade, by virtue of technological advances in the field of biomedicine, gut dysbiosis has been associated with the genesis or progression of a variety of neurological disorders, 1 such as autism, 2 multiple sclerosis, 3 Parkinson's disease, 4 , 5 and Alzheimer's disease. 6 Recently, changes in the composition or function of gut microbiome have been linked to epilepsy and in particular to its medically refractory form 7 Figure 1.

Τhe possibility for modifying gut microbiota using supplements like prebiotics, probiotics (collectively called symbiotics), or diets (eg, ketogenic diet) as add‐on with antiepileptic drugs or alone has been keenly investigated during the last years. 17 We hereby present a review of available literature concerning evidence for intestinal dysbiosis in DRE. It outlines the gut‐brain axis connection; evidence of the link between microbiome, epileptogenesis, DRE, and treatment outcomes; and proposed pathophysiological mechanisms and treatment studies. To our knowledge, there is only one published review with focus on intestinal dysbiosis and DRE. 18 In this article, Holmes et al thoroughly review all existing literature regarding the gut microbiome's effect on treatments of patients with DRE (diets, pre‐,probiotics, antibiotics, antiepileptic medications). In this review, we have added a section reporting findings of all clinical studies that have examined the intestinal microbiota composition in DRE cohorts.

The term “gut‐brain axis” refers to the bidirectional interactions between the gastrointestinal (GI) and the central nervous system (CNS). The CNS regulates the function and integrity of the GI tract through the neuroendocrine hypothalamic‐pituitary‐adrenal axis (HPA) and through the autonomic nervous system. 19 These pathways regulate the permeability of the intestinal barrier, the motility of the GI tract, its secretory activity, and the composition of the intestinal microbiome. At the same time, the GI system can affect brain function and behavior by promoting synaptogenesis, activation of stress response, synthesis of neurotransmitters in the CNS, and blood‐brain barrier (BBB) integrity. This symbiotic relationship between the brain and gut is mediated by the activity of enteric microbial populations, collectively known as “gut microbiota.” 20 Recent discoveries have led to the emerging concept of the “microbiota‐gut‐brain (MGB) axis” which has attracted the interest of neuroscientists, during the last decades. 21 , 22 , 23

The gut microbiome has been shown to affect CNS physiology and neurotransmission, through the neural network, neuroendocrine system, and metabolic and immune system. 19 , 27 Gut microbial disbalance, namely dysbiosis, describes alterations in the taxonomic or functional profile of intestinal microbial communities relative to the community observed in healthy subjects.

Animal and human studies have brought up evidence supporting dysbiosis as a causative factor of epilepsy, most often of a refractory form. There are five possible communication routes between gut microbiota and the brain. These include neural connections, the neuroendocrine HPA axis, biosynthesis of neurotransmitters by intestinal bacteria, the intestinal immune system, and lastly, interconnection between intestinal mucosal barrier and blood‐brain barrier. 19 , 24

All in all, there seems to be various pathways of the MGB axis involved in the pathogenesis and maintenance of epileptic activity. Potential modifiers of these disturbances should aim to restore gut dysbiosis. Those include diet modifications, antibiotic, pre‐ or probiotic supplements and are currently intensively investigated, as they might represent potential therapeutic approaches for treating epilepsy, in the future.

It has been suggested that intestinal dysbiosis may contribute to the mechanism of DRE. 41 A few recent, observational, or interventional clinical studies have searched for potential alterations in fecal microbiota profiles between DRE patients and healthy individuals, and/or drug‐sensitive epileptic (DSE) patients. Their principal findings will be reviewed below.

In the studies by Xie et al and Lindefeldt et al, 44 , 45 an interventional branch with administration of ketogenic diet was performed, following the initial analysis. The corresponding findings are described below (ketogenic diet in DRE).

The notion that the gut microbiome influences seizure activity may be clarified through microbiota manipulation with probiotics, prebiotics, antibiotics, or diet, measuring clinical outcomes in prospective cohorts of patients with epilepsy. 17 There are limited publications covering this topic.

The ketogenic diet (KD) is a nonpharmacologic therapeutic intervention, used in the management of medically refractory epilepsy since the 1920s, 46 mostly in pediatric populations. It proposes high consumption of fat, in addition to sufficient protein and very restricted carbohydrate daily intake (the classic KD consists of a ratio between 2:1 and 4:1 of fat to protein and carbohydrates combined). Its hallmark feature is the production of ketone bodies (β‐hydroxybutyrate, acetoacetate, and acetone) in the liver from the dietary fat, a biochemical procedure called ketosis. 47 , 48 Ketones substitute glucose as an energy substrate for ATP synthesis in body cells including brain cells. This systemic metabolic shift is considered to elucidate biochemical, metabolic, and hormonal changes that may ameliorate severity and reduce the frequency of epileptic seizures, although the exact mechanisms through which it exerts these actions remain unclear. 7 , 49 KD is the therapy of choice for pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency and for GLUT1 deficiency syndrome. 50 Various clinical studies and meta‐analyses have reported significantly positive results of the KD also in the management of DRE, mainly in children, but also in adults. 44 , 45 , 51 , 52 , 53 , 54 Furthermore, it has been applied in various other types of childhood epilepsy and epileptic encephalopathies and has also been tried in other neurological disorders. 55 , 56 , 57 , 58

Following the high effectiveness of the KD in the therapy of hard‐to‐treat epilepsies, there has been substantial scientific interest in defining the underlying pathways through which it exerts this action. It is highly probable that KD exerts its anticonvulsant effect through numerous mechanisms, which may vary with different types of epilepsy. 49 The most widely described mechanisms include an increase in the expression of energy metabolism genes, a direct effect of polyunsaturated fatty acids on ion channels and neurotransmitters control. In addition to these, upregulation of neuroprotective factors such as calbindin, restriction of apoptotic factors like caspase 3, enhanced mitochondrial biogenesis, increased production of the inhibitory factor adenosine 47 , 49 and reduction of pro‐inflammatory cytokines have been described. 59 Lately, it has been suggested that the intestinal microbiota may interfere with the KD mechanism of action. We will further discuss the role of gut microbiota on the antiepileptic action of KD. The current evidence suggests that the antiepileptic effect of the KD may be attributed to changes in the gut microbiota. 44 , 45 , 60 , 61 , 62 , 63 , 64

Hampton proposes that intestinal microbes mediate the inhibitory impact on seizure activity, achieved by the KD. 60 In a pivotal study of 2018, Olson et al 61 studied two mouse models (one with 6‐Hz induced seizures and the other with spontaneous tonic‐clonic seizures) and showed that KD alters the gut microbiota and that this dietary modification was found to be protective against seizure activity in refractory epilepsy. More precisely, they noted that the KD reduced the microbial alpha diversity while simultaneously resulting in an increase in the abundance of Akkermansia muciniphila and Parabacteroides spp. Those mice that were treated with antibiotics were resistant to the anticonvulsant effect of KD. Only after colonization with both Akkermansia muciniphila and Parabacteroides spp did they regain the ability to benefit from the antiepileptic effect of KD. The authors described how microbiota transformation led to alterations in the colonic luminal, serum, and hippocampal metabolome, mainly associated with amino acid metabolism. The decline in peripheral subsets of ketogenic gamma‐glutamylated amino acids that serve as substrates for the synthesis of γ‐aminobutyric acid (GABA) led to the consequent increase in hippocampal GABA inhibitory neurotransmitter, relative to glutamate excitatory neurotransmitter levels, in KD‐fed mice compared with controls. These modifications in neurotransmitters' expression were correlated with the antiseizure effect of the KD. 61 More extensive research is required to ascertain whether similar biological pathways’ modifications (alterations in amino acids and neurotransmitters’ expression) take place in humans on a ketogenic diet.

A few studies in humans have also reported evidence about alterations of gut microbiota in patients with epilepsy after KD, although their results are not unanimous. 44 , 45 , 62 , 63 , 64 A case‐control study by Xie et al 44 which included 14 DRE children who received KD and 30 healthy controls showed vast differences of the gut microbiome compositions between the two groups. Also, in the group of the patients, serial examinations of intestinal microflora revealed changes in microbiota populations along the course of the treatment. The authors identified a reduction in pathogenic Proteobacteria (specifically Cronobacter) and an increase in the beneficial Bacteroidetes (specifically Bifidobacterium, Bacteroides, and Prevotella) within one week of commencing the ketogenic diet. These changes to the intestinal microflora were considered to correlate with suppression of seizure activity. 44 Zhang et al prospectively analyzed gut microbiota changes in 20 children with DRE after a 6‐month treatment with KD. The authors reported different patterns of modification of intestinal microflora as well as different levels of response in terms of antiseizure result, in the above group of patients. In general, the microflora profiles of the studied population showed reduced levels of Firmicutes and Actinobacteria and increased levels of Bacteroidetes, after the treatment. A subgroup analysis revealed that those with no response to treatment (<50% reduction of seizures) had a corresponding increase in the levels of Alistipes, Clostridiales, Lachnospiraceae, Ruminococcaceae, and Rikenellaceae compared to the responders. This study raised an important issue about the varying efficacy of the KD in drug‐resistant epilepsy that requires investigation by future studies. 62

In a similar three‐month prospective study of Tagliabue et al, DRE children with GLUT1 deficiency syndrome demonstrated a marked increase in levels of Desulfovibrio spp., but showed no changes in Bacteroides and Firmicutes following the KD. 63 Last, Ramm‐Pettersen et al 64 found elevated levels of Desulfovibrio spp. in the intestines of six GLUT1 deficiency patients after 3 months of KD. This species has been linked to increased intestinal inflammation following ingestion of animal fat. 63 , 65

In the literature, there is only one case report correlating gut microbiome modulation to difficult‐to‐treat epilepsy. The authors reported on a patient with a long history of epilepsy and concomitant Crohn's disease, who became seizure‐free after fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT), and surprisingly retained remission even after the cessation of the antiepileptic regimen. This article brought up an innovative potential mechanism involved in epileptogenesis and stressed the need for intensive research efforts to unravel the link between gut microbiome and epilepsy. 66

Indirect evidence for the potential benefit of regulating gut microbiota in seizure suppression though antibiotic treatment can be derived from the following retrospective study, by Braakman and Van Ingen. In this study, researchers reported that five out of six patients with DRE became seizure‐free during antibiotic treatment, the sixth had a significant reduction in seizure frequency and the improvement was sustained for two weeks after the antibiotic treatment cessation. The authors speculated that this beneficial effect of antibiotics on seizure frequency might be mediated by alterations in the gut microbiome, although this could not be objectively proven, since no microbiota profiling was performed. 67

There is only one published clinical trial reporting on the administration of probiotics to patients with refractory epilepsy. Gómez‐Eguílaz et al reported on the effects of four‐month probiotic supplementation, with a combination of Lactobacillus, Bacteroides and Streptococcus subspecies, in 45 patients with drug‐resistant epilepsy. Following intervention, patients displayed a reduction in seizure frequency (≥50% in 28.9% of the patients) and improvement in quality of life, assessed by Quality of Life score (mean ± SD: 19.23 ± 6.04 vs 26.45 ± 9.7; P = .013). Overall, this study reveals that probiotics might constitute a safe, low‐cost and effective supplementary therapy in patients with DRE. However, whether therapeutic effects of probiotics are mediated by modifications in gut microbiome could not be established, since, again, microbiota analysis was not performed. 68 No studies about prebiotic supplementation in drug‐resistant epilepsy have been published yet.

The study of the enteric microbiome in DRE represents a promising area for the enhancement of epilepsy care. Gut microbiome “profiling” could potentially serve as a biomarker in epilepsy management. Once the alterations in the composition or function of gut microbiota in refractory epilepsy are clarified, this could be used in clinical practice in order to identify drug resistance from an early stage and treat patients with more targeted interventions (eg, KD, probiotics, and prebiotics). This would require the conduction of large studies, recruiting cohorts of patients who have experienced the first seizure (or early in the course of the disease) and prospective analysis and examination of their gut microbiome, in association with the progress of the disease (number of seizures, response to treatment, etc). Furthermore, gut microbiome analysis might be used to monitor response to treatment in those patients treated with microbiota‐targeted therapies. The impact of antiepileptic drug treatment on gut microbiota, and vice versa, should be investigated by future studies. Like many other, nonantibiotic drugs, it is assumed that some of the antiepileptic drugs might influence gut bacteria growth and survival. Such evidence is derived from animal studies involving AEDs and their effects on gut microbiota 69 , 70 ; however, no studies in humans have been conducted so far. On the other hand, the gut microbiome can affect drug metabolism altering absorption, bioavailability and efficacy of the medication, through various direct and indirect mechanisms. 71 , 72 Furthermore, future research may establish whether altering bacterial composition may serve in the management of refractory epilepsy through antibiotics, pre‐ or probiotic supplementation and FMT. The overall side effects of the KD for the general health of the patients in terms of microbiota modifications will also need to be established. Finally, there is a need to expand the research of gut dysbiosis as a contributor to epileptogenesis, beyond the DRE patients. Alterations of the gut microbiome might also be present in non–drug‐resistant epileptic cases, and this remains to be studied.

There is some evidence for a difference in the enteric microbial composition between those with refractory epilepsy and both healthy control and nonrefractory epileptic groups. We note a consensus among studies concerning increased prevalence of Firmicutes relative to Bacteroides in individuals with refractory epilepsy. However, detailed taxonomic analysis revealed considerable variations in the proportions of reported taxa among the studies. Furthermore, the conclusions were conflicting as to whether α‐diversity is altered in the drug‐resistant epilepsy microbiota populations.

In spite of the limitations, research and clinical study findings suggest that gut microbiome sequencing merits further investigation as a potential biomarker in DRE. There is a need for replicating these findings in large cohorts with adequate control populations, considering variables like age, environmental exposure including medication and diet, genetic factors, and comorbidities. The use of unified microbiome analysis protocols, including both taxa and metabolomic analysis, would provide more extensive and comparable results, between studies. Preliminary study evidence shows promising results; however, more research is warranted so that these modifications might be considered as “evidence‐based.”

None of the authors has any conflict of interest to disclose. We confirm that we have read the Journal's position on issues involved in ethical publication and affirm that this report is consistent with those guidelines.

Abbreviation: DNA, deoxyribonucleic acid.

