Covariation of diet and gut microbiome in African megafauna



Diet and gut microbiome composition are important for health and nutrition in mammals, but how they covary in response to environmental change remains poorly understood—both because diet composition is rarely quantified precisely, and because studies of diet−microbiome linkages in captive animals may not accurately reflect the dynamics of natural communities. By analyzing diet−microbiome linkages in an assemblage of large mammalian herbivores in Kenya, we found that seasonal changes in diet and microbiome composition were strongly correlated within some populations, whereas other populations exhibited little temporal turnover in either diet or microbiome. Identifying mechanisms that generate species-specific variation in the sensitivity of the diet−microbiome nexus to environmental changes could help to explain differential population performance and food-web structure within ecological communities.

A major challenge in biology is to understand how phylogeny, diet, and environment shape the mammalian gut microbiome. Yet most studies of nonhuman microbiomes have relied on relatively coarse dietary categorizations and have focused either on individual wild populations or on captive animals that are sheltered from environmental pressures, which may obscure the effects of dietary and environmental variation on microbiome composition in diverse natural communities. We analyzed plant and bacterial DNA in fecal samples from an assemblage of 33 sympatric large-herbivore species (27 native, 6 domesticated) in a semiarid East African savanna, which enabled high-resolution assessment of seasonal variation in both diet and microbiome composition. Phylogenetic relatedness strongly predicted microbiome composition (r = 0.91) and was weakly but significantly correlated with diet composition (r = 0.20). Dietary diversity did not significantly predict microbiome diversity across species or within any species except kudu; however, diet composition was significantly correlated with microbiome composition both across and within most species. We found a spectrum of seasonal sensitivity at the diet−microbiome nexus: Seasonal changes in diet composition explained 25% of seasonal variation in microbiome composition across species. Species’ positions on (and deviations from) this spectrum were not obviously driven by phylogeny, body size, digestive strategy, or diet composition; however, domesticated species tended to exhibit greater diet−microbiome turnover than wildlife. Our results reveal marked differences in the influence of environment on the degree of diet−microbiome covariation in free-ranging African megafauna, and this variation is not well explained by canonical predictors of nutritional ecology.

Links between diet and the gut microbiome are important for health, nutrition, and ecology in mammals. Gut bacteria modify immune responses to maintain health (1), and perturbations in the gut microbiome can cause disease (2). Mammalian herbivores associate with particular gut microbial taxa, in part because they rely on these bacteria to extract energy and nutrients from food, synthesize vitamins, and detoxify plant defense compounds (3). The many services that gut microbes provide to their hosts almost certainly influence not just individual fitness but also the dynamics of the populations, communities, and food webs in which individuals are embedded (4).

We used these data to evaluate 4 hypotheses about the mammalian gut microbiome that have not previously been tested in a community context. First, we hypothesized that phylogeny is a stronger predictor of microbiome richness and composition (reflecting phylosymbiosis) than it is of dietary richness and composition—in part because the competitive pressures of sympatric coexistence should promote dietary niche differentiation among otherwise similar species but permit resource overlap among otherwise dissimilar species (21, 22). Second, we hypothesized that the individuals and species with the most diverse diets also have the most diverse microbiomes, on the grounds that more diverse diets should be associated with a greater diversity of microbial niches (11). Third, we hypothesized that individuals and species with the most dissimilar diet compositions also have the most dissimilar microbiome compositions, given that variation in the traits, behaviors, and environmental influences that promote differences in diet should also promote differences in microbiome (5, 23). Fourth, we hypothesized that species with the most seasonally variable diets also have seasonally variable gut microbiomes, as expected if microbiome composition is tightly linked to diet composition (14). Based on this hypothesis, we predicted that mixed-feeding herbivores—which frequently switch between grass- and browse-dominated diets in response to seasonal variation in grass availability (higher in wet seasons)—would exhibit the strongest seasonal turnover in their gut microbiomes, for both wild and domesticated species and regardless of gut anatomy.

We collected fresh fecal samples from 33 mammal species in Laikipia, Kenya, during 5 sampling periods that spanned both wet and dry seasons over 4 y (SI Appendix, Texts S1 and S2). We used DNA metabarcoding to characterize diets and microbiomes, sequencing the plant trnL-P6 marker and the bacterial 16S-V4 ribosomal RNA marker (refs. 24 and 25 and SI Appendix, Text S1). We identified DNA sequences by comparison to a local plant reference database and the GreenGenes bacterial database (refs. 26 and 27 and SI Appendix, Texts S3–S5). In total, we analyzed plant DNA from 1,322 fecal samples (median, 23 samples per species; range, 2 to 163) and bacterial DNA from 509 fecal samples (median, 18 samples per species; range, 1 to 29; Dataset S1).

Diets and microbiomes differed widely across herbivore species (Fig. 1). We identified 213 unique food-plant sequences from 54 plant families, out of at least 460 plant species from 66 families that are known to occur at this site (27). These food plants were utilized differently by herbivore species (Dataset S2). Dietary richness averaged 19 to 57 taxa per sample (Fig. 1). The 3 plant families with the highest overall mean relative read abundance (RRA) were Poaceae (grasses; range of mean RRA across species, 0 to 97%; median, 23%), Fabaceae (legumes; range, 2 to 83% RRA; median, 30%), and Malvaceae (mallows; range, 0 to 18% RRA; median, 4%; Fig. 1). The microbiome data included 29,308 bacterial amplicon sequence variants from at least 35 phyla (range, 177 to 494 variants per sample; Dataset S3). The most abundant bacterial families were Ruminococcaceae (range of mean RRA across species, 1 to 55%; median, 37%), Lachnospiraceae (range, 2 to 13% RRA; median, 5%), and Bacteroidaceae (range, 0 to 13% RRA; median, 8%; Fig. 1).

Herbivore species differed in the richness and composition of their diets and microbiomes in ways that supported our first hypothesis. Consistent with the conventional categorization of these species into feeding guilds, grass RRA was a key axis of dietary differentiation (Fig. 1 and SI Appendix, Fig. S1). There was no statistically significant phylogenetic signal among herbivore species in the mean richness or diversity of plant taxa eaten, and pairs of closest relatives often differed starkly in their relative consumption of plants from different families (Fig. 1). There was a modest but statistically significant phylogenetic signal in grass consumption, but we found no significant phylogenetic signal in the RRA of other major food plant families (Fig. 1). Congeneric zebras, horses, and donkeys (Equidae, Equus spp.) all consumed predominantly grass-based diets (range of mean grass RRA, 73 to 97%), whereas other sets of confamilial herbivore taxa diverged sharply in grass RRA: bovids (Bovidae), 0 to 89%; hyraxes (Procaviidae), 59% vs. 1%; rhinos (Rhinocerotidae), 74% vs. 7%; and hares (Leporidae), 42% vs. 29%. In contrast to diet, there was strong phylogenetic signal in the mean richness and diversity of the microbiome. There was also strong phylogenetic signal in the RRA of 2 major bacterial families (Ruminococcaceae and Bacteroidaceae; Fig. 1). Including all plant and bacterial taxa in the analysis, we found significant positive correlations between the phylogenetic distance separating herbivore species and the dissimilarity of both their diets and their microbiomes (SI Appendix, Fig. S2). The stronger association between phylogeny and microbiome composition (r = 0.91) compared to diet composition (r = 0.20) indicates that shared evolutionary history more strongly constrains closely related species to associate with similar gut bacteria than to share food plants (SI Appendix, Fig. S2).

Microbiome richness was not consistently correlated with dietary richness. Contrary to our second hypothesis that species and individuals with more species-rich diets also have more diverse microbiomes, we found no significant correlation between mean dietary and microbiome richness across species (Fig. 2A). Likewise, dietary richness did not strongly predict microbiome richness within species: Only one species (kudu) exhibited a significant correlation (positive) between diet and microbiome richness (SI Appendix, Fig. S3 and Table S1).

Consistent with our third hypothesis, there were generally strong correlations between the compositional dissimilarities of diets and microbiomes. Microbiome dissimilarity increased with dietary dissimilarity after accounting for phylogenetic distance between species (Fig. 2B). This interspecific correlation in diet−microbiome dissimilarity was heavily influenced by differences between ruminants and nonruminants, which had almost entirely nonoverlapping microbiomes (Bray−Curtis dissimilarity of ∼1)—even when their diets were no more dissimilar than pairs of species with similar digestive systems. Within species, we found a wide range of mean Bray−Curtis dissimilarities among individuals for both diet (0.41 to 0.82) and microbiome (0.54 to 0.78), and these ranges were nearly as broad as the corresponding ranges between species (diet, 0.53 to 0.98; microbiome, 0.65 to 1.0; Dataset S4). Across samples within species, microbiome dissimilarity increased significantly with diet dissimilarity in all but 3 cases (Grevy’s zebra, elephant, and dik-dik; SI Appendix, Fig. S4 and Table S2).

We evaluated seasonal diet−microbiome linkages within and among species. For this, we used a subset of the data from the 17 best-sampled species, comprising 365 samples that were analyzed for both diet and microbiome (≥15 total samples per species across the 3 largest sampling bouts, and ≥3 samples per species within each bout; range 3 to 17, median 6 samples per species per season). Consistent with our fourth hypothesis, we found a significant positive correlation between the degree of seasonal turnover in diet and microbiome composition across species (Fig. 3A). Overall, diet turnover explained 25% of the variance in microbiome turnover; however, several species exhibited considerably higher or lower microbial turnover than predicted by regressions based on diet turnover alone (Fig. 3A). In contrast to our prediction that the strongest seasonal turnover would occur in mixed feeders (e.g., elephant, impala), species across the grazer−browser continuum occupied various positions along the seasonal sensitivity spectrum (Fig. 3). The low end of this spectrum included species such as elephant, which exhibited almost as much variation within seasons as between seasons (Fig. 3D); other species from multiple feeding guilds exhibited differences between at least the wettest and driest seasons (e.g., Fig. 3 E and F); and camels (browsers) exhibited uniquely high seasonal turnover in both diet and microbiome (Fig. 3G). In general, domesticated species (which occupied disparate positions across the grazer−browser continuum and the phylogeny) exhibited greater turnover in both diet and microbiome than did wild species (Fig. 3 B and C).

All species differed significantly in diet and microbiome composition across seasons, with the lone exception of the elephant microbiome (SI Appendix, Tables S3 and S4). However, microbiome variation among samples mapped significantly onto diet composition (using Procrustes analysis) for only 8 of 17 species, which included ruminants and hindgut fermenters, grazers and browsers, and wild and domesticated species (SI Appendix, Fig. S5). These 8 species included all 5 of the domesticated species, but not their closest wild relatives (e.g., cattle but not buffalo; donkey but not zebras). The proportion of variation explained by season was much broader for diet (range, 12 to 73%; median, 27%; SI Appendix, Table S3) than for microbiome, which was always low (range, 13 to 28%; median, 20%; SI Appendix, Table S4). The relative abundance of the predominant bacterial families was similar across seasons within species, but the overall richness of microbial taxa differed seasonally for 9 of the 17 species (SI Appendix, Table S4 and Fig. S6). Across species, diets were often dominated by relatively few plant taxa in the wet season and were more diverse in the dry season (SI Appendix, Fig. S6). For example, camels—the extreme outlier in Fig. 3—specialized on a single shrub species in the wet season (Acacia brevispica, mean RRA of 87 to 92% vs. 18% in the dry season) but consumed a more even variety of plants in the dry season (including other Acacia species and the shrub Euclea divinorum).

By focusing on an entire sympatric large-herbivore community and using fine-grained dietary data, we sought to illuminate how host phylogeny, diet, and environmental variation influence diet−microbiome linkages in the presence of natural species interactions and in the absence of confounding geographic variation. We found strong support for hypotheses about diet–microbiome linkages within and across species (Figs. 1 and
2), but less support for hypotheses related to diversity or predictions about the seasonal drivers of diet−microbiome covariation (Figs. 2 and
3). Our results build on previous research into the dietary ecology of African herbivores (21, 28) and the composition of gut microbiomes across the mammalian phylogeny (5, 12), while also revealing marked variation in the degree of diet−microbiome covariation within and among cooccurring species. In particular, we reveal a previously undocumented spectrum in the sensitivity of diet−microbiome covariation to environmental fluctuations (Fig. 3). This seasonal sensitivity spectrum—which could only be detected in light of dietary and microbial data that are highly resolved both temporally and taxonomically—defies explanation by canonical predictors of nutritional ecology (phylogeny, gut morphology, diet type) but does appear to be influenced by species’ history of domestication.

Two complementary bodies of theory suggest that understanding diet−microbiome linkages can improve our understanding of how species interactions shape communities by differentially affecting fitness and population growth. Coexistence theory emphasizes resource competition and niche differentiation within guilds (36), and food-web theory emphasizes trophic regulation of populations (37). Both frameworks can account for species-specific differences in traits such as body size, social structure, and diet selectivity that affect how individuals balance the need for resources against the risk of predation or infection (22, 28). Whereas these characteristics can clearly affect fitness, the health and fitness consequences of microbiome compositions are only well established in biomedical studies on humans and model organisms (1, 3). If diet−microbiome linkages affect demographically vital processes such as health, stamina, and predator evasion, then they could shape the fitness, trophic networks, and coexistence of free-ranging animals.

We collected samples from adjoining wildlife conservancies with active ranching operations (Mpala and Ol Jogi; Dataset S1 and SI Appendix, Text S1 and Fig. S7). Livestock in these conservancies are occasionally treated with antibiotics during disease outbreaks, but no such outbreaks were reported during our study, and, to our knowledge, none of the animals we sampled were treated. Livestock forage and drink during the day following routes that are determined by herders, and are protected from predators at night within corrals (31). We used mammalian mitochondrial DNA markers to confirm the source of a subset of samples, including 2 species of hare that are visually indistinguishable in the field and require further taxonomic investigation (here designated Lepus A and B; SI Appendix, Text S2). We used Illumina sequencing to generate diet and microbiome data. We identified these sequences, and rarefied the resulting data to enable comparisons of plant and bacterial taxa as percentages of the total rarefied sequences within samples (i.e., RRA; SI Appendix, Texts S3–S5). Prior use of this protocol indicated that RRA is likely to be a reliable proxy for consumption of plants at our study site, based on a strong correlation between proportional grass consumption measured using RRA and stable-isotope ratios (δ13C) from feces (38). Although RRA may not always accurately reflect quantitative consumption (39), its use for diet analysis with trnL-P6 has been validated using isotopic analyses and feeding trials (40, 41). Together with a published mammalian megaphylogeny (42), we evaluated support for our 4 hypotheses about dietary and microbiome richness, diversity, and dissimilarity (SI Appendix, Text S6).

The authors declare no competing interest.

This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.

Data deposition: Illumina data and unrarefied sequence count tables are available at Dryad (https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.c119gm5); mitochondrial DNA sequences are available at GenBank (accession nos. MN262920–MN262991 and MN262700–MN262919).

This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1905666116/-/DCSupplemental.

