Honey Bee Larval and Adult Microbiome Life Stages Are Effectively Decoupled with Vertical Transmission Overcoming Early Life Perturbations





Microbiomes provide a range of benefits to their hosts which can lead to the coevolution of a joint ecological niche. However, holometabolous insects, some of the most successful organisms on Earth, occupy different niches throughout development, with larvae and adults being physiologically and morphologically highly distinct. Furthermore, transition between the stages usually involves the loss of the gut microbiome since the gut is remodeled during pupation. Most eusocial organisms appear to have evolved a workaround to this problem by sharing their communal microbiome across generations. However, whether this vertical microbiome transmission can overcome perturbations of the larval microbiome remains untested. Honey bees have a relatively simple, conserved, coevolved adult microbiome which is socially transmitted and affects many aspects of their biology. In contrast, larval microbiomes are more variable, with less clear roles. Here, we manipulated the gut microbiome of in vitro-reared larvae, and after pupation of the larvae, we inoculated the emerged bees with adult microbiome to test whether adult and larval microbiome stages may be coupled (e.g., through immune priming). Larval treatments differed in bacterial composition and abundance, depending on diet, which also drove larval gene expression. Nonetheless, adults converged on the typical core taxa and showed limited gene expression variation. This work demonstrates that honey bee adult and larval stages are effectively microbiologically decoupled, and the core adult microbiome is remarkably stable to early developmental perturbations. Combined with the transmission of the microbiome in early adulthood, this allows the formation of long-term host-microbiome associations.

Microbial symbionts (microbiomes) are often considered an essential part of the host phenotype, influencing important biological traits from nutrition to immunity to behavior (1,–3). Hosts and their microbial symbionts can exert reciprocal selective effects on their ecological partners. For example, while the immune system plays an essential role in maintaining homeostasis with resident microbial communities, the resident bacteria also shape host immunity (4). Specifically, early time windows during development are important for setting host-microbiome trajectories in later life. For example, the order of species arrival can shape gut microbial composition (priority effect) (5, 6), and early disturbances can cause long-lasting changes to composition and function. The latter is specifically well studied in humans and mice with early life antibiotic-induced dysbiosis that then affects later microbial community composition which is correlated with health problems such as obesity (7,–9). When host and microbiome interact over the course of many generations in stable or frequently occurring environments, they may undergo coordinated coadaptation to their shared environment and to each other (10). Such dynamics can be facilitated by vertical microbiome transmission, in contrast to horizontal acquisition of environmental microbes (11), and give rise to the evolution of specific functional roles of symbionts in the system (1, 12, 13). However, many barriers to vertical transmission exist, particularly associated with host reproduction and development (14). In many cases, elaborate methods evolved to inoculate otherwise largely sterile offspring with the maternal microbiome, either directly (e.g., during the birth or egg laying process) or indirectly using a shared environment as the vector (15, 16).

Since their host-microbiome system is well characterized and experimentally tractable, honey bees are well suited for testing the hypothesis that larval and adult microbiome stages are decoupled. We used different diets and microbiome sources to experimentally manipulate larval microbiomes in the lab. We found that while microbiome and gene expression differences in larvae could be diverse, the adult microbiomes as well as gene expression profiles remained steady. This suggests a decoupling of the two microbiome stages and that vertical transmission can reliably overcome disturbances during early development.

To create larvae with different microbial communities, we raised them in the lab and fed them with a royal jelly lab diet (63) without any addition (treatment C), with the addition of fresh bee bread (BB), adult gut inoculation (AG), larvae gut inoculation (LG), or addition of larvae gut and bee bread (LGBB). Larvae from the same frame raised in the hive were used as natural control (Hive). All treatments pupated in the lab, and emerging adults were exposed to the same adult gut microbiome pool. Survival and development rates and larva weight across treatments can be found in Fig. S1 in the supplemental material. We sequenced the gut bacterial community of 87 larval samples at different time points of their development (see Text S1), 53 adult bees (ca. three per cage = ca. nine per treatment) as well as the additional diet components and microbiome transfer pools. After sequencing the V3-V4 region of the bacterial 16S rRNA gene, run joining, read processing, and removing nonbacterial and rare sequences (<5 reads across sample set), the adult samples contained on average 101,440 reads (range, 39,675 to 142,622) and 279 amplicon sequence variants (ASVs). The larval samples contained on average, 71,656 reads (range, 7,474 to 152,820) and 1,436 ASVs. Rarefaction plots on the minimum sample counts (Fig. S2) showed that lines flattened quickly (<1,000 reads) in larval as well as adult samples, indicating sufficient depth.

Larvae reared under different conditions and diets developed strong differences in microbiome composition and abundance. The bacterial communities changed over developmental time and significantly differed between lab treatments and hive controls as shown in bacterial alpha diversity (Fig. S2), beta diversity (Fig. S4), as well as taxonomy (Fig. S5) and bacterial abundance (Fig. S6). Specifically, at the sixth day (before pupation initiation), treatments differed remarkably. Here, the multivariate homogeneity of groups is highly dispersed between treatments (PERMDISP, P = 0.01 and F = 3.97) (Fig. S3). This is supported by nonmetric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) (Fig. S4) and principal-coordinate analysis (PCoA) (Fig. 1A) based on Bray-Curtis dissimilarity matrices which consider presence/absence as well as abundance of ASVs. The ordination plots show distances between hive control and all lab-reared treatments, while the treatments receiving larva gut alone or in combination with bee bread are similar. Permutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) analysis on the distances shows that treatment significantly affects the microbiome at all three sampling time points (day 3, P = 0.001, F = 7.7, and R2 = 0.62), (day 4, P = 0.001, F = 5.7, and R2 = 0.7), (day 6, P = 0.001, F = 10, and R2 = 0.65). Pairwise PERMANOVA with Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR) corrections verifies that all treatments differ significantly from the hive control at day 6 (Fig. 1). In general, the microbiomes in larval treatments that received gut homogenate (AG, LG, and LGBB) were dominated by one or two bacterial genera. Therefore, they showed a low alpha diversity while the lab treatments that received only royal jelly diet (C) or bee bread as addition were colonized by a higher diversity (Fig. 1B). There was also a significant effect of treatment on total bacterial abundance as measured by quantitative PCR (qPCR) using analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) model with treatment as the grouping variable and controlling for copy numbers of the actin housekeeping gene as the covariate at day 3 [F (5, 23) = 34.2 and P < 0.001] as well as day 6 [F (5, 26) = 84.8 and P < 0.001]. Following pairwise comparisons of estimated marginal means (emmeans) with FDR correction showed on day 3 (Fig. S7) and 6 (Fig. 1C) significant differences indicating that larval treatments differed in both bacterial composition and abundance (Fig. 1D). Finally, RNA of individuals from days 3 and 6 were used as qPCR template to better represent the active bacterial community. Compared to DNA results of the same samples, the 16S copy numbers with RNA as the template were higher on day 3 (paired Wilcoxon signed-rank test, for Hive, V = 15 and P = 0.06; for C, V = 15 and P = 0.06; for BB, V = 15 and P = 0.06; for LG, V = 15 and P = 0.06) but lower on day 6 in all tested treatments (for Hive, V = 0 and P = 0.03; for C, V = 5 and P = 0.63; for BB, V = 0 and P = 0.03; for LG, V = 0 and P = 0.03) (Fig. S6).

While the larvae showed strong differences, the adults did not differ in their established microbiomes. The core bacteria previously reported in adult bees colonized all treatments (Fig. 1D). PCoA (Fig. 1A) and NMDS (Fig. S4) show that the samples from all treatments cluster very closely. This is supported by FDR-corrected PERMANOVA with P values of >0.5 between any treatment and the Hive control (Fig. 1). In addition, treatments did not show significant effects on group dispersion (PERMDISP; P = 0.53 and F = 0.85) indicating homogeneous dispersion (Fig. S3). Deeper analysis on species and ASV (amplicon sequence variant) levels also showed no difference across treatments (Fig. S8). There was also no significant effect of treatment on total bacterial abundance [ANCOVA, F (5, 46) = 1.9 and P = 0.12]. Finally, pairwise comparisons with FDR correction of emmeans showed no significant differences between treatments and control (Fig. 1).

RNA sequencing was performed to test for effects of diet/microbiome composition on larval and adult gene expression. Transcriptome sequencing (RNA-seq) reads per sample ranged from 6.3 to 21.0 million, with an average of 14.2 million reads per sample. After quality filtering and adapter trimming, an average of 63.4% (standard deviation [SD], 14.4%) of the reads per sample were pseudoaligned to generate transcript abundance for each annotated transcript in the recently updated honey bee genome annotation (Amel_HAv3.1).

More expression variability but no clear pattern was seen in larval treatments compared to hive controls (Fig. 3) (significantly up- and downregulated genes and associated Gene Ontology (GO) terms for each treatment can be found in the GitHub repository [RNA folder]).

Cotransmission of the host and microbiome via vertical transmission is thought to increase alignment of reproductive interests facilitating long-term cooperative interactions (66,–68). The transition from larva to pupa in holometabolous insects poses a problem for cotransmission, and it is unclear whether the larval microbiome can affect the later adult microbiome (69). Eusociality, which is partially defined by overlap of generations, allows intimate microbiome transfer between individuals. This social transfer is hypothesized to have led to the evolution of distinctive and consistent gut communities with specialized functions found in social insects (70). We show the following. (i) The microbiome stages are effectively, also indirectly, decoupled between honey bee larva and adults. (ii) Vertical microbiome transfer after emergence overrides any variation in the larval microbiome in honey bees, allowing the colony to maintain a stable core adult microbiome even in the face of early perturbations.

While the adult honey bee microbiome is well characterized, information about larvae is conflicting, which makes it difficult to understand the system holistically. Some studies barely detected bacteria in larvae, leading to the conclusion that any present bacteria represent transients and food contaminants rather than symbionts (37, 39). Other studies cultured diverse bacteria from larval guts (47, 53, 57), found almost equivalent bacterial copies per gram of gut material of fifth instar larvae and foragers (38) or could visualize dense bacterial presence in fifth instar larval guts of Apis cerana (55). Resident microbes differ per definition from transient microbes by their replication inside a host at a rate exceeding loss due to death or excretion (71, 72). Here, our qPCR results indicate that bacterial abundance in hive larvae was very low in the early development but increasing by ∼5,000-fold on day 6. Such an increase is expected considering the closed anatomy of the larval gut until the first and only defecation before the start of pupation (73). As DNA sequencing also captures dead bacteria which may accumulate in the closed guts, we additionally used RNA from 3- and 6-day-old larvae as the template for qPCR. Compared to DNA, RNA degrades more rapidly in the environment with an estimated half-life of a few minutes, which is why it is used as a method to identify active microbes (74). While we found higher numbers of 16S copies from RNA compared to the DNA template on day 3, this was opposite on day 6 across all treatments. This may indicate that, while there is an overall increase in bacteria over larva development, an accumulation of dead cells also occurs (see Fig. S6 in the supplemental material). Still, the high counts of RNA copies, indicate that a lot of bacteria are alive in the larval guts. However, alive does not mean growing, as for example, dormant cells will also contain RNA (75). Therefore, our data cannot differentiate whether bacterial cells are actively growing within the larval gut or whether bacterial cells are only accumulating.

While our lab rearing and microbiome transfer methods are not ecologically realistic, they provided the opportunity to control conditions, and have been widely used for this purpose by other studies (20, 36, 85). For instance, laboratory inoculation avoids potential biases in social interactions from the hive bees toward some or all introduced lab treatments, which could lead to altered microbiome states. In addition, using the same inoculation microbiome pool allowed testing for changes in relative abundances of taxa as well as strain level variation across the treatments. However, additional future experiments in a natural setting would be interesting.

The evolution of sociality facilitated the development and maintenance of specialized, socially transmitted microbiomes in adult corbiculate bees. While larvae share the same environment and contact with adults, they do not seem to share the same microbiome transmission mode. The larval microbiome seems environmentally dependent, which has been observed in many other insects (70). Such environmental flexibility may be a source of adaptive potential (87). It does not mean complete random colonization, as the larval gut is a highly selective environment due to its low pH and antimicrobial peptides in royal jelly (88,–90). The hive-reared bee larvae were heavier than all lab-treated bee larvae, but surprisingly, the one following closest was the C treatment (Fig. S1) which did not receive any microbe inoculum or bee bread and showed lowest overall bacterial density (Fig. 1). While in adults the microbiome is functionally involved in pollen digestion and host weight gain (35, 36, 91), microbes, at least the ones colonizing our lab treatments, do not seem to provide this function in larvae.

Further work is needed to identify and understand larva-microbiome relationships and a potential advantage of the environmentally flexible microbiome strategy. It may be worth mentioning that the queen microbiome is also characterized by high variability between colonies as well as being lower in bacterial abundance and lacking the typical adult worker core microbiome (93, 94) just as the larval microbiome is. This fact is interesting considering that both queens and larvae are fed with royal jelly by nurses.

While the decoupling of adult and larval microbiome stages in the honey bee system is assumed in literature, it was not completely proven so far as indirect effects were not explored. During pupation, individuals are gnotobiotic and also lack the ability to upregulate immune responses (95). Our data show that indeed the pupation resets the microbiome, allowing for colonization by the separate community of adult core bacteria. In general, having two decoupled microbiome stages may allow different functional microbiomes to exist in larval and adult developmental stages. Another advantage could be the avoidance of potential constraints in later host life derived from early microbiome selection in juvenile form (18). Our data support this theory. Moreover, reliable transmission of the adult microbiome allows combining the advantages from this adaptive microbiome decoupling with advantages accompanying vertical transmission of a coevolved microbiome. In general, vertical transmission reduces risks such as the loss of beneficial associations or colonization by opportunistic pathogens (70). Microbiome transfer between worker generations, as well as division of labor that keeps young workers inside the colony until their microbiome is fully developed, reduces opportunities for colonization by noncore microbial members (96). In addition, the microbiome mediates effects on the behavior, e.g., nestmate recognition cues are defined by colony-specific gut microbial communities (97). Such reciprocal effects between host behavior and microbiome which are highly manifested in many organisms, as demonstrated by the existence of a microbiota-gut-brain axis (98), are likely driving forces in the evolution of sociality and microbiome across the animal kingdom (99,–101).

To test whether variation and dysbiosis in early colonizing larval microbiome may affect the establishment of a later adult microbiome, we raised honey bees through development and metamorphoses under controlled conditions in the lab. See Text S1 in the supplemental material for detailed methods and analysis.

In late September 2018, we grafted ∼24-h-old larvae from a single frame of an Apis mellifera colony in Okinawa, Japan. We marked this frame and left larvae of the same age for later sampling time points as hive-reared control individuals. For all steps in the standard larval rearing, we followed the protocol of Schmehl et al. (63).

To test whether early microbiome differences affect later microbiome establishment in adults, we had to create larvae that differ significantly in their microbiome composition without artificial disturbance by using chemicals, which would affect larval health. Therefore, we raised the larvae with five different diets and microbial components (Fig. 4) (48 individuals per treatment): (i) with standard royal jelly/sugar/yeast larval food (63) without addition (control [C]), (ii) adding larval gut microbiome (LG), (iii) adding bee bread (BB), (iv) adding larval gut and bee bread (LGBB), and (v) adding adult gut microbiome (AG) (details in Text S1). For adult gut transfer, we followed established protocols using the macerated hindguts of nurses (20). For the larval gut transfer, we macerated whole guts of late-stage larvae (shortly before defecating) as bacterial abundance is highest in this stage (38, 40). On the sixth rearing day, we moved the larvae for pupation. For having a comparable natural control, we pulled 35 larvae of the same age out of the marked frame and kept them under the same conditions in the pupation desiccator. To follow microbiome establishment, we snap-froze larvae at three time points after surface sterilization (Text S1).

From each treatment, we randomly distributed all emerging bees to three sterile cages to avoid batch effects within a time frame of 24 h. We excluded one cage of the AG treatment during the experiment after dropping it accidentally. In general, cages contained two prepared Eppendorf tubes as feeders to provide filter-sterilized 0.5 M sucrose solution and gamma-irradiated bee bread (30 kGy) ad libitum. To transfer adult microbiome, on days 1 and 2, 10 nurse bees from the same hive were surface sterilized and dissected. Hindguts were macerated in a 1:1 mix of phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and 0.5 M sucrose, mixed with sterile bee bread, and equally distributed to all cages. During the experiment, food was replaced, and dead bees were removed on a daily basis. After 7 days to allow microbiome establishment (20), samples were taken, surface sterilized, and dissected, and whole guts as well as the whole abdomen were snap-frozen and stored at −80°C.

Adult guts and adult gut inoculum were extracted following the protocol in reference 27. For the inhibitor-rich larvae, we used the AllPrep PowerFecal DNA/RNA kit (Qiagen) following the manufacturer’s protocol. Library preparations and amplicon sequencing of the V3-V4 region of 16S rRNA region was performed by DNA Sequencing Section at Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology (OIST) on Illumina MiSeq v3 2 × 300-bp platform following the Illumina protocol. Reads were processed using QIIME2 version 2019.1 (102), denoising of the fastq files was performed using the denoise-paired command from the DADA2 software package (103), wrapped in QIIME2, including removal of chimeras using the “consensus” method. For taxonomic assignment, the QIIME2 q2-feature-classifier plugin (104) and the naive Bayes classifier (105), which we trained with our primers, were used on the SILVA release 132 (106, 107). Subsequent analyses for examining alpha and beta diversity as well as taxonomy on genus, species and ASV level were carried out in R, principally using the phyloseq package (108).

For bacterial abundance, we amplified total copies of the 16S rRNA gene as well as the actin housekeeping gene to control for bias from extraction and sample size in 60 adult and 69 larval samples. We also amplified both target genes in the RNA from 43 larval samples to represent the more active bacterial community for direct comparison to the sample’s DNA. For cDNA synthesis from RNA, SuperScriptII reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen) was used according to the manufacturer’s protocol. 16S and actin target sequences were cloned in a pCRTM4-TOPO vector (Text S1) and amplified for standard curves. One-way ANCOVA was performed on log-transformed 16S copy numbers per sample as dependent and treatment as grouping variable while taking actin gene copies per sample as covariate into account. We performed pairwise comparisons between groups using the emmeans package (109) and plotted the obtained estimated marginal means. Finally, we calculated and plotted normalized absolute 16S copy numbers of DNA and RNA of samples.

For exploring gene expression profiles across different treatments, we sequenced mRNA from 18 adult samples (one bee for each experimental cage [two bees from one cage from the AG cages due to the cage loss]) and 18 day 6 larval samples (three per treatment). Novaseq reads were trimmed using AdapterRemoval (110) prior to being quantified using kallisto (111) with the honey bee transcriptome (version Amel_HAv3.1) as a reference, using default parameters. The R package DESeq2 was used to normalize and determine which genes were differentially expressed among treatments in adult as well as larval samples. Genes were considered differentially expressed between two treatments at an FDR-adjusted P value of <0.05. Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis of the significantly differentially expressed genes between treatments were carried out using GOstats, GSEABase, and Category R packages (112).

All data sets, including the lists of the significantly differentially expressed genes and GO terms for each treatment, codes to process sequences as well as code used in the analysis (in R markdown format) are available in the GitHub repository (https://github.com/kowallik/honey-bee-microbiome-development-larvae-adults).

Raw sequence data are available at DDBJ and NCBI under BioProject accession no. PRJDB12699, 16S sequences under Run accession no. DRR333007 to DRR333153, and RNA sequences under Run accession no. DRR333154 to DRR333191.

