Material Engineering in Gut Microbiome and Human Health

Tremendous progress has been made in the past decade regarding our understanding of the gut microbiome's role in human health. Currently, however, a comprehensive and focused review marrying the two distinct fields of gut microbiome and material research is lacking. To bridge the gap, the current paper discusses critical aspects of the rapidly emerging research topic of “material engineering in the gut microbiome and human health.” By engaging scientists with diverse backgrounds in biomaterials, gut-microbiome axis, neuroscience, synthetic biology, tissue engineering, and biosensing in a dialogue, our goal is to accelerate the development of research tools for gut microbiome research and the development of therapeutics that target the gut microbiome. For this purpose, state-of-the-art knowledge is presented here on biomaterial technologies that facilitate the study, analysis, and manipulation of the gut microbiome, including intestinal organoids, gut-on-chip models, hydrogels for spatial mapping of gut microbiome compositions, microbiome biosensors, and oral bacteria delivery systems. In addition, a discussion is provided regarding the microbiome-gut-brain axis and the critical roles that biomaterials can play to investigate and regulate the axis. Lastly, perspectives are provided regarding future directions on how to develop and use novel biomaterials in gut microbiome research, as well as essential regulatory rules in clinical translation. In this way, we hope to inspire research into future biomaterial technologies to advance gut microbiome research and gut microbiome-based theragnostics.

After Louis Pasteur raised the seminal idea that bacteria are a major mediator for many infectious diseases, it took nearly two additional centuries before investigators revealed that the microbiome in fact plays many complex and multifaceted roles in human health and disease [1, 2]. For instance, animals that are germ-free or treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics exhibit significantly altered metabolic levels, trophic factors, enzymatic activities, and specific lipids [3]. Further, microbial dysbiosis has been associated with neural, intestinal, cardiac, renal, and immune disorders [4].

Collaborations among gastroenterologists, biologists, material scientists, bioengineers, and clinicians of other disciplines will further advance an understanding of gut microbiome-related diseases and facilitate new therapeutic strategies enabled by material engineering. Robust platform technologies built upon advanced biomaterials will thus facilitate and contribute to emerging gut microbiome research.

The gut microbiome is composed of bacteria, viruses, archaea, protists, and fungi, with a total cell number even higher (by around 12%) than the host itself [22]. These microorganisms typically inhabit the small intestine and colon in the lower GI tract, where they perform a dynamic and diverse array of metabolic activities [1]. Across the mucosa, biomolecules are under constant flux between the host and the microorganism, which eventually connects the gut microbiota to the whole body.

Such bidirectional communication and host-microbiome interactions are initiated immediately after birth with microbial consortia delivered from the mother [23]. Gut microbiota continues to diversify, followed by a second stage that is relatively resilient to environmental factors (e.g., antibiotics and age) [24]. Due to these developmental differences, the gut microbiota exhibit high variability among different individuals and also at different locations in the GI tract [12]. Greater similarities exist, however, among family members, possibly originating from shared environmental factors (e.g., diet) and/or genetic relatedness [25, 26].

The gut microbiota has been studied in the context of human development and disease [27, 28]. For example, there is increasing evidence suggesting that host health can be negatively affected by specific microbiota in many cardiovascular, inflammatory, gastrointestinal, metabolic, and neurologic disorders [29]. For instance, some studies have shown that subsets of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) patients possess a gut microbiota characterized by a decreased population of Bacteroidetes and an increased population of Proteobacteria and phyla Actinobacteria, compared to healthy subjects [30]. Similarly, type 2 diabetic (T2DB) patients often show reduced Firmicutes bacteria while harboring a denser population of Bacteroidetes bacteria [31]. Necrotizing enterocolitis has been associated with higher populations of Proteobacteria and Firmicutes [32]. In contrast, Bacteroidetes and Fusobacteria species are related to healthy infants. Despite these associations between gut microbiota and diseases, it remains unclear whether dysbiosis is a cause or consequence of host health status or other pervasive factors (e.g., diet).

In summary, there are still major questions regarding the study, analysis, and manipulation of the gut microbiome, which would be greatly facilitated by synergizing these efforts with discoveries from advanced material engineering. The following sections provide an overview of the microbiota-gut-brain axis and then a summary of existent material-facilitated gut microbiome studies. Next, a discussion is provided on how gut microbiome research could also provide new strategies for material research. This multidisciplinary approach can contribute to better treatments for gut microbiome-associated chronic diseases through the collaboration of bioengineers, biologists, material scientists, chemists, and clinicians who treat these diseases.

The gut-brain axis is defined as the continuous, bidirectional communication that occurs between the GI tract and the brain (the central nervous system; CNS) (Figure 2). This communication can occur through multiple types of interactions, largely including the gut microbiota and/or neurotransmitters and other mediators that the microbiota often modulate. The microenvironment that the gut microbiota inhabit is in a symbiotic relationship with each component of the intestine, including its nervous system, known as the enteric nervous system (ENS), as well as its protective coat, the epithelium. Together with the CNS, the gut microbiota and these intestinal components are constantly in communication with one another. Alterations in the gut microbiota can thus affect both ENS and CNS plasticity and functions, including mood as well as GI motility and secretion [57–59]. Research has increasingly shown that these interactions, under normal conditions, serve to maintain both gut and brain homeostasis [60–62]. When any of these systems go awry, these interactions can result in brain and/or gut dysfunction and/or disease [58]. A major class of disorders that can result from these atypical interactions are disorders of gut-brain interactions (DGBIs), including irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). Mood disorders, like anxiety and/or depression, have also increasingly been shown to be affected by this axis [63, 64]. Critical microbiome modulators include diet, probiotics, and medications (e.g., antibiotics). Not surprisingly, these factors have been repeatedly associated, in both clinical and preclinical studies, with DGBIs and mood disorders [63, 64]. For example, different strains of probiotics, including Bifidobacteria and lactobacilli, have been associated with positive effects on anxiety and cognition in both animal models and humans [58]. Extending outward from the immediate gut environment is a key part of the autonomic nervous system that serves as “highways” to facilitate the continuous, bidirectional communication between the gut and the brain. Although the vagus nerves are studied the most, sympathetic signaling has also been shown to be potentially important [65–67].

Broad-spectrum antibiotics have been utilized to yield a “pseudo” GF environment in conventionally raised animals or to alter specific microbial communities, to provide mechanistic insights into microbial-host interactions and have thus afforded a complementary approach to the study of GF models [67, 71–73]. To further validate the role of the gut microbiota in gut and brain plasticity and functions, investigators have also utilized fecal microbiota transplant (FMT) as a mechanism to target the effects of specific microbe recolonization in either antibiotic-treated or GF animals [59, 60, 67, 71]. FMT reestablishes a microbial system from fecal bacteria obtained from a “healthy” donor into a diseased model and has been successfully utilized in cases of recurrent Clostridium difficile (C. diff) infection where current therapeutic interventions have been less successful. Clinical trials of FMT in humans are ongoing for individuals with neurodevelopmental, metabolic, and CNS-focused disorders like autism spectrum disorders (ASD), obesity, and Alzheimer's disease, respectively [74].

There is increasing evidence to suggest that metabolites of the gut microbiota facilitate microbial-host interactions and, conversely, that the microbiota itself interacts with host epithelial and immune cells to release neurotransmitters or initiate signaling pathways involved in neuroimmune homeostasis (Figure 2) [75–77]. For example, microbial metabolites such as short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), tryptamine, bile acids, dopamine, gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), and serotonin have been shown to influence local functions in the GI tract, including in the ENS, and also have far-reaching effects on the CNS [66, 75, 76, 78]. Transmitters, including GABA, dopamine, tryptamine, and bile acids, have been comprehensively described in other reviews [75, 76, 78]. We examine two well-studied modulators, SCFA and serotonin.

Diet has a profound impact on the composition and activity of the gut microbiota. SCFAs, which are byproducts of bacterial fermentation of dietary nondigestible carbohydrates, including fibers and resistant starch, have been identified as important modulators of the MGB axis [79]. Oligosaccharides, a type of indigestible carbohydrate, has been shown to enhance SCFA levels with resultant beneficial effects on GI barrier function as well as postnatal ENS development [80]. Oligosaccharides also serve to influence signaling pathways within the CNS that regulate stress, with resulting improvements in anxiety and depression in both mouse models and humans [79]. In GF mice, treatment with acetate, propionate, and butyrate, the three major forms of SCFA, lessened the normally intensified stress-associated morphological, behavioral, and physiological functions previously observed in these mice, highlighting the importance of microbial-derived SCFA in regulating the gut-brain axis potentially via the major stress pathway in the body, the hypothalamic-pituitary axis [81].

In addition to prebiotics from diet, probiotic manipulation of the gut microbiota also produces SCFA [82]. The most well-studied probiotics include lactobacilli, Bifidobacteria, and bacteria from the Ruminococcaceae and Lachnospiraceae families, with lower levels of the latter implicated in patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD; ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease) thus emphasizing a potential role for SCFA in the regulation of intestinal inflammation [83]. This has sparked interest in targeting SCFA biosynthesis as an IBD therapeutic by probiotic and/or prebiotic administration or formulating drugs that can elevate specific SCFAs, such as butyrate, that have been associated with IBD pathogenesis [84].

Serotonin (5-HT) is a neurotransmitter essential for both CNS and ENS development and function. Abnormal serotonergic signaling is implicated in neurodevelopmental and mood disorders, including autism spectrum disorders (ASD), anxiety, and depression [85, 86]. The GI tract is where the body's largest depot of 5-HT is synthesized with the overwhelming amount synthesized in the intestinal mucosa. The homeostasis of intestinal mucosal 5-HT is regulated in part by the gut microbiota. For example, spore-forming bacteria can increase the production of 5-HT in the colon and serum of GF mice which can subsequently influence GI motility [71, 87]. This increase is likely mediated by the direct action of SCFAs on tryptophan hydroxylase (Tph1), the rate-limiting biosynthetic enzyme of mucosal serotonin, resulting in increased 5-HT biosynthesis [78]. Upstream of 5-HT biosynthesis, the gut microbiota can also influence the synthesis of the 5-HT precursor, tryptophan [88]. Microbial-mediated tryptophan catabolites, including tryptamine and indole, have been found to influence various host physiologic processes involving the immune system, GI barrier function, and GI motility [88]. In GF mice, 5-HT biosynthesis and metabolism are increased, implicating these processes as microbiota-driven [62]. Interestingly, GF mice also exhibit anxiolytic and anti-depressive-like phenotypes, and conversely, the depletion of tryptophan exacerbates a depressive-like phenotype, highlighting the potential importance of microbial-associated 5-HT and its signaling molecules, in the regulation of mood disorders [62].

Microbial-serotonergic signaling has been shown to be bidirectional. In addition to the ability of the microbiota to influence 5-HT signaling, gut mucosal 5-HT can also directly regulate colonization of microbiota, specifically Turicibacter sanguinis to consequently affect host physiological processes, including lipid metabolism [77]. The ability of T. sanguinis to recognize and respond to 5-HT is likely facilitated by a component within the bacteria that closely mimics the serotonin reuptake transporter (SERT), a transporter present in gut epithelial cells, and also neurons of the ENS and CNS, which is employed by host cells to take up 5-HT, leading to its intracellular inactivation [77].

Due to the limited access to human gut tissue, current gut microbiome studies have relied largely on in vivo animal models [89]. Although these models recapitulate several vital aspects of human physiological systems, in vivo animal models have restrictions for understanding the effects and mechanisms of dietary, drug, and other factors in the development of the human gut microbiome and during disease treatment [90, 91]. This is because human and other animal species have distinctive diets, and animals may respond to drugs differently due their distinctive enzyme pools [92]. In this regard, in vitro models of the human gut microbiome could offer several advantages [93]. First, human cells, including intestinal cells, colonic cells, and microbiota derived from human patients, can be integrated into in vitro models for a closer mimicry of human metabolism and host-microbiota interactions; second, as cells and culture processes are more standardized and can be better characterized in vitro, they are typically more reproducible, which is critical for multicenter collaboration and scientific rigor [94–96]. Furthermore, in vitro models allow for noninvasive and real-time sampling of microbiota and host cells compared with in vivo animal models [97]. Therefore, it has advantages for the study of dynamic host-gut microbiota interactions. Lastly, compared to animal studies, in vitro cell culture would allow for more facile large-scale screening assays [98]. Despite the clear advantages for investigating mechanisms and screening therapeutics, the study of in vitro gut microbiome models is still mostly based on animal cells or 2D cocultures that have not yet succeeded in closely mimicking human gut tissues. Creating advanced human gut microbiome models with better mimicry of the biophysical (e.g., extracellular matrix), soluble (e.g., metabolites and growth factors), and cellular (e.g., diverse microbiota) environment of human gut tissues would be critical for accelerating the discovery of novel microbial mechanisms and for the screening of signaling molecules essential in modulating host-microbiome interactions.

Material engineering has helped in important ways with the development of better gut microbiome models. This review points out critical gaps in research and highlights possibilities for how the different aspects of material engineering can facilitate advanced development of human gut microbiome models.

2D enterocyte models, including monolayer intestinal cultures, have been widely used for drug metabolism and gut development studies since the early 1980s [99]. Their coculture with microbiota has also been considered a useful tool for studying the gut microbiome [100]. However, most of the enterocytes have been derived from mice and other animals, which do not recapitulate some of the key human physiological conditions. While primary human enterocytes can be harvested from patients or healthy subjects, invasive procedures are typically required, and a limited number of enterocytes can be obtained from each procedure. Stem cells, especially induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) and intestinal stem cells, are characterized by their ability to proliferate and differentiate [101]. Therefore, stable lines of human enterocytes can be obtained from stem cell culture. The efficiency and speed of stem cell induction, expansion, enterocytic differentiation, and maturation, however, are crucial considerations for both clinical applications and fundamental studies [102]. Current protocols for the expansion and differentiation of stem cells have mostly focused on the optimization of soluble factors, such as media formulation. However, biophysical cues mediated by the extracellular matrix are known to regulate a variety of stem cell behaviors [103, 104]. Therefore, it is reasonable to expect that materials will play an important role in the maintenance, expansion, and differentiation of stem cells and the maturation of the differentiated enterocytes, which can eventually lead to more translatable and functional clinical models for investigating the gut microbiome [105]. Meanwhile, most current intestinal stem cell culture systems rely on static and simplified culture conditions that sometimes do not represent the crucial dynamic environment existent in the human gut. For instance, alongside mucin gels in the gut, there are multiple gradients, including ECM compositions, growth factor concentrations, cytokine types, oxygen, and pH [106] . Currently, very few materials have been able to provide a precisely controlled gradient microenvironment, representing a future direction for biomaterial innovation. For example, a recent study by the Allbritton group used a novel magnetic nanoparticle-integrated substrate to create a dynamic friction system to enhance the maturity of a differentiated colon epithelium layer, which is characterized by increased expression of MUC2, IL8, and E-cadherin in a transwell setup, compared with static culture [107]. Nevertheless, this direction is still at its early stage, leaving considerable room for material scientists and bioengineers to explore.

The differentiation of iPSCs, ESCs, and intestinal stem cells into epithelium cells can also be regulated by biomaterials. From early embryonic development, mechanical forces mediated by cell-ECM and cell-cell interactions regulate epithelial cells, including differentiation, migration, invagination, and junction formation [123]. In a 2D cell culture, soft and laminin-rich substrates are essential to the expression of epithelial differentiation markers [124]. Also, Wnt signaling, which is known to be affected by substrate stiffness and nanotopographies, is essential for long-term intestinal stem cell culture, suggesting a potential role of biomaterials in the maintenance of stem cell pluripotency [125]. Additionally, fibrous silk fibroin has also been used as a substrate to induce corneal epithelial differentiation from iPSCs. A cell sheet with tight cell-cell interactions was further formed from differentiated epithelial cells on the same substrate [126]. Epithelial cells differentiated from iPSCs, ESCs, and intestinal stem cells have been used for the formation of tight junctions in studies on gut epithelium transport [127]. However, the effects of different stem cell sources and epithelial differentiation substrates on the tight junction formation and gut-microbiota interactions require further investigation. Also, many of the aforementioned protocols have not generated all subtype epithelial cells (e.g., endocrine cells) commonly existent in the human gut. Studies that focus on material-regulated gut epithelium differentiation from iPSCs and ESCs remain to be performed. Furthermore, it is worth noting that in addition to gut epithelium, several other cell types also play important roles in gut-microbiome interactions, including the enteric nervous system and the immune system [128]. Nevertheless, while the effects and significance of biomaterials on the differentiation of iPSCs and ESCs are confirmed, little work has focused on this direction. High-throughput screening using biomaterial libraries conveying different mechanical, compositional, and biochemical properties could be key to discovering novel materials for regulating stem cell reprogramming and gut cell differentiation [129]. Although individual components have been studied previously in material-directed stem cell behaviors, the incorporation of the study of different material properties, such as stiffness and topography, would require screening systems of much larger complexity and the integration of advanced analytic tools, like machine learning, to interpret the large-scale screening results. Lastly, as the derivation of iPSCs is still considered a time-consuming step, direct conversion of somatic cells (e.g., fibroblasts) into gut epithelial cells would be desired as well, but the potential role(s) that biomaterials play in direct gut cell reprogramming remains to be explored. The rapid, efficient, noninvasive, and consistent derivation of gut cells from somatic cells would, however, significantly accelerate high-throughput drug screening and identification of signaling molecules in gut-microbiome studies [130]. Future studies should thus focus on materials such as hydrogels with dynamic properties and more diverse biomolecules that have shown great potential in regulating these processes.

As a crucial component in the gut microenvironment, the gut microbiota is constantly interacting with surrounding mucin gels, which act as a continuous barrier to pathogens and separate the gut epithelium from the microbiota [131]. Mucins, including those secreted by specialized gut epithelial cells (e.g., goblet cells), are a group of large glycoproteins with heavy O-glycosylation that oligomerize (oligomerization only occurs within MUC2, MUC5AC, MUC5B, MUC6, and MUC19) with each other through disulfide bonds to form the viscoelastic mucus [132]. Within this complex and dynamic polymeric network, there are antimicrobial molecules (e.g., specific and nonspecific immunoglobins) secreted by Paneth cells which keep the inner layer of mucus sterile [133]. Within the GI tract, mucus has a wide range of thickness from 700 μm (in the stomach) to 150-300 μm (in the small intestine), with a typical thinner inner layer that anchors to gut epithelium cells through transmembrane glycoproteins and a thicker outer layer that undergoes rapid turnover and constant degradation by anaerobic bacteria [134]. Mucus is viscous (compared to water), hydrated, and highly porous, allowing for diffusion of macromolecule (e.g., proteins, sugars, and essential nutrients) while blocking diffusion of biological particulates (e.g., bacteria) above critical sizes (~500 nm) [135]. For viruses smaller than 500 nm, mucus is still a strong barrier due to its viscous nature and the presence of virus-binding antibodies [136]. Mucus is a highly dynamic system and is responsive to microbiota or pathogen invasion [136]. For instance, when bacteria manage to penetrate to the inner mucus layer and bind to the cell-bound mucin, the extracellular domain of mucin will be cleaved by the pathogen and is released to prevent their further invasion to the host (e.g., H. pylori) [137]. This process is accompanied by the stimulation of secretion of mucins from goblet cells and inflammatory signals from microfold cells (M cells) [138]. Meanwhile, if the bacteria do not bind to the cell surface mucin, they will not be able to penetrate the inner layer because of a steric hindrance [134]. Certain microbiota, such as H. pylori, have developed strategies to bypass the mucus barrier by secreting mucin-degrading enzymes (e.g., glycosidases and haemagglutinin proteases (e.g., hapA)), increasing local pH, or through mucolytic activities that use mucin glycoproteins as energy sources [139]. These activities can collectively reduce the viscosity of mucin gel and dilute the immunoglobins [139] within. Some microbiota (e.g., viruses (e.g., HIV-1, poliovirus, and reoviruses) and bacteria (e.g., S. typhimurium, V. cholerae, and Shigella flexneri)) can also evade mucus by directly routing their uptake through the M cells, located in Peyer's patches of the small intestine [134]. Apart from the microbiota, there are other environmental stimuli in the gut that can alter the release of mucin, such as inflammatory stimuli (e.g., pathogen-associated molecular patterns or PAMPs, including prostaglandins and lipopolysaccharide), bile salts, cholinergic stimuli, vasoactive intestinal peptides, nitric oxide, and neutrophil elastase [140].

As described above, mucin gel can be considered an excellent naturally existent biomaterial that conveys signals between host and gut microbiome and can be modulated in response to various environmental stimuli [141]. Additionally, gut microbiota interaction with mucin gels is an essential part of host-microbiota communications [142]. However, our current understanding of microbiota-mucin gel interactions is incomplete. This is partially due to a lack of in vitro systems that fully recapitulate the dynamics and complexity of human mucin gels. Nearly all epithelium cocultures used in the field have relied on the use of malignant epithelial cell lines that present altered mucin-related genes, lack goblet cell-like properties, and secrete mucins with a different glycosylation [143]. It would thus be desirable to develop biological and biochemical approaches to generate dynamic and complex mucin gel systems [144]. For instance, when goblet-like gastrointestinal epithelial cells can be differentiated from human stem cells using soluble factors or biomaterial interfaces, we can expect a more representative mucin gel for the modeling of host-gut microbiota interactions [145]. Developing advanced methods that can analyze the dynamics of mucin gel in anaerobic conditions and with representative microbiota represents another opportunity for material engineers. Additionally, much of the knowledge scientists have already discovered regarding microbiota invasion inside the mucin gel can instruct the design of oral drug delivery systems, which have been discussed extensively in prior reviews [19]. Lastly, partially due to the difficulties of generating robust, complex, and physiologically relevant mucin gel in vitro, there remains a lack of understanding of how mucin gel structures impact microbiota migration, retention, growth, and pathogenic activation [146]. To overcome these challenges, there is a clear need for interdisciplinary research and collaboration among material scientists, bioengineers, and biologists.

Minigut organoids, which include intestinal organoids, have revolutionized the way the human GI tract can be studied [147]. Gut epithelium-associated pathways have been typically studied using adenocarcinoma cell lines of epithelium origin that often demonstrate altered genetic information compared to native human intestinal epithelium [148]. Although there has been no single model that can investigate human GI biology as a whole, organ-like culture derived from stem cells, or organoids, are considered an elegant model as it can recapitulate the cellular diversity in a 3D structure and can expand in vitro long term. For example, gut organoids can include multiple differentiated epithelial cell types such as enterocytes, Paneth, goblet, and enteroendocrine cells and can be incorporated into systems with nonepithelial cell types, such as immune cells [149]. Gut epithelium and the associated mucin gel are the primary sites for gut microbial communities as well as major barriers for pathogen invasion into the GI tract [150]. The distinctive host-microbiota interactions in the human GI tract are typically not well reproduced in animal systems or in vitro models composed of unicellular epithelial cell lines. Ex vivo gut tissue culture harvested from the human intestine or colon has shown unique patterns representative of human gut-microbiota interactions, but this approach is only limited to short-term studies, and invasive procedures are required for tissue harvesting [151]. Gut organoids not only form multicellular tissue patterns but also incorporate critical human- and patient-specific factors, including age, sex, genetic background, and ethnicity, which are factors that may well shape the microbiota-host interactions [152]. Therefore, the development of advanced gut organoid model systems is critical for a better understanding of gut microbiome biology and has attracted enormous interest. However, compared with the real human gut, current organoid systems still lack an accurate recapitulation of all key physiological behaviors, including mucin. Therefore, novel engineering strategies are essential for constructing more advanced gut organoid cultures to overcome the current challenges.

Taken together, gut organoids provide an excellent platform for investigating human gut microbiome biology in vitro. However, the formation, growth, and maturation of gut organoids require a deeper understanding and better design of organoid matrices. Developing synthetic matrices or more chemically defined natural matrices as alternatives to EHS gels for organoid culture would allow scientists to investigate the biophysical cue-guided organoid formation and enable more accurate and advanced gut-microbiome studies.

3D gut-on-a-chip systems enabled by recent advancements in microfluidic fabrication have also emerged for modeling GI tissues [173]. Microfluidics not only provides in vivo mimicry fluidic flow but also allows for simulation of peristalsis, oxygen gradients, and pressure [174]. Additionally, compared to organoid systems, microbes can be more readily introduced for coculture of the gut epithelium in this 3D model [109]. The continuous and controllable fluidic flow not only more closely mimics physiological conditions of the human GI tract but also prevents the overgrowth of microbes that block the nutrient flow in regular insert-based cultures or 2D epithelial cultures [175]. Oxygen gradients are also critical for the maintenance of anaerobic microbial growth in the long term [176].

Gut-on-a-chip systems have already led to discoveries that were not possible in previous in vitro models [18]. For instance, an anaerobic intestinal chip revealed that significantly enhanced growth of anaerobic microbe genus Akkermansia is closely associated with better preserved epithelial barriers [94]. However, it is well agreed that current models remain to be improved to better recapitulate the physiological conditions of human gut tissues. Continuous engineering of gut-on-a-chip in terms of better mimicries of pH, oxygen, metabolites, and combination with a full set of human microbiota would substantiate their potential for drug discoveries and numerous other applications. Additionally, there will be rapid development of more advanced multiorgan tissue models [196]. It would be critical to continuously improve knowledge of gut microbiome and human diseases by building sophisticated microfluidics emulating the human gut-liver, gut-immune, gut-heart, and gut-brain axis. For example, MINERVA, abbreviated from “MIcrobiota-Gut-BraiN EngineeRed platform to eVAluate intestinal microflora impact on brain functionality,” is a project recently funded by the European Research Council and is aimed at paving the road for the first multiorgan-on-chip system to emulate diseases associated with the microbiota-gut-brain axis. Although still at an early stage, its success will substantially transform human beings' knowledge of gut and brain-related diseases and lead to new approaches for drug development in treating neurological disorders. However, considerable amounts of work would be required to deliver the promise, which in turn offers excellent opportunities for biomaterials and biomedical engineering communities.

The human gut microbiota is extremely complex, diverse, and dynamic [105]. Additionally, most species of human gut microbiota require highly specific culture conditions and have not been cultivated in vitro [197]. Therefore, a comprehensive analysis of gut microbiota and their communications with the host is thus extremely challenging. A variety of high-throughput technologies have thus been developed to address this challenge. For instance, metagenomics, metatranscriptomics, and metabolomics have provided excellent tools for profiling the gut microbiota [198]. Nevertheless, taxonomic composition alone is insufficient for understanding microbial pathways [198]. Critical information on the spatial and temporal distribution of microbiota species, genetics, proteins, metabolites, and their associated microbial pathways and host-microbiota interactions is still largely missing yet critical to the true understanding of human physiology [199].

Material engineering has played crucial roles in various aspects involved in the analysis of the gut microbiome. The first step of gut microbiota analysis is typically the sampling and isolation of gut microbiota from human or animal samples [200]. The samples used for the sampling of gut microbiota have so far included feces, gut tissue biopsies, and the lumen of the gut [201]. Sampling methods have included direct isolation of microbiota from feces or using catheters, intelligent capsules, luminal brushes, or surgical tools to dissect gut tissues with gut microbiota [202]. All of the aforementioned methods have their advantages and limitations. For example, fecal samples are the most convenient for microbiota analysis, but they may not accurately reflect the composition and dynamics of microbiota in the gut as microbiota directly harvested from the gut using catheters, intelligent capsules, and/or luminal brushes [203]. The sampling efficiency of these latter methods, however, is limited. For example, ingestible microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) such as IntelliCap® from NIZO integrated with a fluid suction compartment, battery, and wireless communication unit allows for highly controllable sampling of GI fluids in situ [204]. However, the collected sample can easily leak out and become contaminated during travel within the GI tract, and microbiota in the inner layer of mucus may not be efficiently harvested [205]. Meanwhile, more conventional endoscopic aspiration methods, which are also the current clinical gold standard for monitoring abnormal bacteria growth in the GI tract, also share the same concern of contamination [206]. Developing smarter and better-controlled microoperation units may be a key to addressing this concern [207]. For instance, the future development of smart microrobots integrated with multichamber systems for spatially defined collection and the storage of GI fluids could provide excellent solutions [208]. Surgical methods that dissect gut biopsies can harvest microbiota samples and the associated gut tissues in their original structures and thus provide accurate and reliable profiling of microbiota species and study of microbial pathways at the sampling site [209]. However, because of invasiveness, biopsies are largely obtained from patients with underlying medical issues, thereby limiting their broad clinical applicability [210]. Equally invasive methods to obtain gut biopsies have included the luminal brush method that uses fiberoptic bronchoscope techniques, as well as laser capture microdissection techniques [211]. However, they still require advanced instruments and involve tedious procedures. Functionalized nanomaterials such as magnetic hydrogels, graphene, and iron oxide nanoparticles have also been recently developed for capturing microbiota in the GI tract [212, 213]. Particularly, because of their high surface area and small sizes, they potentially have high efficiency in penetrating mucus and binding to microbes both in the lumen and in the inner mucosal layer [214]. In particular, magnetic nanomaterials have distinctive advantages for the isolation of metabolites of microbiota through in situ binding followed by magnetic separation from the fecal samples, which have been combined with mass spectroscopy for microbiota metabolic profiling [215]. Nevertheless, because these technologies are still at an early stage of development, challenges still remain as to how to spatially control the capture of microbes and record the dynamics of diverse microbial species [216]. Most importantly, none of the methods can provide information on the intricate spatial distribution of the gut microbiome, which is critical for understanding spatially defined microbial pathways and interactions inside the GI tract.

Sheth et al. developed a metagenomic plot sampling by a sequencing (MaPS-Seq) method to analyze the spatial organization of gut microbiota [217] (Figure 5). As a proof of concept, mouse small and large intestine samples were dissected and fixed by in situ crosslinking of a perfused acrylamide polymer precursor. The polymer precursor solution was also embedded with 16 rRNAs as an amplification primer commonly used in metagenomics studies [217]. After embedding, the tissue samples were then fractured without disrupting the spatial arrangement of the tissue. The fractured particles could then be captured by a microfluidic device followed by the release of genomic DNA for qRT-PCR analysis of taxa of microbiota information coupled with spatial barcodes [217]. This unbiased and accurate spatial metagenomics approach provides high-resolution (~20 μm) analysis of the gut microbiome and provides definitive proof of the high spatial heterogeneity of gut microbiota. For instance, this study discovered that positively coassociated taxa, particularly for Ruminococcaceae, Lachnospiraceae, and Porphyromonadaceae, are present in the cecum, while the ileum is characterized by fewer taxa associations in the network. Although this work established an innovative framework for spatial metagenomics, the reconstruction of high-resolution spatial information within each part of the gut relies on advanced data analytic tools that can be further improved by the integration of advanced tagging strategies. Additionally, capturing the dynamic host-gut microbiome interactions in live animals or humans also requires the development of noninvasive and real-time monitoring tools for the gut microbiota [218]. Therefore, there are abundant opportunities to further develop the gel-embedding and plotting strategy for diverse spatial profiling applications.

Advanced optical imaging techniques have also enabled the spatial and temporal analysis of gut microbiota [219]. Conventional gene and protein analysis methods such as fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH), expansion microscopy, and immunostaining require tissue fixation postprocessing and are thus not suitable for live animal analysis [220]. However, the recent development of nondestructive in situ near-infrared (NIR) fluorescent labeling techniques has enabled the real-time monitoring of gut microbiota that provides both spatial and temporal information on host-gut interactions [221]. For example, Wang et al. used a click-chemistry-based approach by first feeding mice with a diet containing alkyne-labeled sugars (e.g., propargylglycine), which are supposed to partially replace polysaccharides in the bacterial membrane through sugar metabolism [222]. Afterward, an NIR-II fluorescent dye-containing azide group was conjugated to the alkyne-labeled microbiota after gavage of the dye. NIR-II fluorescent dye is beneficial for gut imaging because of the high depth of gut tissues and the relatively low scattering of NIR-II laser by tissues. This study tracked the dynamics of gut microbiota over a period of 11 hours [222]. However, this approach only allows for the analysis of overall microbiota without providing information on different species of microbiota. Also, this metabolic labeling method may not be applicable for viral species in the gut microbiota. Another report by Hudak et al. shows the expanded capacity of metabolic labeling by using two different biorthogonal chemistry (azide-alkyne and cyclopropane-tetrazine conjugation) methods to visualize capsular polysaccharides, lipopolysaccharides, and peptidoglycans in three different color combinations [223]. However, the three-color combination approach only allows for in vitro imaging due to the strong scattering of red, blue, and green light by tissues [224]. Still, if only one specific biomolecule is needed for characterizing microbiota species, in vivo imaging and analysis of gut microbiota is feasible. Future directions to further develop this metabolic labeling strategy may include the integration of quantum dots, plasmonic nanomaterials, upconversion, and radioactive nanoparticles that allow for deep-tissue imaging (e.g., NIR fluorescence and surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy) while having sharp emission profiles [224].

Microbiota analysis of samples harvested from feces, GI fluids, or gut biopsies has typically been based on metagenomics, metaproteomics, and more recently metatranscriptomics, which have already been comprehensively reviewed in the literature [225]. However, future development in new sequencing methods (e.g., nanopore) and microfluidic technology (e.g., single bacteria encapsulation systems) could advance metagenomics and single-cell analysis of the gut microbiome [226]. Current metagenomics has mainly used Illumina-based second-generation next-generation sequencing (NGS), which is not only time-consuming (sample to readout time around 2-3 days) but also limited to short-read sequencing [227]. Third-generation NGS, based on nanopore technologies, has enabled extremely fast (<6 hours) and long-read sequencing and has thus gained popularity in metagenomics analysis [228]. Given the recent advancement in graphene nanopore technologies, we envisage the continuous prosperity of nanopore-enabled genomic studies of the gut microbiome [229]. Similarly, in the past decade, there has been rapid development of advanced single-cell analysis technologies, from single-cell genomic, transcriptomic, and proteomic, to more recent colorimetric and epigenomic studies, with reduced costs and higher accuracy in single-cell sampling, encapsulation, and barcoding through advanced microfluidics design and software integration [230]. Although their applications in microbiota analysis are expected to significantly facilitate the discoveries of dynamic and heterogenous microbial pathways that cannot be achieved by bulk genomic studies, the translation of single-cell techniques into gut microbiome analysis has been limited [231]. Critical barriers include the extremely large population, as well as the smaller sizes, of gut microbes. The large number of cells will require improvement of microfluidic devices in terms of reliability during continuous sample processing and also adds significant challenges in terms of data analysis. To address this challenge, the recent development of the CRISPR-cas13 biosensing platform provides a promising tool for multiplex detection of RNAs [232], as compared to the previous qRT-PCR, loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) approaches, but how to incorporate CRISPR-cas13 into droplet systems for digitalized biosensing remains elusive [233]. More importantly, the sizes of water-in-oil droplets used for single-cell encapsulation in microfluidic devices may need to be decreased in cell size to reflect eukaryotic cells to bacteria [234]. Reducing the channel size alone may lead to higher chances of failed encapsulation and more miniaturized droplet sensing units [235]. Therefore, there will be challenges but also many opportunities to develop advanced microfluidic devices for single-cell technologies in gut microbiome analysis.

Developing sensitive, selective, multiplex, and point-of-care (POC) biosensing units can also significantly facilitate the analysis of the gut microbiome and their influence on host health and disease status (Figure 6). Although metagenomics is the gold standard for microbiome analysis, point-of-care biosensors that analyze crucial metabolites or disease biomarkers in fecal samples can accelerate the translation of findings in the gut microbiome into clinical diagnostics [236]. Compared to blood, fecal samples are easier to obtain and better suited for point-of-care diagnostics. Fecal biomarkers have been linked to a variety of diseases, including arthritis, cirrhosis, cancer, IBD, and metabolic and neurological diseases. For example, higher levels of branched-chain amino acids in fecal samples have been associated with insulin resistance in diabetic patients [237]. Many of the new biomarkers can be predicted by metagenomics or metaproteomics, which suggests an enormous opportunity for the future development of biosensors. For instance, a metagenomic comparison of subjects with Crohn's disease to healthy subjects suggested a higher population of facultative anaerobes in IBD-associated conditions [238]. This is further linked to higher levels of acylcarnitine, short-chain fatty acids, and bile acids and provides targets for the development of early-stage IBD biosensors [238]. In the past few decades, the material community has made strenuous efforts to develop various types of biosensors (e.g., electrochemical, plasmonic, and immunolateral flow assays and cantilever-based biosensors) previously developed for POC detection of proteins, small molecules, lipids, nucleic acids, and other biomarkers [239]. Given the identification of new biomarkers revealed by recent metagenomic and metaproteomic studies, material scientists have enormous opportunities to contribute to a variety of POC biosensors for analyzing host-gut microbiome interactions and monitoring host health status in human diseases.

In the past decade, the gut microbiome has been widely associated with a variety of common and debilitating human diseases, including Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease, diabetes, atherosclerosis, arthritis, and cancer [240]. As such, there has been immense interest in the medical, materials, chemistry, bioengineering, and biology communities to develop effective approaches for engineering and manipulating gut microbiota. In general, current approaches can be divided into suppressive or additive treatment based on mechanism-of-action (MOA). Suppressive therapies, typically mediated by antibiotics and based on specific or nonspecific inhibition of notorious bacteria, fungi, and viruses in the gut, are the most broadly adapted clinical strategies. Additive therapies, in comparison, are either based on the oral delivery of beneficial microbiota species (e.g., probiotics and genetically modified bacteria) or molecules (e.g., prebiotics) that augment the growth or metabolic activities of beneficial gut microbiota species [241]. Although direct oral administration of some of these additive or suppressive modalities has already led to effective therapeutics, challenges remain in how to improve their efficacy, achieve target specificity, and better understand the molecular mechanisms. Smart materials that can enhance the oral delivery of both suppressive and additive microbiome-targeted therapeutics may thus provide excellent solutions as the mechanistic underpinnings of bacterial functions, and interactions become more well understood. This section mainly discusses the new generation of microbiota modulatory approaches and highlights the opportunities for material engineering.

Smart materials have been applied for the delivery of various types of antibiotics, such as small molecules, peptides, proteins, and replicating entities to suppress microbes in the gut. Conventional antibiotics often target a broad spectrum of bacteria species even when only specific pathogens are causing diseases. This leads to the elimination of beneficial species in the gut microbiota, which has been associated with compromised outcomes in immunotherapy-based cancer treatment as well as other side effects. Furthermore, microbes treated with the same antibiotics repeatedly often develop resistance, ultimately leading to treatment failure. As such, an active direction of research is to develop more targeted antimicrobial approaches.

Engineered viruses, as parasites for selective killing of target bacteria, have been recently used for suppressive gut microbiota modulation, which is also known as bacteriophage therapy [242]. In nature, bacteriophages can infect the target and then replicate inside the bacteria, eventually leading to the death of the bacterial host. Unlike conventional small molecule-based antibiotics, bacteriophages can be engineered to incorporate capsid protein domains for enhanced binding to mucus or bacteria-derived biofilms [243, 244]. Thus, this engineered bacteriophage can have both better retention in the gut for prolonged antimicrobial applications and more specific targeting capability to certain microbiota communities [244]. In parallel, host adsorption factors can be engineered to change the target range of bacteria [245]. The killing of target bacteria, especially those that have developed resistance to conventional antibiotics or are protected by biofilms, can also be enhanced through genome engineering (e.g., CRISPR-Cas technologies) [246]. One critical barrier of bacteriophage therapy, however, is its limited efficiency in oral delivery due to the presence of a wide range of pH and proteases in the stomach and gut. Materials have been previously applied for the delivery of viruses, both through oral and parenteral routes in order to overcome these challenges; for example, a virus has been loaded into Escherichia coli for protected oral delivery into the host in the development of oral vaccines [247]. Viral-mimicking nanoparticles that enable oral delivery of plasmids have also been explored in diabetic treatments. However, whether these material-based approaches can be used to replicate the outcomes from bacteriophage-mediated therapies remains to be tested and thus represent a future direction for suppressive therapy in gut microbiome research.

Biomaterials have been widely applied for the oral delivery of small molecules, peptides, proteins, and genes, with some of them having direct effects on the gut microbiome. Specifically, compared to parenteral drug delivery, oral administration is often safer and more convenient and has a faster FDA approval rate. However, because of the biochemical barrier in the stomach (e.g., low pH and various proteases), the mucosal and epithelium barrier in the small intestine, as well as the rapid clearance in the GI, oral drug delivery has typically shown lower efficacy compared to parenteral routes. Biomaterials, such as nanoparticles, microneedle patches, polymeric gels, and other ingestible devices, can address these barriers in oral drug delivery by encapsulating drugs, protecting them from aggregation or enzymatic degradation, enhancing GI retention, facilitating their penetration across the mucosal layers, and enabling tissue-specific drug delivery once entering systemic circulation [204, 248, 249].

In addition to polymeric nanomaterials, inorganic nanoparticles have also been studied for their probiotic effects, even though their therapeutic functions through microbiome modulation are less explored. For instance, ceria nanoparticles have been previously studied as a nanozyme to scavenge reactive oxygen species which may promote the growth of bacteria. Also, ceria nanoparticles have also shown effects on the stimulation of the growth of Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium species that demonstrate beneficial effects on obesity reduction and dyslipidemia. Interestingly, in vivo oral treatment of Balb/c mice with nanoceria leads to a significant reduction in blood cholesterol levels, but the detailed mechanisms remain unclear [255]. Selenium nanoparticles have also shown modulatory effects on microbiome that further leads to enhanced immune responses of host mice toward breast cancer cells. In parallel, while one report suggests that selenium nanoparticles stimulate the growth of Lactobacillus brevis, another report found the antimicrobial effects of selenium nanoparticles on Candida albicans. Given the vast array of inorganic nanoparticles developed in the past two decades, systematically understanding their therapeutic effects through modulation of the gut microbiome represents another challenge for the next decade's research.

The discovery of the beneficial roles of human gut bacteria in maintaining human health has inspired many probiotic therapies that are mediated through oral administration of bacterial species such as E. coli, Bifidobacterium spp., and Lactobacillus spp. In parallel, bacteria can be engineered to express therapeutic proteins and other biomolecules. Additional efforts have also been made to evaluate engineered bacteria for in situ applications and prolonged release of recombinant proteins and other biologics to enhance their oral bioavailability and enable environmental stimuli-responsive on-demand delivery [256]. Therefore, harnessing the beneficial effects of bacteria with both natural therapeutic effects and the capabilities of releasing biologic drugs represent new paradigms in oral cell therapy and drug delivery. Through combined efforts from material scientists, bioengineers, biologists, and clinicians, the efficacy of orally delivered bacteria for the treatment of inflammatory, infectious, and metabolic diseases has been studied. Nevertheless, to achieve the ultimate goal of fully autonomous directed bacterial therapies, several challenges remain. First, personalizing bacteria species for the treatment of specific diseases requires significant advancement in metagenomics and metatranscriptomics as well as synthetic biology. Second, similar to oral virus delivery, achieving high bioavailability and retention of orally ingested bacteria in the low-pH and protease-rich environment of the GI tract remains a critical barrier that needs to be overcome [47]. Lastly, combining spatially controlled delivery of bacteria combined with temporally controlled release of biotherapeutics can enhance bacteria therapy, but how to implement this goal remains largely elusive given the complex and dynamic GI environment in vivo. Materials in the forms of pills, enteric coatings (e.g., Eudragit®), membrane polymerization, and gels have already been applied to address some of these limitations (Figure 7). Gene engineering approaches that increase the stress tolerance of bacteria and also enhance the survival of bacteria delivered orally are currently being studied [47]. However, their overall bioavailability remains to be improved, which can be achieved by more robust protection from the GI environment and in situ release in a spatially controlled manner and also by using smart biomaterials to enhance their retention in the GI tract.

In general, material-mediated oral bacterial therapy has shown excellent potential for treating gut microbiome-associated diseases by enhancing survival, bioavailability, and gut retention and facilitating on-demand and spatially controlled release. Given the species diversity in the gut microbiome, the enhanced oral delivery of multiple bacteria species using a coating or other scaffolding materials remains to be realized. Also, most current work has focused on the delivery and modulation of bacteria species in the gut. However, recent advancements in the study of the virome revealed the increasingly important role of viral species in gut microbiome-associated diseases. Using biomaterials for enhanced oral delivery of beneficial viral species may provide a new perspective on the role of viruses in homeostasis maintenance in the gut. Also, there has been a large number of studies that have applied materials for drug, protein, and gene delivery; both drugs and the delivery vehicles may have additive or suppressive effects on the gut microbiome, but most studies thus far have only focused on their therapeutic outcomes on host health. Incorporating gut microbiome analysis in future oral drug delivery studies would not only help identify the still concealed MOA of drugs but also lead to new therapeutic modalities for modulation of the gut microbiome.

Several animal models and/or systems (e.g., antibiotic, prebiotic, or probiotic exposure, FMT, and GF) have been utilized to evaluate the role of the gut microbiota on gut-brain axis disorders and have lent evidence to the idea that targeting the gut microbiota may be a novel therapeutic target for treating gut-brain axis disorders, including DGBIs and mood dysfunction [63, 269, 270]. Utilization of these different models in concert is critical to understanding the true functions of the microbiota on these, and other, neurologic and/or psychiatric disorders. Before one can target specific communities, or even individual species, of gut microbiota, further research needs to be focused on the specific functions of individual bacteria and the impact of their interactions with other bacteria as well as with host factors. As these aspects are elucidated, a more targeted approach involving probiotics, prebiotics, genetically engineered gut microbiota, and dietary supplements can be implemented.

Diverse neurological disease pathways (e.g., neuroinflammation, neurogenesis, myelination, and protein aggregations) and gastrointestinal diseases (e.g., constipation, colitis, and Hirschsprung's disease) have been associated with the MGB axis [271]. Single-cell omics have also been constantly increasing the complexity of the ENS [272]. Future application of spatial transcriptomics into the analysis of MGB is also expected to offer ever-increasing biological targets for drug development and delivery, opening numerous opportunities for biomaterial innovation (Figure 8). On the one hand, to facilitate these discoveries of novel biological targets, real-time profiling of gut microbiota, in vivo tracking of neurotransmitters, and noninvasive imaging of MGB signaling would be tremendously helpful. Advanced sampling methods, biosensors, imaging enhancers, and instrumentation would be the key to realizing these goals. Building more reproducible, more biologically relevant, and more complex in vitro models for high-throughput drug screening is another way to accelerate the discoveries of drugs and screening of novel drug delivery devices. On the other hand, how to use these new biological targets to guide the next generation of oral drug delivery systems is equally important. For instance, different subtype neurons play distinctive roles in MGB signaling, but there have been no oral delivery systems that can effectively target subtype neurons. Although advanced viral gene delivery systems have partially realized cell-type-specific delivery into the CNS, their applications in ENS have been limited, especially in the context of oral delivery [273]. In vivo screening nanoparticle libraries with diverse charge, size, coating, and targeting ligands and barcoded with DNAs could pave the road for nonviral drug and gene oral delivery to the ENS in a cell-specific manner. In parallel, the spatial heterogeneity of MGB signaling molecules also provides multiple excellent opportunities for developing regiospecific drug delivery devices. Equally importantly, in terms of gut-to-brain signaling, investigating retrograde uptake and transportation of nanoparticles would be of significant interest both for neurological disorder treatment and a fundamental understanding of MGB. Specifically, studies have suggested that protein aggregates such as α-synuclein and β-amyloid could be mediated by the vagus nerve to the brain and induce Parkinsonism and Alzheimer's disease, but this is under active debate. Nanoparticles that have a similar size to protein aggregates and also advanced imaging modalities may provide excellent insights into these important questions.

Control and manipulation of the gut microbiome for therapeutic applications have gained favorable attention due to their significant potential for reducing the incidence and severity of a wide range of human conditions and diseases. However, current approaches, such as antibiotics, broad-spectrum probiotics, and fecal microbiota transplants, nonspecifically perturb the existing microbiome community and potentially impact many species of beneficial commensal bacteria [274]. In this regard, gene-editing tools, which involve the delivery of transgenes into specific members of the endogenous microbiota, have been developed for more specific modulation of the gut microbiome. To date, some gene-editing tools have emerged that have already been implemented, such as transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALENs), zinc finger nucleases (ZFNs), and CRISPR-Cas systems [275]. These gene-editing techniques enable the addition or removal of the functions of the gut microbiota in a precise way. Specifically, RNA-guided CRISPR-Cas9 systems that have been applied to site-specifically edit bacterial genomes and Ll.LtrB group II introns (retrotransposons that go through RNA intermediary steps) have been successfully repurposed for targeted gene editing of multiple bacteria. Nonetheless, to fully reach their potential and initiate an efficient microbial gene therapy, several advances are needed.

Material-mediated oral gene modulation tactics are hindered by the degradative conditions of the upper GI tract and poor intestinal absorption [279]. Physiological modification strategies may be needed to suppress gastric acidification to enable a relatively high gene-editing efficiency [280]. Hence, increased knowledge and functional annotation of microbial genomes, coupled with advances in delivery strategy (particularly noninvasive delivery strategies), are required to enhance genome-editing efficiency, to predict the effects of particular genomic modifications, and to maximize the potency of gene-editing tools.

The influences of the gut microbiome on host physiology are so pervasive that the microbiota has been regarded not only as a gripping target for pathogen-related illness but also as an effective prescription to enhance general well-being. Advances in our understanding of the gut microbiome, involving interactions between bacterial species residing in the gut and generation or modification of metabolites that impact host physiology, have brought to light an array of opportunities for the development of novel therapeutics [281].

In this context, nanomaterials with therapeutic function and superior protection ability against biochemical barriers (e.g., pH and enzymatic) may play a more important role in future translation. In the next phase of the preclinical study, the considerable variation in the microbiota between individuals should be evaluated, as well as the dynamic ecosystem of human gut microbiota. Given the complexity of the microbiota, manipulating the gut microbiome for therapeutic development requires a more thorough understanding of the precise roles and functions of gut microbiota and their interactions with the host and each other. Such research will likely further emphasize the need for individually tailored nanomedicines. Further, a material-engineered gut microbiome will need to overcome the native microflora's resistance to new residents [286]. Achieving targeted nanomedicines to exert therapeutic functions in situ or deliver gene-editing tools for manipulation purposes is of great significance. We envisage that modeling, simulation, and computational analysis can significantly aid the tunable design of nanomedicines, and diverse materials with multiple functions will be inaugurated to hew out the landscape of this field. We also anticipate that the vista of material engineering in the gut microbiome will expand and change rapidly in the near future, yielding novel and safe therapeutics for use by patients and clinicians.

The authors declare no conflicts of interest regarding the publication of this article.

L. Yang and K.W. Leong conceived the manuscript; L. Yang, Y.H. Lin, Y. Zhu, S. Ding, K.G. Margolis, K.W. Leong, and L. Yang wrote the draft; L. Yang designed the figures; L. Yang, Y.H. Lin, Y. Zhu, S. Ding, K.G. Margolis, and K.W. Leong edited the manuscript.

