The Changes in the Frog Gut Microbiome and Its Putative Oxygen-Related Phenotypes Accompanying the Development of Gastrointestinal Complexity and Dietary Shift



There are many examples of symbiotic and reciprocal relationships in ecological systems; animal gut microbiome–host interactions are one such kind of bidirectional and complex relationship. Here, we utilized several approaches (16S rRNA gene sequencing, metagenomics, and transcriptomics) to explore potential gut microbiome–host interactions accompanying the development of gastrointestinal complexity and a dietary shift from metamorphosis to maturity in ornamented pygmy frogs (Microhyla fissipes). We identified the possible coevolution between a particular gut microbial group (increased putative fat-digesting Erysipelotrichaceae and chitin-digesting Bacteroides and Ruminococcaceae) and the host dietary shift [from herbivore to insectivore (high proportion of dietary chitin and fat)] during metamorphosis. We also found that the remodeling and complexity of the gastrointestinal system during metamorphosis might have a profound effect on the gut microbial community (decreasing facultative anaerobic Proteobacteria and increasing anaerobic Firmicutes) and its putative oxygen-related phenotypes. Moreover, a high proportion of chitin-digesting bacteria and increased carbohydrate metabolism by gut microbiomes at the climax of metamorphosis would help the frog’s nutrition and energy needs during metamorphosis and development. Considering the increased expression of particular host genes (e.g., chitinase) in juvenile frogs, we speculate that host plays an important role in amphibian metamorphosis, and their symbiotic gut microbiome may help in this process by providing the nutrition and energy needs. We provide this basic information for the amphibian conservation and managements.

In ecology, there are many examples of symbiotic and reciprocal relationships (e.g., algae and marine invertebrates, mycorrhiza, gut microbes and animal hosts, and prokaryotes and protists or animals) (Smith and Douglas, 1987). Animal gut microbiome–host interactions play important roles in host nutrition, fitness, and health (Ley et al., 2008; Kinross et al., 2011; Zhu et al., 2011; Nicholson et al., 2012; McFall-Ngai et al., 2013; Wlodarska et al., 2015; Gould et al., 2018; Wei, 2018). The gut microbiota is involved in the regulation of multiple host metabolic pathways, giving rise to interactive host–microbiota metabolic, signaling, and immune-inflammatory axes (Nicholson et al., 2012). Additionally, the host, in turn, shapes the gut microbiome (Yatsunenko et al., 2012; Gould et al., 2018). In humans, the gut microbiome displays changes in composition and function in response to dietary changes during human development and physiological variations (Yatsunenko et al., 2012). For example, the abundance of Bifidobacterium (involved in human milk oligosaccharide degradation) decreases significantly from infancy to adulthood, and adults harbor different gut microbial communities (Yatsunenko et al., 2012). The changes in the gut microbial community under host development are a complex process involving many factors (e.g., gastrointestinal development, dietary changes, host genotype, geography, and environment) (Ley et al., 2008; Yatsunenko et al., 2012).

Moreover, during metamorphosis, the endocrine cells of the digestive tract are also redistributed. Such changes [including the appearance of chitinases (EC: 3.2.14)] may be associated with modifications in feeding behavior (from herbivore to insectivore) (Hourdry et al., 1996). For example, chitin is a polymer of N-acetyl glucosamine and is a primary component of exoskeletons of arthropods (e.g., crustaceans and insects) (Kramer and Muthukrishnan, 1997; Doucet and Retnakaran, 2012). Chitin can be degraded by chitinases to generate GlcNAc (N-acetyl-d-glucosamine) and chito-oligosaccharides (Kramer and Muthukrishnan, 1997; Doucet and Retnakaran, 2012). Thus, here, we applied several approaches (16S rRNA gene sequencing, metagenomics, and transcriptomics of the host) to explore the potential gut microbiome dynamics in response to the gastrointestinal complexity and dietary shift from metamorphosis to mature adults including the following: (1) the putative dissimilarity in the gut microbial community throughout frog development; (2) the decrease in oxidative stress tolerance of gut microbiomes throughout metamorphosis; and (3) the potential adaptation to the insectivore diet (e.g., high proportion of chitin) in this symbiotic and reciprocal relationship.

The digestive tract of tadpoles in group A (MA, S32-41) consists of the esophagus, stomach, and small and large intestines; the small intestine is long and is the most significant part of the gastrointestinal tract (Figure 1A). The ratio of the intestinal length to body length was lowest among the four stages. The stomach was only beginning to differentiate and could not be distinguished (Figure 1A). The chamber was full of digestive contents or juices mixed with algae. The primary diet was Spirulina and Chlorella. In group B (MB, S42-44), the intestine had undergone extensive changes. The length of the digestive tract was shorter (Figure 1A), whereas the upper and middle digestive tract expanded gradually (Figure 1A). The stomachs showed bulges compared to stomachs in group A. The inner wall of the intestinal tract was smooth, and there were few folds, whereas some surface absorption cells and goblet cells could be seen (Figure 2B). The primary diet was Spirulina and Chlorella, but organisms at this stage reduce eating.

In group C (MC, S45), metamorphosis had ended, tail degeneration was complete, and the tadpoles had become froglets (Figure 1A). The length of the entire gastrointestinal tract of the frogs was much shorter than that of tadpoles (Figure 1A). However, the ratio of the intestinal length to body length was highest among the four stages (Figure 2A). The upper gastrointestinal tract of the digestive tract was greatly expanded and appeared to be a saccade chamber, in which there was a visible protrusion. Histological observation showed that the epithelium had developed into the multiple-folded adult structure to increase the area of nutrient absorption (Figure 2C). In addition, the connective tissue and outer muscle were abundant and thickened. The amphibians shift from aquatic to terrestrial life. They also shift from a herbivore to an insectivore diet (e.g., termite and flea). In group D (MD, mature individuals), the gastrointestinal tract had finished intricate patterning, where the stomach, foregut, midgut, and terminal hindgut were discernible (Figure 1A). The intestinal wall epithelium was thicker than in previous stages and had more folds, and short rod-like villi were clearly visible. The lamina propria was also dense. There were a large number of goblet cells on the surface (Figure 2D). The major diet at this stage was mealworms and Drosophila.

In this study, we gained the 18 pooled samples, and each pooled sample came from 10 individuals (Table 1). The Illumina HiSeq platform was used to generate the bacteria 16S rRNA sequences for these pooled samples. In order to avoid the bias in the sequencing depth, we rarefied our sequencing depth at ∼53,809 sequences per pooled sample based on the smallest sequencing depth in these pooled samples. The predominant phyla in the gut microbiota of the ornamented pygmy frogs in this study included Firmicutes, Proteobacteria, Verrucomicrobia, Bacteroidetes, Actinobacteria, and Cyanobacteria (Figure 1B). From metamorphosis to mature adults, the relative abundance of Firmicutes increased (MA: 22%, MB: 34%, MC: 65%, and MD: 50%), and the relative abundance of Proteobacteria (MA: 55%, MB: 30%, MC: 17%, and MD: 17%) and Bacteroidetes (MA: 10%, MB: 6%, MC: 4%, and MD: 3%) decreased. The relative abundance of Verrucomicrobia showed high variation among groups (MA: 2%, MB: 13%, MC: 1%, and MD: 20%). Linear discriminant analysis Effect Size (LEfSe) identified the gut microbial phyla with significantly differentiating abundance among groups (from metamorphosis to mature adults) including dominant Firmicutes (highest in MC), Proteobacteria (highest in MA), Chloroflexi (highest in MB), Cyanobacteria (highest in MB), Planctomycetes (highest in MB), and Fusobacteria (highest in MB) (Supplementary Figure S1).

Non-metric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) analysis showed gut microbial dissimilarity among groups (one-way permutational multivariate ANOVA: F = 4.2, p = 0.0001), and the gut microbiome of each group belonged to one different cluster. All of the pairwise comparisons among groups using Unifrac unweighted distance were significantly different (Figure 4B), and the pairwise distance showed that the gut microbial dissimilarity increased over the development stages to some extent (Figure 4C). For example, the Unifrac unweighted distance between MA and the other three groups or between MB and the other two groups (MC, MD) increased. The pairwise SIMPER test was used to further investigate the contribution of each gut microbial genus to the observed dissimilarity (Table 1). The greatest contribution to the dissimilarity between MA and each other group was caused by the highest abundance of the genera Rickettsiella (Proteobacteria_ Coxiellaceae) and Legionella (Proteobacteria_ Legionellaceae) in the MA groups. The greatest contribution to the dissimilarity between MB and each other group was caused by the high relative abundance of the genera Akkermansia (Verrucomicrobia_ Verrucomicrobiaceae) and Tyzzerella 3 (Firmicutes_ Lachnospiraceae) in the MB groups. The greatest contribution to the dissimilarity between MC and each other group was caused by the highest abundance of the genera [Anaerorhabdus] furcosa group (Firmicutes_Erysipelotrichaceae) and [Eubacterium] fissicatena group (Firmicutes_ Lachnospiraceae) in the MC groups. The greatest contribution to the dissimilarity between MD and each other group was caused by the high abundance of genera Akkermansia (Verrucomicrobia_ Verrucomicrobiaceae) and Ruminococcaceae_uncultured (Firmicutes_ Ruminococcaceae) in the MD groups.

The gut microbiome of MC had the lowest abundance of the aerobic bacteria (Figure 5A), which may be due to the low abundance of Proteobacteria and Verrucomicrobia (Figure 5E). The relative abundance of anaerobic bacteria increased from metamorphosis to mature adults; the lowest significant abundance was observed in MA, and the highest significant abundance was observed in MC (Figure 5B; pairwise Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon test, p < 0.05). The changes in the abundance of Firmicutes mostly contributed to these variations (Figure 5F). The changes in the relative abundance of facultatively anaerobic and oxidative stress–tolerant bacteria decreased from metamorphosis to mature adults, and MA had the highest significant abundance (Figures 5C,D; pairwise Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon test, p < 0.05). The changes in the abundance of Proteobacteria mostly contributed to these variations (Figures 5G,H).

We obtained 10 metagenomes (four from MB and six from MD) in 10 pooled gut content samples from 100 individuals. The major contaminants, especially in MD metagenomes, came from the host and the diet: Chordata (49.46%) and Arthropoda (25.43%) (Supplementary Tables S2, S3). Thus, after removing the contamination using three steps, the clean data set of prokaryote sequences for six metagenomes was very small (Supplementary Table S4) and would introduce bias compared with the four MB metagenomes (with the low contamination rate and the high proportion of clean data, mostly from prokaryotes). First, to reduce the bias caused by uneven data sets, we took one conservative strategy to investigate the unique genes detected in only most of the six MD genomes, none of which were identified in any MB metagenomes. Second, considering the dietary shift from herbivore to insectivore, we investigated the bacterial chitinases (EC: 3.2.1.14) degrading the chitin and their putative bacterial taxonomical assignment among these 10 clean metagenomes. The mean abundance of the gene coding for putative chitinase was 0.010 and 0.025% in MB and MD, respectively. Taxon assignment of these genes identified their putative bacterial origins, including genera Bacteroidetes (BAC), Cyanobacteria (CYA), Firmicutes (FIR), Proteobacteria (PRO) (Figure 6A). The 16S data revealed that most of these genera were rare in these four groups; only Bacteroides (1.57% in MD) and Ruminiclostridium (1.19%) had a relatively higher abundance in MD than in the other groups (Figure 6B).

Moreover, we also investigated whether the unique genes might code some putative enzymes involved in the degradation of chitin in MD metagenome after their dietary shift (from herbivore to insectivore) compared with the MB metagenome. Trehalose is the non-reducing disaccharide of glucose and is the principal sugar circulating in the blood or hemolymph of most insects (Thompson, 2003). According to the comparison in the metagenomes between MB and MD, three unique genes coding for putative trehalose-specific IIB component [EC: 2.7.1.201], N,N′-diacetylchitobiose phosphorylase [EC: 2.4.1.280], and histone-lysine N-methyltransferase SETMAR [EC: 2.1.1.43] were identified in the MD metagenomes (Figures 6C,E). The first two genes were successfully assigned to gained taxa. The genes coding for the putative trehalose-specific IIB component involved in transporting extracellular trehalose into the cell came from Enterococcus devriesei (Firmicutes_ Enterococcaceae). The 16S data revealed that the MD adult group had the highest mean abundance of E. devriesei among these groups (Figure 6D). The genes coding for the putative N,N′-diacetylchitobiose phosphorylase involved in chitin catabolism [catalyzing chitobiose to N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc)] came from Ruminococcaceae and Ruthenibacterium lactatiformans (Firmicutes_ Ruminococcaceae). The 16S data revealed that the relative abundance of Ruminococcaceae sharply increased from MC to MD, and MD samples had the highest mean abundance among these groups (Figure 6F). Thus, the metagenomes in the MD might have some features in response to the insectivorous diet.

One of the profound changes during metamorphosis is the dietary shift from herbivore to insectivore (herbivore: MA and MB, insectivore: MC and MD). The gene expression coding for the putative chitinase and chitin-binding peritrophin-A domain increased during metamorphosis, and the expression of this gene was most significant in the MC stage among the three stages [S30 (premetamorphosis), MB, and MC] (Figures 7A,B). However, the expression of genes coding for putative chitin synthase was rare, and there was no significant difference in expression level among these three stages. Thus, during the dietary shift, the juvenile frog in the MC stage eating insects had higher chitin-digesting gene expression level than tadpoles eating herbivorous food.

Significant changes in the gut microbiome and its related phenotypes were detected from metamorphosis to mature adult stages, which may reflect the putative relationship between the host and its symbiotic gut microbiome during the shift in diet and lifestyle and the remodeling of the gastrointestinal system.

Additionally, in the MD (adult) stages, we found that the proportion of anaerobic bacteria decreased compared to the MC stage. A carnivorous animal has a relatively simple and short digestive system (Hume, 2002). The adult frog has a large food intake (from large insects) compared to the juvenile frog in the MC stages. Thus, the MD stage will increase the change of colonization by aerobic environmental bacteria, such as Verrucomicrobia, acquired from their new living conditions and even from their new diet. Verrucomicrobia is one of the dominant bacteria in the environment. The decrease in alpha diversity of the gut microbiome from metamorphosis (herbivorous) to juvenile and mature frogs (insect-enriched) has also been detected between herbivorous and carnivorous vertebrates (Ley et al., 2008).

Here, we identified some putative relationships between the frog and its gut microbiome. (1) We revealed the gut microbiome developmental association that was influenced by host dietary sources. (2) The remodeling of the gastrointestinal system during metamorphosis might also have a profound effect on the gut microbial composition. (3) The potential functions of the gut microbiome could help the frog’s nutritional and energy needs during metamorphosis and development. Therefore, these findings provide the basic information for amphibian management and conservation.

A total of 80 individual tadpoles and 160 individual frogs (Supplementary Table S1) were collected from the habitat around the Wild Research Center of the Chengdu Institute of Biology (E: 104°9′12, N: 31°6′35) located in Shifang County in Sichuan Province from June to August 2017. Based on our previous experience on the feeding and development of M. fissipes in the captive environment and direct observation in the wild field [e.g., Zhao et al. (2016)], we could identify these tadpoles from M. fissipes and estimate the primary diet of M. fissipes. The tadpoles were collected gently with fishing nets, and the young and adult individuals were captured after metamorphosis at night with sterile gloves (usually 21:00 to 24:00 is the active period). To ensure the integrity of the contents in the digestive tract, the frogs were immediately euthanized with MS-222. Tadpoles were treated at a concentration of 0.3 to 0.6 g/L MS-222 for 2 to 3 min, and frogs were treated for 5 to 8 min or more. After washing the surface of the animals repeatedly with sterile distilled water to avoid residual solution, we removed the holonomic gastrointestinal tract from the abdominal cavity and scraped the inner wall of the intestines with sterile blades or squeezed the intestines directly by hand. All of the gut contents or digestive juices were placed into 2-mL centrifugal tubes and then stored at −80°C until DNA extraction. Because of the lack of enough gastrointestinal content in a single tadpole, subadult or even adult individuals, we refer to the mixed treatments as the northern leopard tadpoles and frogs (Kohl et al., 2013). In our study, four typical stages of growth and developmental process (Shimizu-Nishikawa et al., 2003; Wang et al., 2017) were selected: before forelimb and after hindlimb growth (S32–41), marked as group MA; during the peak of metamorphosis and when the forelimb began to grow (S42–44), labeled as group MB; frogs that had recently completed metamorphosis (S45), labeled as group MC; and sexually mature individuals, marked as group MD. In total, we obtained 18 qualified samples of intestinal contents or digestive juices, including four tubes in group MA, four tubes in group MB, five tubes in group MC, and five tubes in group MD. Ten tadpole individuals were pooled for each tube (Table 1).

We measured the mean ratio of the intestinal length to body length among four groups (MA, 3; MB, 3; MC, 3; and MD, 5 individuals). A stereo microscope (Nanjing Jiangnan Yongxin JSZ8 Stereo Microscope, Nanjing, China) with an MShot Digital Imaging System (microscope camera Mc50-N, Guangzhou, China) was used to observe, take photos of tadpoles, and measure their body length and intestinal length. Then, the small intestines were dissected and 4% paraformaldehyde fixed. After dehydration in a graded series of ethanol and transparency by xylene, intestines were embedded in paraffin and sectioned in serial transverse sections (4 μm thick) using an RM2016 [Leica RM2016 Manual Rotary Microtome (Wetzlar, Germany); Leica Microsystems]. Dewaxed serial sections were stained with Delafield’s hematoxylin and counterstained with eosin to show general histological characteristics.

Gastrointestinal samples were thawed on ice, and microbial genomic DNA was extracted using a QIAamp Fast DNA Stool Mini Kit (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The integrity of the DNA was visually assessed using 1.0% agarose gel electrophoresis and quantified using a Qubit and NanoDrop. The highly variable V4 region of the 16S rRNA gene was amplified from community genomic DNA using the bacteria-specific universal primers 515F (GTGCCAGCMGCCGCGGTAA) and 806R (GGACTACHVGGGTWTCTAAT). Polymerase chain reaction was performed in triplicate using a 25 μL reaction containing ∼40 ng of DNA template, 2.5 μL of 10 × TransStart Taq buffer, 1 μL of each forward and reverse primer, 2 μL of dNTPs (2.5 mM), 0.25 μL of TransStart Taq DNA Polymerase, and 16.25 μL of ddH2O. The polymerase chain reaction amplification conditions were as follows: initial denaturation at 94°C for 5 min, followed by 35 cycles of denaturation at 94°C for 30 s, annealing at 53°C for 30 s, elongation at 72°C for 30 s, and a final extension at 72°C for 10 min. Polymerase chain reaction products were purified with a Universal DNA Purification Kit (TIANGEN, Beijing, China), and barcoded V4 amplicons were sequenced using the Illumina HiSeq platform (HiSeq2500 PE250).

Raw sequences were generated from the Illumina HiSeq sequencing platform. We performed quality control (e.g., demultiplexing and denoising) and taxon classification (based on Silva 132 version) in QIIME1.9 (Caporaso et al., 2010). We obtained the operational taxonomic unit (OTU) abundance tables and diversity results for downstream analysis. We chose to rarefy our sequencing depth at ∼53,809 (according to the lowest number of sequences of one sample in this study) to equalize the sampling depth across all samples.

We used LEfSe (Segata et al., 2011) to determine the gut microbial taxon with significantly differentiating abundance among groups (development stages). The relative abundance table of the bacteria families was inputted into Cytoscape 3.4.0 (Shannon et al., 2003). And then, we used the plugin CoNet (Faust and Raes, 2016) to generate co-occurrence plots using these parameters (Spearman index, ρ = 0.7). CoNet can detect significant non-random patterns of co-occurrence (mutual exclusion and copresence) in abundance and incidence data (Faust and Raes, 2016). The alpha diversity (e.g., phylogenetic diversity) among groups was analyzed using one-way ANOVA in SPSS Statistics 20.0 (IBM SPSS, 2011).

The Bray-Curtis distance for species abundance was used to generate NMDS in PAST3 (Hammer et al., 2001). Moreover, to evaluate the effect of development stages on the gut microbiota composition, we performed one-way permutational multivariate ANOVA on Bray-Curtis dissimilarities in species abundance in PAST3 (Hammer et al., 2001). To determine the dissimilarity trend over the development stages, we performed pairwise comparisons among groups on Unifrac unweighted distance (Lozupone et al., 2011). The contribution of each gut microbial genus to the observed dissimilarity between groups was performed by Similarity Percentages test (SIMPER) in PAST3 (Hammer et al., 2001).

We used BugBase to predict the oxygen-related phenotypes of the frog gut microbiome (Ward et al., 2017). BugBase is an algorithm that predicts organism-level coverage of functional pathways as well as biologically interpretable phenotypes such as oxygen tolerance and Gram staining within complex microbiomes using either marker gene sequencing data (e.g., 16S) or whole-genome shotgun data (Ward et al., 2017). For example, reference databases in BugBase included Integrated Microbial Genomes (Markowitz et al., 2011), the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) (Kanehisa et al., 2011), and the Pathosystems Resource Integration Center (Snyder et al., 2006), which were categorized to six major phenotypes (e.g., Gram staining, oxygen tolerance, ability to form biofilms, mobile element content, pathogenicity, and oxidative stress tolerance) (Ward et al., 2017). Here, the OTU table of 16S data was normalized by 16S copy number and then was input into the BugBase to gain the trait prediction by algorithm methods based on the reference databases (Ward et al., 2017). Pairwise Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon tests were performed among groups.

Metagenomic shotgun sequencing libraries were prepared and sequenced at Shanghai Biozeron Biological Technology Co. For each sample, 1 μg of genomic DNA was used with Illumina’s TruSeq for library preparation. Libraries were sequenced using the Illumina HiSeq 4000, PE 150.

HiSeq reads were filtered using custom Perl scripts and Trimmomatic (parameters: Trimmomatic-0.30.jar PE -phred33 LEADING:0 TRAILING:20 SLIDINGWINDOW:50:20 MINLEN:50) (Bolger et al., 2014) to remove (i) all reads less than 50 bp in length, (ii) reads with degenerate bases (N′s), and (iii) all duplicates defined as sequences whose initial 20 nucleotides were identical and shared an overall identity of greater than 97% throughout the length of the shortest read. After blasting with the NR databases using diamond (Buchfink et al., 2014), we removed the putative host (frog) and diet (insect) contamination and gained clean reads. This was the first step to remove putative host contamination. Megahit (Li et al., 2015) was used to assemble the clean reads (removing the contigs with coverage <60%), and prodigal was used for gene prediction (Hyatt et al., 2010). Then, we blasted these genes against the NR database in the National Center for Biotechnology Information using diamond and gained the putative taxon assignments of these genes per metagenome (Buchfink et al., 2014). Thus, we classified the taxon information for these genes into three categories, such as prokaryotes, and the different contamination sources (e.g., host, diet). Then, we used salmon (Patro et al., 2015) to map the clean reads to these genes per metagenome and kept only the reads theoretically belonging to prokaryotes. This was the second step in removing the host or diet (insect) contamination per metagenome. We used megahit (Li et al., 2015) to assemble these clean reads into contigs and remove the contigs with coverage of less than 60%. Prodigal (Hyatt et al., 2010) was used for gene prediction from these high-quality (flited) contigs, and we gained the gene files in this step. CD-HIT (Li and Godzik, 2006) was used to construct non-redundant gene sets with less than 90% overlap and less than 95% shared sequence identity from these gene files. We used diamond (Buchfink et al., 2014) to conduct species annotation for the non-redundant gene profile, remove the genes putatively belonging to the host and diet, and gain the final clean non-redundant gene profile. This was the final step to remove contamination. The referred published frog genome is not well assembled, which lead to the poor blasting for some metagenome reads. Thus, we used this third step to remove the putative contaminations based on non-redundant gene sets.

Based on these gene profiles, we used salmon (Patro et al., 2015) to map the clean reads (from step 2 after removing contamination) per metagenome to the clean non-redundant gene profile and determine the TPM abundance (transcripts per million reads) of these non-redundant gene profiles in each metagenome. Finally, the clean non-redundant gene sequences were searched against the KEGG database using diamond (Buchfink et al., 2014). The KEGG orthology, enzyme commission, and KEGG pathways associated with each sequence were determined. We calculated the relative abundance of KEGG pathways using TPM (transcripts per million) (Wagner et al., 2012).

We reanalyzed the transcriptome data in our previously published study (Zhao et al., 2016). These transcriptomes represented the three key developmental stages of M. fissipes: premetamorphosis (stage 30), metamorphic climax (stage 42, MB), and completion of metamorphosis (stage 45, MC). Three individuals from each of the three stages were used as independent biological replicates. Here, we focused on the genes coding for putative enzymes involved in the chitin metabolic pathway due to the dietary changes in these frogs. To compare the unigene expression levels, each unigene was further normalized by fragments per kilobase of exon model per million mapped reads for the three developmental stages (Trapnell et al., 2010). The transcriptome analysis focused on the changes in gene expression during metamorphosis and did not include the adult stage samples.

This study has also used the previous published transcriptome data (Zhao et al., 2016) with accession number (GECV00000000) at NCBI.

The 16S sequencing data and mapfile have been deposited in figshare (10.6084/m9.figshare.11627460). The raw metagenome data is being uploaded to NCBI (National Center for Biotechnology Information) with the accession number PRJNA601807. The requirement of the raw data and materials in this study can also send to LZ (nc.ca.zoi@fluhz).

The animal use protocol in this study (permit: 2015-AR-JJP-01) was reviewed and approved by the Animal Ethical and Welfare Committee of Chengdu Institute of Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chengdu, China. The Chairman of this committee is Dr. Xinquan Zhao.

LZ and JJ conceived the project. MZ, LX, XW, and LC collected the samples. MZ performed the experiments. LZ, MZ, HC, LL, and GL analyzed the data. MZ, QC, LZ, JJ, and LG wrote the manuscript. All authors gave final approval for publication.

HC was employed by Hangzhou Legenomics Bio-Pham Technology Co., Ltd. The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

Funding. This research was financially supported by the National Key Program of Research and Development, Ministry of Science and Technology (2016YFC0503200), Important Research Project of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (KJZG-EW-L13), National Natural Scientific Funds (31491964) to JP, Sichuan Science and Technology Project (2017JY0339), West Light Foundation of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (2015XBZG_XBQNXZ_B_011) to LL, and the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (PAPD).

The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fmicb.2020.00162/full#supplementary-material

