CAR-T cell therapy-related cytokine release syndrome and therapeutic response is modulated by the gut microbiome in hematologic malignancies

Immunotherapy utilizing chimeric antigen receptor T cell (CAR-T) therapy holds promise for hematologic malignancies, however, response rates and associated immune-related adverse effects widely vary among patients. Here we show, by comparing diversity and composition of the gut microbiome during different CAR-T therapeutic phases in the clinical trial ChiCTR1800017404, that the gut flora characteristically differs among patients and according to treatment stages, and might also reflect patient response to therapy in relapsed/refractory multiple myeloma (MM; n = 43), acute lympholastic leukemia (ALL; n = 23) and non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL; n = 12). We observe significant temporal differences in diversity and abundance of Bifidobacterium, Prevotella, Sutterella, and Collinsella between MM patients in complete remission (n = 24) and those in partial remission (n = 11). Furthermore, we find that patients with severe cytokine release syndrome present with higher abundance of Bifidobacterium, Leuconostoc, Stenotrophomonas, and Staphylococcus, which is reproducible in an independent cohort of 38 MM patients. This study has important implications for understanding the biological role of the microbiome in CAR-T treatment responsiveness of hematologic malignancy patients, and may guide therapeutic intervention to increase efficacy. The success rate of CAR-T cell therapy is high in blood cancers, yet individual patient characteristics might reduce therapeutic benefit. Here we show that therapeutic response in MM, ALL and NHL, and occurrence of severe cytokine release syndrome in multiple myeloma are associated with specific gut microbiome alterations.

B-cell-derived hematologic malignancies, including acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL), non-Hodgkin lymphoma (B-NHL), and multiple myeloma (MM), carry a high probability of relapse after conventional chemotherapy1. With novel therapeutic strategies incorporating monoclonal antibodies, bispecific T-cell engager (BiTE) antibodies, and hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT), treatment outcomes have greatly improved2–4. However, some patients progress to relapsed/refractory (r/r) status, with a poor prognosis5. For patients with r/r B-ALL, the median overall survival (OS) is 3–6 months6, 7. The median OS is 6.2 months for patients with r/r diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL)8. For r/r MM patients, the median OS is 3–9 months9. There is an urgent need to explore novel treatment strategies for these malignancies.

Here we show the intestinal microbiome changes in patients with r/r B-cell-derived hematologic malignancies undergoing CAR-T cell treatment and investigating associations of the microbiota with clinical responses and CRS severity. Further, the potential of the gut microbiome to predict treatment outcomes and CRS severity was also explored. Our results indicated that CAR-T cell therapy-related cytokine release syndrome and therapeutic response was modulated by the gut microbiome in hematologic malignancies. These findings highlight the role of gut microbiome in CAR-T therapy.

Previously we reported the safety and efficacy of interim results of the trial (61 patients)24. Here after completion of the trial, 99 patients with relapsed/refractory multiple myeloma (r/r MM) were included (Fig. 1a). The primary outcome was to evaluate the safety of BCMA CAR-T cells in the treatment of r/r MM. All patients were evaluated for safety analysis. Cytokine release syndrome (CRS) was observed in 97% (96/99) patients, including 50 (52.1%) patients with grades 1–2 CRS, 42 (43.8%) and 4 (4.1%) with grades 3 and 4 CRS. None grade 5 CRS occurred. The neurotoxicities were reported for 11 patients (11.1%), of whom 10 (10.1%) and 1 (1.0%) had grade 1 and grade 2 events, no grade 3 or higher neurotoxic effect was observed. After treatment, all episodes of CRS and neurotoxicity were resolved. The secondary outcome was to evaluate the efficacy and characterization of BCMA CAR-T cells in the treatment of r/r MM. Within 1 month after BCMA CAR-T cell infusion, 1 patient died of cerebral hemorrhage and 3 died of severe infections. Of the 95 remained patients, 91 (95.8%) had an overall response. In all, 55.8% (53/95), 15.8% (15/95), and 24.2% (23/95) of patients achieved a complete remission (CR), very good partial response (VGPR), or partial response (PR), respectively. With a median follow-up time of 21.2 months (95% CI, 18.4–32.1), the median progression free survival (PFS) was 12.2 (95% CI, 9.1–15.7) months. The 1-year OS and PFS rates were 0.71 (95% CI, 0.62–0.81) and 0.51 (95% CI, 0.42–0.62), respectively. BCMA CAR-T cells expanded dramatically in vivo. The BCMA CAR-T/CD3+ T-cell percentages in peripheral blood (PB) peaked on day 11 (range: 5–31) after CAR-T cell infusion. The median BCMA CAR-T/CD3+ T-cell percentages was 81.95% (range: 6.07–97.30%).

Microbiome samples were not available from 12 patients and 16S sequencing depth was not sufficient for analysis on 6 patients. Finally, a total of 81 patients with r/r MM was included for gut microbiome analysis, which included 43 patients for experiment group and 38 patients for validation group (Fig. 1a). Number of samples collected, and sequencing depth were summarized in Supplementary Data 1–2. Clinical and sequencing information of patients used in the study are presented in Supplementary Table 3 and Supplementary Data 3.

Three months after infusion of a median dose of 4.4 × 106/kg (range 1.2–6.9 × 106/kg) of BCMA CAR-T cells, 55.8%, 14%, and 25.5% of patients had a CR, VGPR, or PR, respectively. All 43 MM patients showed CRS, grade 1 in 8 patients (18.6%), grade 2 in 16 (37.2%), and grade 3 in 19 (44.2%). No higher grade was observed (Fig. 1d). The CRS was fully controlled and managed for all patients. Of these patients, 24 received only supportive care, 6 received supportive care plus tocilizumab treatment (IL-6 receptor-blocking monoclonal antibody), 10 received supportive care and corticosteroid treatment, and 3 received supportive care accompanied with tocilizumab and corticosteroids treatment. The antibiotics used before or during treatment were β-lactam (41 patients), Carbapenems (26 patients), Quinolone (26 patients), Aminoglycosides (1 patient), Macrolide (1 patient), Tetracyclines (4 patients), Cephalosporins (3 patients), and Glycopeptides (6 patients). Although we included age, gender, number of prior lines of therapy, CAR-T cell dose, autologous stem cell transplantation, antibiotic use before or during treatment as covariates into our analyses, no significant differences were observed among different efficacy groups or CRS grade groups (Supplementary Tables 1–2). Two patients died: one from sepsis caused by Pseudomonas aeruginosa and the other from intracranial hemorrhage (Fig. 1d). Both the BCMA CAR-T/CD3+ T-cell percentages in peripheral blood (PB) and serum concentrations of interleukin (IL)−10 increased during CRS and differed significantly in the CR and PR groups (Fig. 1e). Patients’ temperature and C-reactive protein (CRP), ferritin, and lactic dehydrogenase (LDH) concentrations were elevated, and IL-6 and IFN-γ concentrations were significantly different in grade 3 vs grade 1 CRS (Fig. 1f and Supplementary Fig. 1a–c). The serum immunoglobulins (IgG, IgA) and immunoglobulin κ and λ light chain concentrations decreased dramatically after CAR-T (Supplementary Fig. 1d–f). Figure 1g shows the differences of positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET-CT) scans and plasma cells detected by Wright’s stain of a bone marrow smear (43.5% vs. 0), as well as flow cytometry (68.9% vs. 0) of bone marrow cells before and after CAR-T infusion for a representative subject.

To detect changes in the gut microbiota during CAR-T therapy, we collected fecal samples from each patient at five times (FCa, FCb, CRSa, CRSb, and CRSc; Fig. 1c), where FCa denotes the baseline before chemotherapy; FCb after chemotherapy; CRSa after CAR T-cell infusion but before the onset of CRS; and CRSb and CRSc denote the peak and during the recovery phase of CRS, respectively. The median date of FCa was 4 days (range 2–7) before CAR-T cell infusion in MM patients, the median date of FCb was 0 days (range 0–7) before CAR-T cell infusion, and the median dates of CRSa, CRSb, CRSc after CAR-T cell infusion were 2 days (range 1–5.3), 6 days (range 2.5–17.4), and 14 days (range 8–37.5), respectively.

Moreover, by checking changes in the five genera in ALL and NHL patients, we observed consistent shift trends in NHL (two genera; Supplementary Fig. 4f) and ALL (four genera; Supplementary Fig. 4g), respectively. These results were further verified in another independent MM sample, showing that CAR-T therapy correlated significantly with decreased Shannon diversity (Supplementary Fig. 4c) and increased abundance of genus Enterococcus and Actinomyces (Supplementary Fig. 4h).

We next determined whether microbial compositions or changes were associated with the response to CAR-T therapy. Because we wanted to identify maximum differences and only six subjects presented in the VGPR group, we performed comparisons only between the CR and PR groups.

To further demonstrate the association between these taxa and outcome, we assessed PFS following CAR-T therapy. By stratifying patients by tertile of bacterial abundance, we observed that for Sutterella, patients in the highest-abundance tertile had significantly prolonged PFS (Fig. 4g). Even after stratification by timepoints, this association remained significant (Supplementary Fig. 6a). However, for genus Faecalibacterium, which was reported to be significantly associated with PFS and anti-PD-1 therapy19, we did not observe an association (Supplementary Fig. 6b, c).

Manifestations of severe CRS, namely high fever and greater amounts of cytokines, typically develop within several days after CAR-T cell infusion and may cause death if untreated27. We scaled CRS from level 1 to 528. To analyze associations between bacterial communities associated with CRS, we compared patients with severe (level 3) versus mild (level 1) CRS and severe and moderate CRS (level 2) in MM patients. We found 146 OTUs with different time patterns in the severe and mild groups (Supplementary Fig. 7 and Supplementary Data 7), and 99 OTUs with different patterns in the severe and moderate CRS groups (Supplementary Fig. 8 and Supplementary Data 8). The profiles of the OTU clusters for the comparisons were similar, with OTUs in clusters 1 and 3 having a higher abundance during late therapy in patients with severe versus mild CRS (Supplementary Figs. 7b and 8b).

By analyzing associations between CRS grade and taxa at the genus level, we identified signatures discriminating severe from mild CRS, including decreases in amount of Bifidobacterium and Leuconostoc in patients with severe CRS (Fig. 5a and Supplementary Data 9). Bifidobacterium was increased in patients with worse CRS, not only during the window of CRS, but also at early stages (Fig. 5a, b). Leuconostoc was significantly enriched during the window in patients with high CRS grade (Fig. 5a, b). In the 38 validation MM patients, no significance was observed for Bifidobacterium or Leuconostoc among different CRS grade groups (Supplementary Fig. 9).

To determine if gut microbial functions correlated with CAR-T therapy, we first inferred community function of MM patients using Phylogenetic Investigation of Communities by Reconstruction of Unobserved State (PICRUSt2). By applying time-course differential analysis, we identified differential pathways related to fatty acid metabolism, glutathione metabolism, quinone biosynthesis and glycan degradation (Supplementary Fig. 10) in the MM cohort. Further, we compared pathways across different CRS groups. Microbial function of fecal samples from patients with severe CRS had high metabolism or biosynthesis related to inflammatory compounds, including several pathways associated with phosphonate and its metabolism, amino acid metabolism, lipoic acid metabolism, amino sugar, and nucleotide sugar metabolism and antibiotic synthesis (Supplementary Fig. 11).

In addition, we applied metabolic Liquid Chromatography Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS) to quantify concentration of fecal metabolites during CRS. Intermediates (Choline, l-Cysteine, S-Sulfo-l-cysteine, Rosmarinic acid, l-Phenylalanine, and 2-Phenylacetamide) involved in multiple amino acid metabolism pathways were differentially abundant between CP and PR group when during CRS (p-value < 0.05). We also identified metabolites concerning phosphonate and phosphonate metabolism (Bialaphos) and steroid biosynthesis (Desoxycortone) to be differ between CR and PR (Supplementary Fig. 13). In differential analysis between CRS groups, we identified phosphocreatine which annotated to arginine and proline metabolism (Supplementary Fig. 14). Moreover, three abovementioned pathways (i.e., tyrosine metabolism, phenylalanine metabolism, phosphonate, and phosphonate metabolism) were also indicated to have differentially abundances between the CR and PR group in the predicted pathway analysis (Supplementary Fig. 10). Two pathways (tyrosine metabolism and phenylalanine metabolism) were also differed among patients with different CRS grades (Supplementary Fig. 11). Additionally, we performed pathway enrichment analysis of differentially abundant metabolites between the CR and PR subjects to reveal distinction on metabolic functions (Supplementary Fig. 15a). Two pathways (Phenylalanine, tyrosine and tryptophan biosynthesis; Riboflavin metabolism) reached marginal significance (p = 0.07). These concordant findings strengthened the results of functional prediction analysis and highlighted the importance of amino acid metabolism during the CAR-T therapy.

Primary inflammatory markers of CRS are cytokines, such as IL-6, IL-2, IL-10, interferon gamma (IFN-γ), and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α). Various cytokines are elevated in the serum of patients experiencing CRS after CAR-T cell infusion29. By assessing serum cytokine concentrations and immune cell numbers during CAR-T, we observed significantly increased amounts of serum inflammatory cytokines (IL-6, CRP, IFN-γ, D-dimer, ferritin) but low numbers of immune cells (monocytes, lymphocytes, neutrophils, leukocytes) in severe CRS (Fig. 5c). We also compared serum cytokine concentrations and immune cell numbers in CR and PR, observing significant differences for many of them (see Supplementary Fig. 16).

To explore further associations between the gut microbiome and CRS during CAR-T therapy, we determined whether serum cytokine concentrations and numbers of PB immune cells correlated with the abundance of gut microorganisms (Fig. 5d). By assessing common within-individual correlation for repeated measures30, we constructed correlation network between gut microbes, cytokines, and immune cells (Fig. 5c). The top significant correlation pairs were MCP-1 and Lactobacillus, lymphocyte and Clostridium, IL-15 and Lactobacillus, leukocyte and Veillonella (Fig. 5d). In addition, serum level of lymphocyte was negatively correlated with 11 genera, including multiple genera related to CRS level such as Bifidobacterium, Butyricimona and Oscillospira. M1 and M2 macrophages, which play a key role in CRS initiation, did not show significant correlation with any microbes.

Although several studies have revealed the critical role of the gut microbiome in treatment responses and survival after administration of another important immunotherapy — immune checkpoint inhibitor (e.g., PD-1, PD-L1) therapy20, no study has reported on the association between the gut microbiome and CAR-T therapy. In this study, we describe the changes of the gut microbiome during CAR-T therapy and associations with treatment responses and CRS severity in CAR-T-treated patients with B-cell malignancies. Although neurotoxicity is another major toxicity associated with CAR-T cell therapy, we were not able to analyze the microbiome in relation to neurotoxicity incidence and severity because of very limited patients presented in the MM patients. Future work with larger number of patients is needed in order to explore the relationship between microbiome and neurotoxicity after CAR-T cell treatment.

As one of the most prominent treatment strategies for hematologic malignancies, CAR-T cell therapy has recently received great attention. Here for the first time, we found that the dynamic changes in the gut microbiome correlated significantly with therapeutic response and CRS during CAR-T treatment of hematologic malignancies (B-ALL, B-NHL, and MM). These findings will aid the development of novel biomarkers for predicting treatment outcome and CRS severity, thereby optimizing the management of these patients while reducing potential toxicities.

The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of the First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University and was registered in the Chinese Clinical Trial Registry (ChiCTR1800017404). All patients provided written informed consent for participation in accordance with the guidelines of the Declaration of Helsinki and signed agreement for collection and analysis of microbiome samples. Patient inclusion criterias were: (1) age <75 years; (2) relapsed or refractory BCMA–positive MM before CAR-T cell treatment; and (3) expected survival > 12 weeks and adequate performance status and organ function to tolerate treatment. Exclusion criteria were: (1) pregnancy or lactation; (2) having received systemic (except inhaled) steroids in the previous 2 weeks or gene therapies; (3) having medical conditions such as severe mental illness, clinically significant cardiovascular disease, severe renal or hepatic dysfunction, or active infection; and (4) any conditions that might increase treatment risks. Data and sample collection were carried from 1 July 2018 to 30 September 2021. Patient information and the methods related to two types of cancer (ALL and NHL) are presented in the Supplementary Materials.

Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were obtained from each patient by leukapheresis for CAR-T cell preparation. The purified CD3+ T cells were transduced with lentiviral vector to express BCMA CAR (Fig. 1b). Then the engineered T cells were expanded ex vivo under interleukin-2 stimulation. All patients received lymphodepletion with fludarabine (30 mg/m2 of body surface area daily on days −4, −3, and −2) and cyclophosphamide (500 mg/m2 daily on days −3 and −2) followed by an infusion of BCMA CAR-T cells on day 024. The primary response outcome, defined by the guidelines from the International Myeloma Working Group (IMWG) as a complete response (CR), very good partial response (VGPR), or partial response (PR) in the third month after CAR-T treatment47, 48. CRS was graded by the Lee criteria28.

Gut microbiome samples were collected at five timepoints (Fig. 1c). All fecal samples were collected with the GUHE Flora Storage kit (Zhejiang Hangzhou Equipment Preparation 20190682, GUHE Laboratories, Hangzhou, China), which maintains microbial DNA stability at room temperature for as long as 1 month. All samples were frozen at −80 °C prior to DNA extraction. The stages of FCa, FCb, and CRSa were defined as early stages and CRSb and CRSc as late stages. The CRS grade 1 was defined as Mild, CRS grade ≤2 as Moderate, and CRS grade ≥3 as Severe.

All blood samples were stored at 4 °C until centrifugation at 5000 rpm for 6 min. The supernatant liquids were quantified with the BD Cytometric Bead Array Human Th1/Th2/Th17 Cytokine Kit and its corresponding software (BD Biosciences) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Plasma levels of MIP-1α, GM-CSF, MCP-1, IL-15, IL-1β, IL-1α, and IL-17α were determined by the Bio-Rad human Multi-cytokine detection array.

Serial PB samples were collected in BD Vacutainer K2EDTA tubes (BD Biosciences) before and after CAR-T cell infusion. The expansion of CAR-T cells in vivo was determined by detecting the CAR-T ratio continuously in PB as described49, 50. BCMA CAR-T expression was assessed using biotin-SP-conjugated F(ab’)2 fragment goat anti-mouse IgG, F(ab’)2 fragment-specific antibody, and the secondary staining reagent streptavidin-FITC (BioLegend, 405202) or streptavidin-PE (BioLegend,405204) using a dilution of 1:50. The flow cytometry gating strategy is presented in Supplementary Fig. 17.

Total bacterial genomic DNA samples were extracted using the MO BIO PowerSoil DNA Isolation Kit (MO BIO Laboratories, Carlsbad, CA, USA). The quantity and quality of extracted DNA was assessed using both the NanoDrop ND-1000 Spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and agarose gel electrophoresis.

The V4 region of the 16S rRNA gene was amplified with bacterial universal primers: 515 F (5′-GTGCCAGCMGCCGCGGTAA-3′) and 806R (5′-GGACTACH VGGGTWTCTAAT-3′). The primers used for amplification contain adapters for the HiSeq platform and single-end barcodes allowing pooling and demultiplexing sequences of PCR products. Amplified sequences were purified with AMPure XP beads (Agencourt, Inc, Beverly, Manchester, MA, USA) and AxyPrep DNA Gel Extraction Kit (Axygen, Inc, Union City, CA). Qualified PCR products were sequenced with the HiSeq platform (Illumina, Inc, San Diego, CA, USA) using the 2 × 150-bp paired-end sequencing protocol.

Sequenced reads were demultiplexed according to barcodes. Paired-end reads were merged with the fastq_mergepairs command from VSEARCH (v. 2.4.4)51.The minimum length of overlap between paired-end reads was set to 5. Merged reads were then imported into Qiime2 (v. 2020.2)52. Jointed reads were processed by the qiime quality-filter q-score-joined command to filter sequences with low-quality scores. Sequences were denoised with the Deblur workflow53. Amplicon sequence variants (ASVs) were summarized with the feature-table summarize command. To calculate phylogenetic diversity, a rooted phylogenetic tree was constructed using the align-to-tree-mafft-fasttree pipeline from the q2-phylogeny plugin within Qiime2. The pipeline performed a multiple sequence alignment of the ASV sequences and then masked the alignment to remove positions that are highly variable. The masked alignment was used to generate a phylogenetic tree by FastTree program54. Alpha and beta diversity matrices were generated through the q2-diversity plugin using the above-mentioned ASV feature table and rooted phylogenetic tree. De novo clustering of ASVs was performed with the cluster-features-de-novo command within vsearch plugin51. Input features were collapsed at 97% identity, resulting in new OTU features that are clusters of the ASV features. To annotate the OTUs, we downloaded the pre-trained Naive Bayes classifier trained on the Greengenes 13_8 99% OTU database, which was provided by developers of Qiime2 (https://docs.qiime2.org/2020.2/data-resources/). Representative OTU sequences were then annotated with pre-trained Naive Bayes classifier trained on the Greengenes 13_8 99% OTU database using the feature-classifier plugin55. The sequences used for training were trimmed to include only the V4 region. Taxonomic composition was summarized with the collapse method from the taxa plugin within Qiime2.

We used the OTU feature table generated from Qiime2 to predict microbial community function with PICRUSt2 (v.2.3.0-b)56. PICRUSt2 integrated more than 40,000 bacterial and archaeal genomes from the Integrated Microbial Genomes (IMG) database and pre-calculated gene contents for each organism to generate a table of predicted gene family abundances for each organism. Then functional prediction procedure was performed based on the precalculated gene content table and 16 S rRNA marker gene sequencing profile of each sample. The algorithm searched for the most closely related organisms with annotated genomes in the gene content table for each 16 S rRNA marker gene sequence to infer gene contents per sample. Gene family abundance per sample was summarized and grouped into KEGG orthologs (KOs). To facilitate the interpretation of functional results, KOs were further summarized into KEGG pathways on the basis of structured pathway mappings. For differential pathway analysis, we applied the two-sided Welch’s t-test to identify discriminative KEGG pathways concerning clinical responses (PR versus CR) and CRS level (level 1 versus level 3).

Comparisons of alpha diversity and taxonomic abundances between two groups were conducted with the Wilcoxon rank-sum test, while comparisons among three or more groups were conducted using the Kruskal-Wallis rank-sum test. For beta diversity analysis, a PCoA plot was generated with weighted Unifrac distances. To test the significance of between-sample diversity alternation, permutational analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) was performed with the adonis function within the R (v. 3.6.2) package vegan (v.2.5-6). Clinical data were analyzed using SPSS software (v. 23.0). Flow cytometry data were analyzed using FlowJo 10 software.

We applied repeated measures correlation (rmcorr, v.0.4.5) analysis to test the association between bacterial abundance and concentration of immune cells and inflammatory factors. Only genus-level features deemed to be associated with clinical response and CRS grades were included in this analysis. Associations with FDR less than 0.05 were depicted using Cytoscape (v.3.9.0)60.

Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.



Source Data(8.1M, xlsx)

Nature Communications thanks Jonathan Jacobs, Saad Kenderian and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Peer reviewer reports are available.

Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

These authors contributed equally: Yongxian Hu, Jingjing Li, Fang Ni, Zhongli Yang.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41467-022-32960-3.

