Gut Microbiome Changes Associated with Epithelial Barrier Damage and Systemic Inflammation during Antiretroviral Therapy of Chronic SIV Infection

Gut dysbiosis is a common feature associated with the chronic inflammation of HIV infection. Toward understanding the interplay of chronic treated HIV infection, dysbiosis, and systemic inflammation, we investigated longitudinal fecal microbiome changes and plasma inflammatory markers in the nonhuman primate model. Following simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) infection in rhesus macaques, significant changes were observed in several members of the phylum Firmicutes along with an increase in Bacteroidetes. Viral suppression with antiretroviral therapy (ART) resulted in an early but partial recovery of compositional changes and butyrate producing genes in the gut microbiome. Over the course of chronic SIV infection and long-term ART, however, the specific loss of Faecalibacterium prausnitzii and Treponema succinifaciens significantly correlated with an increase in plasma inflammatory cytokines including IL-6, G-CSF, I-TAC, and MIG. Further, the loss of T. succinifaciens correlated with an increase in circulating biomarkers of gut epithelial barrier damage (IFABP) and microbial translocation (LBP and sCD14). As F. prausnitzii and T. succinifaciens are major short-chain fatty acid producing bacteria, their sustained loss during chronic SV-ART may contribute to gut inflammation and metabolic alterations despite effective long-term control of viremia. A better understanding of the correlations between the anti-inflammatory bacterial community and healthy gut barrier functions in the setting of long-term ART may have a major impact on the clinical management of inflammatory comorbidities in HIV-infected individuals.

Persistent inflammation during HIV infection is strongly associated with gut dysbiosis [1,2,3], and contributes to a high risk of morbidity and mortality in persons living with HIV [4]. The significant shifts in gut microbiota of HIV-infected persons remain unresolved despite initiation of antiretroviral therapy (ART) and are interrelated with intestinal barrier damage and altered mucosal immune responses [5,6]. As first demonstrated in the SIV-infected macaque model [7] and later confirmed in HIV-infected humans [8,9], it is well established that HIV rapidly infects and depletes gastrointestinal CD4+ T cells within days of infection regardless of the route of exposure. The sustained loss of CD4+ T cells, particularly the epithelial barrier protective mucosal CD4+ T-helper 17 (Th17) cells is linked to microbial translocation (MT) and persistent inflammation despite continued ART [10,11,12,13]. Together, unresolved gut dysbiosis, loss of gut barrier integrity, MT, and chronic immune activation contribute to the persistent inflammation during chronic HIV infection. Thus, a better understanding of the host–microbe interaction at the gut mucosal interface is essential to develop therapeutic approaches toward alleviating chronic inflammation in ART-treated HIV-infected persons.

Although the gut microbial composition of macaques is slightly different from humans [31], the dynamic changes in gut microbiome and its interrelationship with gut immunity and inflammation following SIV infection and through the course of long-term ART can provide important information on how specific bacterial species may impact the persistent inflammation of chronic treated HIV infection. However, longitudinal studies on the impact of chronic HIV/SIV infection with ART on gut microbiome rarely extend beyond one year. Here, we investigated the fecal microbiome composition within individual rhesus macaques before and during SIV infection and with up to 21 months of effective treatment with ART. We further examined circulating markers of systemic inflammation, intestinal epithelial barrier damage (IEBD), and microbial translocation (MT) during this period to determine the impact of ART on the restoration of gut microbial shifts caused by SIV infection and the dynamic changes during inflammation of chronic SIV-ART.

Animals in this study were housed at the Tulane National Primate Research Center (TNPRC). The institution has received continued full accreditation by the Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care (AAALAC) International. The study was approved by the Tulane University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC; P0359-2017) and was conducted under the standards of the US National Institutes of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. The NIH Office of Laboratory Animal Welfare assurance number for the TNPRC is A4499-01. Following SIV infection, animals were housed in Animal Biosafety Level 2 indoor housing. All animal procedures including virus administration, sample collection, and euthanasia were carried out under the direction of TNPRC veterinarians.

Six healthy female Indian ancestry rhesus macaques ranging in age from 5 to 10 years old and seronegative for SIV, HIV-2, STLV-1 (Simian T Leukemia Virus type-1), SRV-1 (type D retrovirus), and herpes-B viruses were used in this study. MHC-1 genotyping for the exclusion of the common Mamu alleles Mamu-A*01/-A*02 and Mamu-B*08/-B*17 was performed by sequence-specific priming PCR. The macaques were socially housed in pairs after enrolment in the project. Animals were infected with 2500 TCID50 SIVmac251 via the intrarectal (IR) route using the pathogenic SIV challenge stocks obtained from the Preclinical Research and Development Branch of Vaccine and Prevention Research Program, Division of AIDS, NIAID. cART consisted of daily subcutaneous injections of 5.1 mg/kg Tenofovir Disoproxil Fumarate (TDF), 30 mg/kg Emtricitabine (FTC) and 2.5 mg/kg Dolutegravir (DTG) in a solution containing 15% (v/v) kleptose at pH 4.2, as previously described [32].

Blood samples in K2-EDTA anticoagulant coated tubes (Sarstedt Inc. Newton, NC, USA) were taken for a complete blood count and routine chemical analysis and centrifuged for plasma separation. Approximately 250 mg of fresh fecal sample from each animal was collected using a sterile fecal loop into a sterile 2 mL cryovial and stored at −80 °C until use for genomic DNA extraction. Longitudinal samples were collected from pre-SIV, one month following SIV infection, and during ART at various time-points between 2 and 21 months from 6 SIV-infected treated rhesus macaques. Plasma viral load quantification was performed using a Roche High Pure Viral RNA kit (Catalog #11858882001) as previously described [33].

Plasma samples were thawed and cleared using Ultrafree centrifugal filters (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). Cytokines, chemokines, and growth factors were quantified in plasma using the Non-Human Primate Cytokine/Chemokine/Growth Factor 37-Plex ProcartaPlex Panel (Invitrogen, Life Technologies, Waltham, MA, USA), following the manufacturer’s instructions. Data were acquired with a Bio-Plex 200 analyzer and analyzed using Bio-Plex Manager software v6.1 (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). Commercially available Monkey IFABP/FABP2 and LBP ELISA kits (MyBioSource, San Diego, CA, USA) were used to quantify the intestinal fatty acid binding protein (IFABP) and LPS-binding protein (LBP) in plasma samples. The commercially available ELISA kit for Human sCD14 (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA) was used according to the manufacturer’s protocols with 1:200 dilution of plasma samples. All assays were performed in duplicate, and data were analyzed using Gen 5 software (BioTek, Winooski, VT, USA).

DNA was extracted from approximately 250 mg of stool using the Qiagen DNeasy PowerSoil kit (Qiagen, Germantown, MD, USA). Extracted DNA was quantified with the Quant-iT PicoGreen_dsDNA kit (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA). Libraries for shotgun metagenomic sequencing were generated using the NexteraXT kit and sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq 2500 instrument. Extraction blanks and DNA-free water were included to empirically assess environmental and reagent contamination.

Shotgun metagenomic sequence data were processed using the Sunbeam metagenomics pipeline [34]. Trimmomatic was used to trim Illumina adapter sequences and low-quality basecalls [35]. Host DNA was identified by alignment using Burrows-Wheeler Alignment tool (BWA) [36], and low-complexity sequence reads were removed using the Komplexity tool [34]. Reads mapping to the PhiX genome were also removed. The abundance of bacteria was estimated using MetaPhlAn software v3.0 [37]. Sample similarity was assessed using the Bray–Curtis distance and alpha diversity was assessed using the Shannon diversity metric. Reads were mapped to the KEGG protein database [38] to estimate the abundance of bacterial gene orthologs using RAPSearch2 [39].

Comparisons for plasma analytes were performed using GraphPad Prism software version 8.4.3 (GraphPad, San Diego, CA, USA). Data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA with multiple comparisons with a test for linear trends, or two-way ANOVA with repeated measures. Tukey’s and Dunnett’s post hoc tests were used for multiple comparisons. p < 0.05 was considered significant. For bacterial abundance, the differences across time in qPCR levels and Shannon diversity were assessed using linear mixed effects models with the study time-points as fixed effects and the animal IDs as random effects. The cohousing information of the animals was added as a covariate to the model. Community level differences between sample groups were assessed using the permutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) test. Bacterial species and gene abundance levels were tested using linear mixed effects models on logit transformed relative abundances. When multiple tests were performed, the p-values were corrected for a false discovery rate using the Benjamini–Hochberg method. The correlations between the plasma cytokines and bacterial relative abundances were assessed using linear mixed effects models with the animal IDs as random effects. The cohousing information was added as a covariate to all the tests.

To understand the coordinated roles of intestinal barrier function and gut microbiota in systemic inflammation during long-term antiretroviral therapy, we examined circulating IEBD and MT biomarkers, inflammatory cytokines, and gut microbial communities in a cohort of six SIV-infected macaques through the course of SIV-ART. The study design is shown in Figure 1A. As expected, following SIV infection, plasma viremia peaked at 2 weeks of infection to an average 7.2 log10 copies/mL and by 4 weeks had reduced by 2 logs and settled at ~5.8 log10 copies/mL (Figure 1B).

Early SIV infection resulted in a significant increase in plasma levels of multiple inflammatory cytokines and chemokines including IL-1β, IL-18, IL-1Rα, CXCL9/monokine induced by gamma (MIG), CXCL11/Interferon-inducible T cell alpha chemoattractant (I-TAC), macrophage inflammatory protein (MIP)-1β, Granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF), and CXCL13 (Supplementary Figure S1A). As we have recently reported [40], this was accompanied with elevated levels of the leaky gut and microbial translocation (MT) markers IFABP and LBP (Supplementary Figure S1B), in agreement with several other studies revealing intestinal barrier disruption during acute HIV/SIV infections [41,42,43]. This also coincided with a significant decline in frequencies of peripheral CD4 T lymphocytes (data not shown). Following set-point viremia, the animals were treated daily with the three-drug ART regimen that resulted in the stable suppression of viremia (Figure 1B). Effective viral suppression resolved the plasma inflammatory cytokines and leaky gut biomarkers by 3 months (3 mo) of treatment (Supplementary Figure S1). However, despite continued ART and initial resolution of IEBD and MT, an increase in IFABP and LBP was observed at the 8 month ART time-point. Further, there was a significant increase in plasma inflammatory cytokines including GM-CSF, MCP-1, IP-10, IL-6, IFN-γ, IL-12, and TNF-α (Supplementary Figure S1). This suggested a synchronized development of leaky gut and systemic inflammation during chronic infection regardless of long-term suppression of viremia in the SIV-infected macaques under ART.

Consistent with previous reports [29,44], the baseline fecal microbiome prior to the SIV challenge was composed predominantly of Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes. Spirochaetes, represented by Treponema, were the only other phylum to appear with over 1% relative abundance. The Firmicutes were a mixture of facultative anaerobes (Streptococcus, Lactobacillus) and obligate anaerobes (Faecalibacterium, Ruminococcus, Eubacterium) (Figure 2).

We next examined microbial gene abundances to gain a better understanding of the potential for metabolite production. Of particular interest was butyrate, which is primarily synthesized following fermentation of dietary fiber and plays an important role in maintaining gut homeostasis [45]. We examined gene abundances in four butyrate-production pathways: one based on carbohydrate metabolism (pyruvate), and three involving amino acid metabolism (lysine, aminobutyrate, and glutarate). Several genes in the amino acid pathways were significantly decreased following SIV infection (Figure 5), including AbfD-Isom, HgdA, KamE, Cro, Bcd, and But (fdr = 0.024), indicating that SIV-induced alterations in gut bacterial abundances impacted the production of metabolites essential for intestinal epithelial cell function.

To understand the impact of viral suppression with ART on the stabilization of SIV-induced perturbations, we then examined the longitudinal progression of fecal microbial composition in the SIV-challenged macaques. Initiation of ART was associated with microbiome differences in the cohort. Again, we carried out an exploratory time-series analysis to identify recovery signatures during ART. This analysis revealed a rebound in the abundance of Streptococcus infantarius (p = 0.047), and Lactobacillus reuteri (p = 0.0087) by 3–8 months of continuous ART (Figure 4). Conversely, the acute increase in Anaerostipes hadrus and Bacteroidetes bacteroidales at 1 month post-SIV infection returned to baseline levels by 3 months of ART (p = 0.00032 and 0.046 respectively), showing a trend toward early signs of recovery with control of viremia (Figure 4). However, the evidence for recovery in these taxa was not statistically significant after controlling for a false discovery rate of 5% across all comparisons, underscoring the exploratory nature of the species level results.

Since we observed an increase in immune activation and microbial translocation in our cohort around 8 months of ART, we next examined the changes in the butyrate producing potential of the microbiome through the course of untreated and ART-treated SIV infection. Although several genes in the amino acid pathways were significantly decreased following SIV infection, HgdA, KamE, HgCoAd B, and Kce (p < 0.05) showed a late recovery signature at the 21 mo ART time-point (Figure 5). This suggests that an incomplete recovery and a sustained loss of butyrate producing genes, particularly in the pyruvate pathway, likely contributed to an increase in inflammation during chronic SIV-ART.

To assess the relationship between the observed changes in gut microbiome, systemic inflammation, and gut epithelial barrier disruption, we analyzed the association between the fecal microbiome composition and plasma levels of cytokines/chemokines and IEBD/MT biomarkers in our cohort of macaques. The levels of Streptococcus lutiensis, S. infantarius, and Eubacterium rectale significantly correlated with plasma levels of inflammatory cytokines including TNF-α (p = 0.018), IP-10 (p = 0.009), GM-CSF (p = 0.0006), IL-6 (p = 0.0008), and G-CSF (p = 0.0021), thus suggesting a likely role in driving systemic inflammation (Figure 6A).

A further analysis of correlations with circulating biomarkers of epithelial barrier damage and MT revealed that the relative abundance of E. rectale in the fecal microbiome correlated significantly with increases in IFABP (p = 0.0011), LBP (p = 0.0007), and sCD14 (p = 0.0055) during chronic SIV-ART (Figure 7A). Conversely, T. succinifasciens levels negatively correlated with IFABP (p = 0.0015), LBP (p = 0.0097), and sCD14 (p = 0.0011; Figure 7B). Together, these data suggest a link between shifts in microbial abundance and leaky gut mediated systemic inflammation.

The discovery of efficient ART regimens has remarkably reduced the rates of HIV-associated mortality and transformed it into a chronic, manageable disease that requires life-long treatment. However, non-AIDS comorbidities including cardiovascular events, neurocognitive disorders, gastrointestinal disease, and neoplasia that are linked to persistent inflammation in long-term treated individuals severely impact the health and lifespan of people living with HIV [46]. Although gut dysbiosis and inflammation persist even with long-term ART in HIV-infected individuals, the role of dysbiosis in the development of chronic inflammation remains unclear. Here, we sought to determine the dynamic relationship between gut microbiome composition and systemic inflammation during acute SIV infection, through the initial immune restorative phase of ART, and during the reemergence of leaky gut and inflammation in chronic SIV-ART. The study findings revealed an early partial recovery of SIV-induced compositional changes and butyrate producing genes in the gut microbiome following ART initiation. However, long-term ART displayed the significant loss of specific bacterial species that correlated with higher levels of plasma inflammatory cytokines, leaky gut, and MT biomarkers, suggesting that despite stable suppression of viremia, chronic SIV infection drives inflammatory changes in gut microbial composition.

In summary, we have demonstrated that although the initiation of ART enables some recovery of SIV-induced gut microbiome changes, the recovery is partial and not sustained despite the successful long-term control of viremia. This study investigated longitudinal changes in the gut microbiome of macaques through 21 months of ART following SIV infection, which is one of the longest durations of continuous ART evaluated to date in a nonhuman primate model and is equivalent to ~5 years of ART in HIV patients. The progressive changes during the later time-points of ART and their associations with plasma inflammatory cytokines and MT markers are contrary to the earlier speculation that longer ART may be beneficial to restore gut microbiota to healthy levels [29]. These results highlight the need for further research to understand the long-term implications of ART itself on gut microbial communities and intestinal immunity. The identification of bacterial species which inversely correlate with epithelial barrier disruption and MT and are progressively lost during chronic ART could be important for future studies on developing therapeutic interventions to control persistent inflammation in HIV-infected individuals receiving long-term ART.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

