Microbiome Composition and Function in Aquatic Vertebrates: Small Organisms Making Big Impacts on Aquatic Animal Health

Aquatic ecosystems are under increasing stress from global anthropogenic and natural changes, including climate change, eutrophication, ocean acidification, and pollution. In this critical review, we synthesize research on the microbiota of aquatic vertebrates and discuss the impact of emerging stressors on aquatic microbial communities using two case studies, that of toxic cyanobacteria and microplastics. Most studies to date are focused on host-associated microbiomes of individual organisms, however, few studies take an integrative approach to examine aquatic vertebrate microbiomes by considering both host-associated and free-living microbiota within an ecosystem. We highlight what is known about microbiota in aquatic ecosystems, with a focus on the interface between water, fish, and marine mammals. Though microbiomes in water vary with geography, temperature, depth, and other factors, core microbial functions such as primary production, nitrogen cycling, and nutrient metabolism are often conserved across aquatic environments. We outline knowledge on the composition and function of tissue-specific microbiomes in fish and marine mammals and discuss the environmental factors influencing their structure. The microbiota of aquatic mammals and fish are highly unique to species and a delicate balance between respiratory, skin, and gastrointestinal microbiota exists within the host. In aquatic vertebrates, water conditions and ecological niche are driving factors behind microbial composition and function. We also generate a comprehensive catalog of marine mammal and fish microbial genera, revealing commonalities in composition and function among aquatic species, and discuss the potential use of microbiomes as indicators of health and ecological status of aquatic ecosystems. We also discuss the importance of a focus on the functional relevance of microbial communities in relation to organism physiology and their ability to overcome stressors related to global change. Understanding the dynamic relationship between aquatic microbiota and the animals they colonize is critical for monitoring water quality and population health.

Aquatic ecosystems are under stress from global change due to both anthropogenic and natural phenomena. Climate change, ocean acidification, eutrophication, and pollution have affected microbial and host dynamics in aquatic animals. Environmental factors such as light, temperature, and oxygen affect the smallest members of our freshwater and oceanic habitats. There is a close and delicate interaction between microbial communities and animals, and perturbations of this kind of symbiotic relationship can lead to ecological disruptions. These impacts on microbiota can be significant and may influence the health of aquatic vertebrates.

In this review, we discuss the current knowledge and highlight the importance of interactions between microbiomes, environments, and hosts, discussing the role of microbiomes in relation to freshwater and marine fish and mammals. We recognize that aquatic invertebrates comprise a significant biological group whose microbiomes are essential for aquatic food webs, however, here we focus on larger freshwater and marine vertebrates because many are vulnerable to global climate change and pollution. First, we review the functional role of planktonic microbiomes in water and their influence on tissue microbiomes of aquatic animals. Second, we review what is known about the composition and function of gut, skin, and gill microbiomes in fish, as well as ecological drivers behind tissue microbiome assembly. Third, we discuss microbiome research in relation to marine mammal conservation. Having reviewed literature concerning microbiome in association with aquatic vertebrates, we discuss how their symbiotic relationships may be influenced by environmental stressors as case studies on emerging contaminants of two categories. This is followed by case studies of emerging contaminants, and we select cyanobacteria and micro-plastics to highlight in this review; however, we point out that there are various examples that can be discussed in the context of environmental stressors (e.g., chemicals, abiotic factors). We complete the review with a discussion of the potential for using microbiome measurements as an indicator of aquatic ecosystem health and suggest future directions that can advance the science.

Many of the inert components of water are composed of inorganic elements and molecules, however, water can almost be considered a living matrix due to its numerous biological inhabitants. The microbes (archaea, bacteria, fungi, protists) residing in water perform numerous biological functions, but also serve as a source for the microbiomes of host animals, including invertebrates, fish, and aquatic mammals (Krotman et al., 2020). Interest in the microbiology of water spans centuries, as early scientists recognized the ability of microbes in the water to influence the health of animals and humans. These early examples include the recognition of water as a vector for numerous infectious microbes, with examples including Campylobacter jejuni, toxigenic Escherichia coli, Shigella sp., Vibrio cholerae, and Salmonella enterica (Ashbolt, 2004). Perhaps now more than ever, there has been a renewed focus on understanding how microbiomes in drinking water influence our resident microbiomes (Pinto et al., 2012, 2014; Ji et al., 2015; Proctor and Hammes, 2015; Ling et al., 2018). In addition to interacting with host organisms, free-living microbes have an essential role in aquatic ecological processes.

In summary, the water microbiome plays an important role in the ecology of both freshwater and marine systems, performing essential ecosystem services and providing the energy for these systems. The composition of the water microbiome is dynamic, with variable composition over time, geography, and environmental conditions. However, the various functions of the water microbiome are conserved globally, suggesting core microbial functions in water. The microbiomes of animals inhabiting water are influenced by the composition of their local water microbiome, as the water microbiome serves as a reservoir for the microbes that comprising the microbiome of aquatic animals. However, aquatic animal microbiomes are not a direct reflection of the surrounding water microbiome, as the host-associated microbiome is under numerous environmental and biological selection pressures. In the following sections, we will examine the diversity of aquatic vertebrate microbiomes and their important functions within the hosts.

Fish and their tissue microbiomes have co-evolved over time in an aquatic milieu of microorganisms, establishing mutually beneficial relationships. Fish microbiomes are involved in the host’s biological functions (e.g., nutrient acquisition and immunity, including competitive suppression of pathogens) and in return the host supports the nutrition pool and colonization of both internal and external microbiota. This section summarizes the most recent findings and describes the mutualism between microbiomes and fish, specifically emphasizing the role of less-studied skin and respiratory microbiomes in addition to the intestinal microbiome. We synthesize the available knowledge on the importance, composition, and environmental factors influencing the structure of fish core microbiomes (Figure 1). Additionally, we include a table describing the proposed functional roles of microbial taxa in fish species and tissues (Table 1 and Supplementary Table 1). In the subsequent section (see section “Marine Mammal-Associated Microbiome”), we present in a similar fashion what is known about marine mammal microbiomes in different tissues, to facilitate comparisons among aquatic vertebrates.

Gill surfaces are the primary site of gas exchange in fish and are colonized by microbial communities. Like the skin and gut, the gills are coated in a layer of mucus that is constantly replaced, providing both a defense against and habitat for pathogenic or commensal prokaryotes (Lumsden et al., 1995; Gomez et al., 2013). Antimicrobial peptides found in the skin and intestines of fish are also present in the gill mucus, highlighting the importance of the gills as a first line of defense against pathogenic infection (Iijima et al., 2003; Murray et al., 2003). Gill microbiota can reflect internal and external diseases (Legrand et al., 2018). For example, farmed Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) with proliferative gill inflammation had different gill microbiomes than healthy fish, with a lower abundance of important Gammaproteobacteria (Psychrobacter) and a higher abundance of potentially pathogenic bacteria, such as Tenacibaculum and Flavobacterium (Steinum et al., 2009).

In summary, there is an absence of studies quantifying fish gill microbiomes, and comparative studies systematically characterizing the coexisting microbiomes in gills and surrounding aquatic environments are lacking. Generally, gill microbiomes tend to have a different composition and lower richness and diversity compared to skin and water microbiomes (Wang et al., 2010; Lowrey et al., 2015; Legrand et al., 2018; Pratte et al., 2018); however, gill environments seem to be uniquely enriched in nitrogen-fixing bacteria from the excretion of ammonia through the gill epithelia. Though it requires more invasive sampling methods, the gill microbial environment is affected by disease status and may provide valuable knowledge of overall animal health.

Fish epithelial surfaces are coated in mucus that provides a barrier between the host and aquatic environment. Skin mucus is an important component of fish immune systems and contains various immunoglobulins, mucins, antimicrobial peptides, and other mucosal biomolecules that protect the fish from pathogens (Gomez et al., 2013). Skin mucus hosts a diverse community of commensal microorganisms, namely bacteria but also archaea and fungi, believed to play a role against infection. For example, probiotic treatment with skin bacteria isolated from brook char (Salvelinus fontinalis) reduced pathogenic infection by up to 84% (Boutin et al., 2012). Microbial isolates from skin of rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) inhibited the growth of skin fungal pathogens (Lowrey et al., 2015). Fish with internal diseases, like enteritis, display differences in diversity and enrichment of skin and gill microbial phyla compared to healthy fish (Legrand et al., 2018). The dynamic role of skin microbiomes in disease in fish make them a useful indicator of individual health, and the less invasive nature of skin sampling methods (fin clips, mucosal swabs) makes them beneficial for studying wild and/or protected species.

In summary, skin microbiomes play an important role in immunity in fish and there are differences in composition between different species and environments. The skin of marine fish is often colonized by Proteobacteria, especially Alphaproteobacteria and Gammaproteobacteria (e.g., Psychrobacter and Photobacterium). Other phyla common to fish skin microbiomes include Firmicutes, Actinobacteria, and Bacteroidetes, such as Flavobacterium (Wilson et al., 2008; Larsen et al., 2013; Chiarello et al., 2015, 2018; Sylvain et al., 2019). Identifying core microbial taxa colonizing fish skin is an important step toward establishing microbiomes as population health indicators. Due to the less-invasive nature of skin microbiome sampling compared to that of guts and gills, exploring the role of the skin microbiome as a health indicator in fish could aid in method refinement and reduction of animal harm.

Like mammals, fish have complex intestinal microbiomes that aid in nutrient absorption, immune system function, intestinal development, energy homeostasis, and xenobiotic metabolism. The acidic environment of the intestines favors certain yeasts and gram-negative bacteria. Gut microbial composition is highly influenced by species and diet as well as environment (Nayak, 2010; Sullam et al., 2012; Vasemägi et al., 2017; Adamovsky et al., 2018).

Taken together, unique microbial communities exist in fish tissues, each of which function in tissue-specific physiology. In the aquatic environment, abiotic and biotic factors modulate microbial diversity, composition, and function, resulting in a complex and dynamic relationship between the external environment and the individual. These complex relationships are not unique to fish and extend to other aquatic vertebrates such as marine mammals. Marine mammals presented with significant challenges in terms of sampling and opportunity compared to fish, but emerging research has revealed an array of microbial diversity in species such as dolphins and whales. Below, we present what is known about microbial communities in marine mammal tissues, highlighting challenges and the potential implications for conservation efforts in these species.

In the conservation of marine mammals, analysis of the microbiome is a new and emerging non-invasive technique to assess health (Raverty et al., 2017; Hooper et al., 2018; Marón et al., 2019; Nelson et al., 2019). Only recently has microbiome research been incorporated into marine mammal conservation work on a significant scale (Hanning and Diaz-Sanchez, 2015; Pascoe et al., 2017; Comizzoli and Power, 2019). Studying the microbiome using non-invasive sampling is key to marine mammal research because many are elusive, protected, and/or too large for capture (Delport et al., 2016; Nelson et al., 2019). Currently, marine mammal microbiome research is working toward a foundation of data characterizing the microbial load of different marine mammal species with the goal of using the microbiome to set health biomarkers (Delport et al., 2016; Raverty et al., 2017; Bierlich et al., 2018; Hooper et al., 2018; Nelson et al., 2019; Soares-Castro et al., 2019; Suzuki et al., 2019a,b). In this section, we synthesize these findings from studies employing non-invasive collection techniques (Figure 2 and Supplementary Table 2). The discussion section will outline limitations and discuss the future trajectory of microbiome research in marine mammal conservation in relation to emerging environmental pressures.

Marine mammals have a unique respiratory anatomy as the nasopharynx is independent of the oral cavity; therefore, it may harbor rare microbes (Apprill et al., 2017). The blowhole of cetaceans is unique in that their respiratory system is directly exposed to both surface water and air microbiome when they take a breath, allowing for the microbiota composition to be influenced by external factors as well as host biological factors. This intersection of external and internal environment poses an interesting research opportunity. Bik et al. (2016) sampled both the blow hole mucosa (via swab) and chuff (exhalation caught in a filter) of bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops truncatus) and found higher microbial richness and diversity in the chuff. This suggests that the internal respiratory tissues host their own unique microbiome and blow is more than just aerosolized sea water (Bik et al., 2016; Apprill et al., 2017; Raverty et al., 2017; Vendl et al., 2019), which could have respiratory health and disease implications making this sampling method clinically relevant. However, researchers reported that the blow microbiome of four captive common bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops truncatus) was not distinct from that of the pool water (Nelson et al., 2019). It is currently unknown if this is due to captivity (versus wild mammals), water filtration practices, or species differences. Apprill et al. (2017) identified 25 core taxa (host-specific) in blow samples from humpback whales off the coast of Vancouver, Washington state, and Massachusetts including genera such as Corynebacterium (Actinobacteria phylum), Tenacibaculum (Bacteroidetes phylum), Moraxella (Proteobacteria phylum), and Psychrobacter (Proteobacteria phylum). Conversely, Vendl et al. (2019) found poor microbiota richness and a small core microbiome in humpback whales off the coast of Australia. The authors hypothesized that the lack of core microbiome may be related to the physiological state of the animals at the time of sampling. The animals sampled in Vendl et al. (2019) were 4 months into their migration which is a time of fasting; whereas, the animals sampled in the study by Apprill et al. (2017) were at their feeding grounds and early on into their migration. The difference between metabolic states may explain the difference in core microbiota found in humpback whales. Core microbiome of healthy animals are thought to serve beneficial roles to the animal hosts; therefore, identifying core taxa may allow researchers to quickly and non-invasively identify unhealthy individuals by assessing abnormalities of blow microbiota (Apprill et al., 2017; Vendl et al., 2019). Theoretically, the established core microbiome would be used as a reference to identify diseased animals, assuming the presence of a core microbiome is an indicator of good health.

Studying the microbiome of the oral cavity with swabs in captive and wild animals is an attractive option due to accessibility and non-invasive sampling methods. Researchers have been interested in determining whether the oral microbiome is distinct from the seawater. Bik et al. (2016) found that the seawater microbiome was largely different in composition from the oral microbiome of bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops truncates) and California sea lions (Zalophus californianus). They found that the fish and squid diet of dolphins and sea lions were also microbially distinct. The contrast in microbiome of seawater, diet, and mouth could indicate that the oral microbiota composition is host-specific. The oral microbiome was found to be very diverse with a low number of core taxa in common dolphins (Delphinus delphis), striped dolphins (Stenella coeruleoalba), harbor porpoises (Phocoena phocoena) (Soares-Castro et al., 2019) and common bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops truncates) (Bik et al., 2016). Bik et al. (2016) found 25 phyla represented in the oral microbial community of wild (n = 10) and captive (n = 38) dolphins of the US Navy marine mammal program (MMP) collectively. When compared, the oral microbial compositions from the two dolphin populations (captive and wild) were significantly different potentially due to diet, location, and social behavior. Moreover, the oral microbial composition of California sea lions (Zalophus californianus) (n = 18) of the MMP was distinct from the dolphins of the same program. These findings suggest that microbiome composition is dependent on host physiology. On the other hand, the oral microbiome may be too variable to have an intra-species core microbiome as evidenced from a study on Odontoceti cetaceans (n = 48), which observed a small number of core OTUs and divergence between species (Soares-Castro et al., 2019). This difference in microbial communities within individuals was attributed primarily to habitat use, location, and developmental stage of the animals. Therefore, even though the oral microbiome seems to be influenced by host physiology and is distinct from the surrounding environment the oral microbiome may not be worth pursuing as a reliable a biomarker of the pinniped and cetacean health.

The skin microbiome is an important area of study in marine mammal research and perhaps the most accessible to sample. In recent years, the use of biopsy darts for sampling skin tissues from healthy cetaceans swimming swiftly in the marine habitats has advanced research understanding their skin microbiome diversity and health status with changing environmental conditions. In the past, researchers relied on stranded unhealthy animals to collect skin for microbiome analysis (Apprill et al., 2011, 2014; Chiarello et al., 2017; Bierlich et al., 2018; Russo et al., 2018; Hooper et al., 2019). There is a close mutual interaction that occurs between the skin epithelium and microbes that inhabit the water column. Similarly to fish, temperature, water chemistry, skin sloughing, season, diet, physiological state, geographic region, and horizontal and vertical host inheritance may all also affect the skin microbiome of marine mammals (Apprill et al., 2011, 2014; Chiarello et al., 2017; Bierlich et al., 2018; Russo et al., 2018; Hooper et al., 2019).

Noteworthy is that there are core genera common in marine mammals from different environments. For example, Gammaproteobacteria genus Psychrobacter was highly prevalent in captive killer whales and bottlenose dolphins (Chiarello et al., 2017) and wild humpback whales (Apprill et al., 2014; Bierlich et al., 2018). Psychrobacter was also one of the top 20 most abundant genera found on skin biopsies from offshore bottlenose dolphins but was not reported in onshore bottlenose dolphins (Russo et al., 2018). The skin of marine fish is also frequently colonized by the Psychrobacter (Apprill et al., 2011, 2014; Chiarello et al., 2017; Bierlich et al., 2018), highlighting the importance of this class to epidermal health in aquatic animals. There are other genera frequently detected on the skin of marine mammals. For example, Tenacibaculum was highly prevalent in humpback whale skin biopsy samples (Apprill et al., 2014; Bierlich et al., 2018) and was found in 95% of individuals sampled (Apprill et al., 2011). The high prevalence of Tenacibaculum spp. across populations of the same marine mammal species is evidence of a conserved core microbiome, although this high prevalence may be cause for concern. Tenacibaculosis, caused by Tenacibaculum maritimum, results in severe external lesions and necrosis in many marine fish species (Apprill et al., 2011; Pérez-Pascual et al., 2017; Guardiola et al., 2019). However, the high prevalence of Tenacibaculum in healthy marine mammals suggests a symbiotic rather than pathogenic relationship, as in fish (Apprill et al., 2014), because other species of Tenacibaculum have been found to be bacteriolytic and may fend off pathogenic colonizers (Banning et al., 2010). In summary, identifying the diversity and functionality of core microbiota conserved within a species and across ecotypes would enable better evaluation of animal health status and potential impacts of hydro-climatic changes.

Marine mammal gut microbiome studies are primarily done by collecting fecal samples from living wild or captive animals. Many studies of protected marine mammals are restricted due to a lack of access to animals and small population sizes. To compensate for this, researchers often collect samples from many populations of the same species. This offers an opportunity to compare microbial composition between disparate populations. Three main techniques are used. (1) Fecal samples are collected from the environment and then sampled from the center non-contaminated portion (Delport et al., 2016; Suzuki et al., 2019b). (2) Rectal swabs are also used on live animals that are either captive or temporarily captured in the wild (Bik et al., 2016). (3) Stranded, often deceased, animals are sampled directly from intestines. There is reasonable concern that the gut microbiota may change postmortem. However, studies have shown no significant difference in microbial composition related to state of decomposition in samples from fresh to moderately decomposed animals (Erwin et al., 2017; Marón et al., 2019). Although species richness was not profoundly affected by advanced decomposition, there was an increase in Erysipelothrix and a decrease in Cetobacterium in stranded Southern right whales (Marón et al., 2019). Despite limitations, deceased stranded animals present a unique opportunity to capture the microbiome of different physical and chemical sections within the intestines (Sanders et al., 2015; Wan et al., 2018). Wan et al. (2018) determined that fecal samples collected from five East Asian finless porpoises (Neophocaena asiaeorientalis sunameri) represented a higher percentage of anaerobic bacteria in the hindgut and fecal samples which was different than the community in the forestomach and foregut. Thus, fecal samples, while essential to gut microbial research, may provide a partial view of the diversity of gut microbial communities.

To summarize, there are exciting applications for microbiota research in marine mammals from a conservation perspective. By comparing fish and marine mammals in terms of their tissue-specific microbiome, we have learned that the anatomy related to the respiratory tract and other tissues like skin can differ in microbiome composition, further evidence that microbial communities perform specific functions in different aquatic vertebrates. Moving forward, elucidating microbial diversity in species inhabiting the same aquatic microhabitat will be significant in understanding how environmental factors drive microbial communities; are these microbe communities more dependent upon an individual physiology and health (host-specific effects), evolutionary history of the species, or rather driven by environmental factors within local habitats (e.g., salinity and temperature). In the next section, we provide two examples of emerging stressors that can impact microbiomes of both fish and aquatic mammals.

Previous sections discuss the key role of the microbiome in host health and the factors that affect microbiome composition and diversity. Although there are many emerging contaminants that are priorities for scientific investigations and policy makers (e.g., pharmaceuticals, pesticides, cyanobacterial toxins, plastic additives and plastic waste), there is a scarce information regarding their effect on host associated microbiomes, specifically for aquatic organisms. Recent reviews investigating impact of pollutants on microbiome highlight that microbiome response is a key but underestimated element to better understand the toxicity of environmental contaminants on hosts (Adamovsky et al., 2018; Evariste et al., 2019; Duperron et al., 2020). Further, the direct effect of pollutants on microbial-driven nutrient cycling should not be ignored to characterize the consequences on ecosystem function. We selected two emerging stressors (microplastics and cyanobacteria) that are currently considered as top priority contaminates worldwide for aquatic environment due to human related activities. However, cyanobacteria and microplastics are frequently found in the environment and studied from different perspectives, and recent studies show their novel negative impact on host associated microbiomes.

Over the last few decades, cyanobacteria have become a significant environmental problem worldwide, due to their production of toxic compounds. Accelerated by climate change, cyanobacterial blooms are now an emergent global challenge. The US EPA reports that cyanobacteria are a major environmental problem in all 50 states, and toxic blooms can impact all aspects of environmental health (USEPA, 2020). Cyanobacteria produce numerous toxic secondary metabolites with hepatotoxic, neurotoxic, carcinogenic, endocrine, and immunomodulatory potency (Palikova et al., 2013, 2015; Adamovsky et al., 2015; Jarošová et al., 2015; Javu̇rek et al., 2015; Jonas et al., 2015; Moosova et al., 2018, 2019). Among these, microcystins (MCs), specifically microcystin-LR (MC-LR), are the most frequent and are present in high quantities in the environment (Bláha et al., 2010). Cyanobacteria produce compounds that affect other microbial organisms (e.g., induce oxidative stress) (Chen et al., 2015) that may interfere with bacterial quorum sensing, and exhibit allelopathic or antibacterial properties (Shah et al., 2017). Therefore, it is suggested that cyanobacteria may affect microbial communities in the environment but also host-associated microbiomes. Although studies with mammals show that MC-LR contributes to gut dysfunction by generation of reactive oxygen species (Gehringer et al., 2004), cell erosion, deficient intestinal absorption of nutrients and modulation of the immune system (e.g., increase of pro-inflammatory cytokines) (Adamovsky et al., 2011, 2015; Christen et al., 2013; Moosova et al., 2018, 2019), the role of the intestinal microbiome in cyanobacterial toxicity remains poorly investigated. Similarly, there are few studies exploring the effect of cyanobacteria on fish-associated microbiota (Lin et al., 2015; Duperron et al., 2019).

In conclusion, cyanobacterial biomass is a mixture of bioactive compounds and toxins but current microbiome-related research is solely focused on one microcystin congener, MC-LR. More research is needed to investigate other cyanobacterial substances (e.g., lipopolysaccharides) with microbiome modulatory potency (Annadotter et al., 2005; Blahova et al., 2013; Salguero et al., 2019). MC-LR causes dysbiosis in mammals and fish have functional consequences, as an affected microbiome may alter feed efficiency, metabolism, immunity, pathogen susceptibility, or protective functions of the gut. More studies are needed to evaluate the impact of cyanobacteria-related microbial shifts on health and explore the characteristics of microbiomes resistant to cyanobacterial toxins. These interesting questions add another layer of complexity for investigations into microbiota of aquatic organisms. From the human perspective, there is a need to investigate the efficiency of current water treatment technologies at removal of cyanobacterial substances associated with gastrointestinal diseases, as studies indicate that specific water treatment plants are ineffective at removing toxins from cyanobacteria-polluted waters (Sovadinova et al., 2017).

Plastic pollution in freshwater and marine environments has gained considerable attention over the past several years. Global plastic waste production is predicted to triple to nearly 270 million tons from 2015 to 2060 (Lebreton and Andrady, 2019). In the environment, plastics continuously break down into small fragments, called microplastics (MPs), usually defined as particles below 5 mm (Hartmann et al., 2019). MPs are found in almost all aquatic and terrestrial environments, where they become a part of the food chain. MPs are not only ubiquitous in the environment but have also been detected in human foods and drinking water (Zhang et al., 2020). MPs have a broad spectrum of chemical compositions, including the presence of additives, sizes, shapes, biofilm compositions, and conditions (pristine versus weathered) that strongly influence their environmental fate and potential toxicity to microbial communities.

Though several pilot studies indicate that pristine MPs can affect host microbial communities, the research investigating complex, environmentally relevant MPs (i.e., aged and/or befouled MPs, environmentally relevant concentrations) and their ability to interfere with the host microbiome is still in its infancy. Importantly, MPs are ingested by many aquatic organisms, but the depuration kinetics is known only for a low number of specific plastic types and sizes, and speed of depuration strongly influences the potential of MPs to interfere with host microbiomes.

As highlighted in previous sections, microbiomes are tightly linked to the functioning and health of ecosystems (e.g., animal health, nutrient recycling, water quality). A decade of microbiome research has revealed that these complex microbial communities respond rapidly to environmental disturbances in the form of biotic or abiotic pressures, sometimes in a matter of hours or days (Païssé et al., 2010; Landesman and Dighton, 2011). This sensitivity of microbiomes to environmental disturbances opens avenues for use of microbial communities as standard ecological indicators for biomonitoring of ecosystem or host health. In this section, we highlight the following four (I-IV) motivations that encourage the development of microbiome-based indicators in aquatic ecosystems.

With these promising findings, microbiome-based biotic indexes are currently being developed for application in routine biomonitoring to assess the ecological quality status of aquatic environments (Cordier et al., 2019). These biotic indexes classify environments based on species richness, composition, abundance, and/or functions of microbiomes in comparison to reference conditions (e.g., unpolluted environment, healthy host). Aylagas et al. (2017) developed a bacterial community-based index for assessing ecological status of estuarine and coastal environments based on 16S rRNA gene metabarcoding. Keeley et al. (2018) developed a multi-trophic metabarcoding biotic index based on three taxonomic groups (Foraminifera, bacteria, and eukaryotes) for the biomonitoring of benthic enrichments in sea-based fish farms. Following the example of the successful use of macroinvertebrates, fish, and diatom communities in bioassessment, biotic indices based on microbiome data will provide a sensitive and integrative tool for rapid environmental assessment, and help protect key ecosystem and host services delivered by microorganisms (Lau et al., 2015).

Core microbiomes of healthy animals are beneficial to the host; therefore, identifying core (consistent and dominant) taxa as biomarkers will allow researchers to quickly and non-invasively identify unhealthy individuals by assessing abnormalities in niche microbiomes (Bowman and Nichols, 2005; Rosado et al., 2019). However, variability is expected. In particular, animal-associated microbiomes are strongly influenced by natural fluctuations in water quality (e.g., season, temperature, salinity) but also by sex, captive-state, life-stage, trophic level, diet, and phylogeny (Egerton et al., 2018). As reviewed, certain body locations (e.g., marine mammal oral) have high diversity and low core microbiome when compared to others (e.g., marine mammal skin and blow, fish skin and gills). These tissues with highly variable microbiomes and those that do not show conservation between populations may not be useful for the development of reliable biomarkers of ecosystem health. However, large fluctuations in composition of the microbiome that cannot be explained by natural variability may serve as an indicator of exposure to environmental stressors in aquatic vertebrates.

The recent rise in studies investigating host microbiomes have significantly expanded our knowledge on this topic, but there is still a gap in the understanding of fundamental principles of the bidirectional relationship between microbiota and host, as well the natural variability of microbiomes. Extensive research in wild populations as well as controlled laboratory studies will be necessary to reveal the disruptive potency of global stressors such as pollution and climate change, including ocean acidification, on host-associated microbial communities. Lastly, research assessing the connections between different aquatic animal microbiomes is sparse and will be important for characterizing tissue-specific microbiomes as indicators of organism health.

In this review, we summarize current knowledge regarding the microbiome in aquatic environments and identify novel aspects and gaps in microbiome research. In addition to frequently studied intestinal microbiomes, we highlight the importance of other microbial communities and how they may coexist with fish and marine mammals. Although the scientific community has made strides in elucidating microbiome complexity and dynamics in oral, skin, and respiratory microbiomes, there remains a huge lack in systematic studies addressing the factors responsible for variation within and between freshwater/marine animal populations. We described several significant abiotic (e.g., temperature, water chemistry), biotic (surrounding microbiome, physiology, diet), and anthropogenic (pollution, contaminants) factors that shape various host-associated microbiomes with potential consequences for host and ecosystem health. We recommend standardizing sequencing methodologies and sampling techniques to eliminate variation in microbiome investigations. Additional studies and an appropriate number of replicates are needed to overcome inconsistencies and to draw stronger conclusions. Further, future studies should focus on the functional differences in microbiome, as observed compositional differences do not necessarily mean differences in function of the microbiome. Lastly, we identify several reasons demonstrating that microbiomes will become standard indicators of ecological status and health of aquatic individuals or communities. Microbiome-based monitoring in animal tissues is anticipated to be a sensitive and integrative tool for rapid environmental health assessments.

LS, EB-R, and AW reviewed the literature and drafted the manuscript with input from authors LB, JB, IL, CM, MS, and OA. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fmicb.2021.567408/full#supplementary-material

