Fueling Gut Microbes: A Review of the Interaction between Diet, Exercise, and the Gut Microbiota in Athletes

The athlete's goal is to optimize their performance. Towards this end, nutrition has been used to improve the health of athletes’ brains, bones, muscles, and cardiovascular system. However, recent research suggests that the gut and its resident microbiota may also play a role in athlete health and performance. Therefore, athletes should consider dietary strategies in the context of their potential effects on the gut microbiota, including the impact of sports-centric dietary strategies (e.g., protein supplements, carbohydrate loading) on the gut microbiota as well as the effects of gut-centric dietary strategies (e.g., probiotics, prebiotics) on performance. This review provides an overview of the interaction between diet, exercise, and the gut microbiota, focusing on dietary strategies that may impact both the gut microbiota and athletic performance. Current evidence suggests that the gut microbiota could, in theory, contribute to the effects of dietary intake on athletic performance by influencing microbial metabolite production, gastrointestinal physiology, and immune modulation. Common dietary strategies such as high protein and simple carbohydrate intake, low fiber intake, and food avoidance may adversely impact the gut microbiota and, in turn, performance. Conversely, intake of adequate dietary fiber, a variety of protein sources, and emphasis on unsaturated fats, especially omega-3 (ɷ-3) fatty acids, in addition to consumption of prebiotics, probiotics, and synbiotics, have shown promising results in optimizing athlete health and performance. Ultimately, while this is an emerging and promising area of research, more studies are needed that incorporate, control, and manipulate all 3 of these elements (i.e., diet, exercise, and gut microbiome) to provide recommendations for athletes on how to “fuel their microbes.”

The human body integrates thousands of biochemical processes to manifest the various aspects of its metabolic phenotype. The athlete's goal is to optimize this complex system to enhance performance. Nutrition has long been used as a tool by athletes to feed their brains, bones, muscles, and cardiovascular system to foster peak performance (1). However, recent scientific advances suggest that nutrition may also influence athletic performance via the gut and the trillions of microorganisms that inhabit this ecosystem (Text Box 1) (2–4). Importantly, diet affects the microbial community within the gut (5–7). As a result, the gut microbiota mediates and modulates many of the effects of diet and nutrition and health, such as the risk of chronic diseases including obesity, type 2 diabetes, and cardiovascular disease (8, 9). However, athletes are interested not only in preventing disease but also in optimizing health and performance.

Given the gut microbiota's potential to influence athletic performance and its responsiveness to diet, “fueling your microbes” should be seen as a strategy for athletes attempting to optimize performance. Therefore, this report aims to provide a comprehensive review of research on 1) common dietary strategies utilized by athletes and their effects on the gut microbiota and 2) dietary strategies utilized to improve gastrointestinal health and effects on athletic performance (Figure 1). This review summarizes clinical research investigating connections between the gut microbiota/microbiome and exercise since 2008. However, research on the gut microbiota/microbiome or exercise from any time was included when necessary to provide context, including mechanisms of action. This review aims to synthesize nutrition, exercise, and gut microbiota research to highlight what is known, gaps in the literature, and future directions for research to optimize the interaction between diet, sports, and the gut microbiota for health and athletic performance.

Diet affects the gut microbiota composition and fluctuations (7, 10) over both short (5) and long (6) time frames. In addition to well-studied nutrients like fiber (11), the effects of specific foods (e.g., nuts, avocados) (12, 13) and dietary patterns (e.g., Mediterranean diet pattern) (14) are also recognized. Recent reviews have detailed how exercise influences the gut microbiota, depending on the type, intensity, and exercise duration (2, 10, 15–17). Indeed, evidence suggests that exercise increases α-diversity and microbial metabolites such as SCFAs (2). Effects of exercise on individual taxa are variable but typically reveal increases in commensal taxa such as Bifidobacterium, Lactobacilli, and Akkermansia (2). The gut microbiota may also influence exercise performance by producing metabolites such as SCFAs, which are utilized as fuel by colonocytes or absorbed into systemic circulation (acetate, 36%; propionate, 9%; butyrate 2%) (18). In skeletal muscle, SCFAs can be oxidized, incorporated into glucose via gluconeogenesis, or increase the bioavailability of glucose, glycogen, and fatty acids during exercise (2, 18–23). SCFAs also contribute to increased blood flow, insulin sensitivity, skeletal muscle mass preservation, and an oxidative phenotype (21). The multiple mechanisms by which SCFAs influence athletic performance via modulation of skeletal muscle function is an area of growing research.

Additionally, factors such as dietary intake, colonic transit time, training status, shared training environment, health or disease status, age, or gender may present confounding factors in assessing the bidirectional relation between sport and the gut microbiota (2, 33–35). Recent reviews have discussed dietary intake (2, 15) and supplements (17) on the gut microbiota of athletes. Numerous cross-sectional studies have reported the relation between exercise, athletes’ habitual diets, and the gut microbiota (36). Additional studies have investigated the impact of dietary and exercise interventions on the gut microbiota in rodents or in sedentary or otherwise unhealthy human populations (2). Importantly, there is research on the effects of combined exercise and dietary interventions in athletes (Table 1) (37–44).

In addition to affecting the gut microbiota, exercise also impacts gastrointestinal physiology. Although exercise typically acts as a beneficial, or “hormetic,” stress, it can become detrimental if increased duration and intensity are not supported by adequate training, rest, nutrition, and antioxidant status (17). Exercise activates the autonomic nervous system, increasing circulating concentrations of cortisol and catecholamines, epinephrine, and norepinephrine, in peripheral tissues and the gastrointestinal tract (45). This results in reduced blood flow to the gastrointestinal tract, causing hypoxia, ATP depletion, and oxidative stress (46). These effects damage the gut barrier, increasing intestinal permeability, endotoxemia, nutrient depletion, and inflammation (46). The gastrointestinal tract responds to stress activation by releasing neurotransmitters such as γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), neuropeptide Y, and dopamine, which are associated with gastrointestinal disturbances (45). These physiological effects are proportional to the intensity, duration, and frequency of exercise (45, 46).

The increased oxidative stress and disturbances to the gut barrier function that cause gastrointestinal symptoms also influence the gut microbiota (22, 45). Translocation of LPS, components of gram-negative bacteria resulting from increased gut permeability, causes endotoxemia and triggers proinflammatory cytokine secretion into the gastrointestinal tract that may influence the gut microbiota and further exacerbate the condition (22). Conversely, the microbial metabolites butyrate and propionate serve as energy sources for colonocytes, reducing mucosal degradation, gastrointestinal permeability, and inflammatory cytokines (22, 45). As alterations in microbial composition and diversity have been associated with gastrointestinal distress prevalence in athletes, the gut microbiota composition may be used as a biomarker for metabolic and systemic stress after exercise (22). For instance, a study investigating the acute effects of an exercise bout on the serum and fecal metabolome and the gut microbiota demonstrated that a single bout of exercise upregulated metabolic pathways of skeletal muscle substrate utilization and carbohydrate metabolites in serum, increased fecal ammonia and amino acid metabolites, and increased the abundance of Clostridia (52). Thus, acute changes in microbial and metabolite profiles may provide information regarding the effects of exercise on the gastrointestinal tract and metabolism. Furthermore, gastrointestinal symptom assessments could complement information on gut microbiota composition when considering the impact of exercise on the gut microbiota and the need for gut-centric dietary strategies.

Diet is 1 tool that athletes use to optimize their fitness, performance, and recovery (1). Dietary strategies for sport seek to optimize training, performance, and recovery via supplementation of specific nutrients (e.g., protein, carbohydrate loading, iron), restriction of energy or certain food categories (e.g., low-FODMAP diet, gluten-free), and adequate hydration; however, the effects of these dietary strategies on the gut microbiota are not well understood (17, 53, 54). Alternatively, increasing research indicates that dietary strategies for improving gastrointestinal health (e.g., probiotics, prebiotics, and synbiotics) represent promising opportunities to optimize the interaction between the gut and sport, with the potential to enhance athletes’ health and performance. The following sections discuss the effects of dietary strategies on the gut microbiota and athletic performance.

Protein is the main component of skeletal muscle. However, specific amino acids differ in their uptake and catabolism by the liver and skeletal muscle and their ability to regulate the muscle protein synthetic response (55). Essential amino acids, particularly branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs), are crucial for muscle protein synthesis and result in a greater muscle protein synthetic response than nonessential amino acids (55, 56). Therefore, dietary protein influences protein utilization and the anabolic response of skeletal muscle to exercise (55).

In summary, high-protein diets and protein supplements appear to have limited effects on the gut microbiota composition but shift the metabolite profile to greater production of proteolytic metabolites. This may lead to detrimental effects on gastrointestinal health and exacerbate exercise stress–induced symptoms of gastrointestinal distress in athletes, which may impair training and performance. However, these effects may be specific to the protein supplement type and depend on concomitant carbohydrate or fiber intake. Furthermore, the gut microbiota may also contribute to muscle protein anabolism and function throughout the lifespan via modulation of protein absorption and utilization.

Intramuscular triglycerides and adipose tissue provide important fuel substrates for athletes during exercise (102, 103). Additionally, dietary fat modulates the gut microbiota composition and subsequently impacts metabolic health (104). The amount and type of dietary fat are important aspects of dietary quality and are important considerations for both athletic performance (102, 103, 105) and the health of the gut microbiota (104, 106–108).

In summary, high fat, particularly high saturated fat, intake is linked to a proinflammatory microbiota composition with a reduced capacity to produce SCFAs and may induce gastrointestinal permeability, both of which can adversely impact performance. Conversely, ɷ-3 fatty acids may promote a beneficial microbiota profile, increased SCFAs, and reduced gastrointestinal permeability. However, current research on the ergogenic effects of ɷ-3 fatty acids is inconclusive (127).

Highly digestible and readily absorbed carbohydrates are of great interest for sport. However, nondigestible carbohydrates (i.e., fibers and resistant starches) are of greater interest when considering the gut microbiota.

SCFAs are linked to muscle function and glycogen accretion in skeletal muscle (19, 20). Therefore, reduced SCFAs due to a low-fiber diet may affect exercise capacity and performance. Studies in mice by Donatto et al. (141) (oat bran containing β-glucan, 300 g/kg chow) and Okamoto et al. (142) (hemicellulose and lignin, 14.6% neutral detergent fiber) revealed that nondigestible carbohydrate supplementation with exercise, either swimming or treadmill running, respectively, increases muscle glycogen concentration, SCFA production, and time to exhaustion while decreasing the postexercise inflammatory response. While muscle glycogen content is well correlated with endurance performance (143), the effect of increased SCFA production and systemic availability (18) on athletic performance in humans is unclear. Okamoto et al. (142) reported that infusion with acetate improved endurance exercise capacity in antibiotic-treated mice while Scheiman et al. (144) reported increased performance with propionate and Veillonella atypica, which converts lactate to propionate, inoculation in mice. The mechanism(s) of these ergogenic effects may involve increased glycogen or glucose fuel availability (19), increased water reabsorption (145), or direct utilization of metabolites (e.g., propionate) (144). Fiber intake and SCFAs may also decrease gastrointestinal permeability (146) and influence the immune response and inflammation via interaction with the gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT) (147). A study on the effects of butyrylated high-amylose maize starch in healthy adult cyclists increased butyrate and propionate concentrations, increased Parabacteroides distasonis and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, and maintained IL-10 concentrations (an anti-inflammatory cytokine) (148). Another study on the effects of a low-dose (6 g/d), partially hydrolyzed guar gum fiber on the gut microbiota and recovery in athletes revealed increased Actinobacteria, decreased Bacteroidetes and Clostridium cluster XI, fecal defecation characteristic improvements, and reduced diarrhea (149), thus having a potential indirect effect on performance.

A prebiotic is “a substrate that is selectively utilized by host microorganisms conferring a health benefit” (150). While many fibers have prebiotic effects and are considered candidate prebiotics (e.g., resistant starch; polydextrose; β-glucans; pectin; soy-, xylo-, arabinoxylo-, and malto-oligosaccharides) (150–152), only fructo-oligosaccharides (present in artichokes, asparagus, bananas, chicory root, garlic, onions, leeks, wheat) (11) and galacto-oligosaccharides (derived from lactose) (153) are readily accepted as prebiotics (150). The health benefits of prebiotics include gastrointestinal health (e.g., pathogen inhibition), mental health (e.g., energy and cognition), and bone health (e.g., mineral absorption), all of which play important roles in the health and performance of athletes (150, 154).

While increasing prebiotic intake may decrease effective carbohydrate intake and glycogen storage, it has been postulated that microbial production of SCFAs from prebiotic fermentation may improve glycogen storage and metabolism (19, 155). To our knowledge, no studies have investigated the effects of prebiotic supplementation alone on exercise performance in athletes (156) (Table 2) (141, 142, 157–161). However, a study in asthmatic adults with hyperpnea-induced bronchoconstriction, a surrogate for exercise-induced bronchoconstriction, demonstrated that galacto-oligosaccharide supplementation (5.5 g/d) improved exercise-induced bronchoconstriction and reduced inflammation (157). Another study investigated the effect of exercise training in combination with inulin-propionate ester (IPE) supplementation in women with overweight and reported that IPE increased fat oxidation compared with a placebo (158). However, IPE has distinct effects compared with inulin alone on the gut microbiota and metabolome (162), making it difficult to determine whether the observed effects were due to inulin's prebiotic capacity or the esterified propionate.

Probiotic supplementation is a topic of interest among athletes to increase health and performance (36, 156, 163–170). Probiotics are “live microorganisms that, when administered in adequate amounts, confer a health benefit on the host” (171). Conventional probiotics include Bifidobacterium spp. and Lactobacilli, although other bacteria investigated in athletes include Bacillus spp., Enterococcus spp., Streptococcus spp., Veillonella, or the yeast Saccharomyces boulardii, which have been reviewed elsewhere (2, 36, 156, 163–170, 172).

There is increasing interest in the effect of live cultures in fermented foods (171, 182), and their effects or association with the gut microbiota (183). However, few studies have investigated the effects of fermented foods, including yogurt, kefir, sauerkraut, on exercise (184–187). Three studies using kefir or fermented milk reported decreased exercise-induced CRP or creatine phosphokinase and muscle soreness, indicating a positive effect of these fermented foods on reducing inflammation (185–187). One study in mice reported an ergogenic effect of kefir on strength and endurance (184). Therefore, fermented foods containing live microorganisms may confer beneficial effects on inflammation and exercise performance.

A synbiotic is “a mixture comprising live microorganisms and substrate(s) selectively utilized by host microorganisms that confers a health benefit on the host” (180). A synbiotic may be a combination of a probiotic and a prebiotic (complementary synbiotic), although the individual components do not necessarily need to meet the criteria for pro- and prebiotics as long as they act synergistically when co-administered (synergistic synbiotic) (180). Thus, the prebiotic component may enhance the functionality of the probiotic (synergistic synbiotic), or the 2 components may provide independent beneficial functions upon introduction to the gut and its resident microbes (complementary synbiotic) (180). This combination of microorganisms and selectively utilized substrates (159–161) may have different effects than either prebiotic or probiotic supplementation alone (Table 2). However, to our knowledge, only 1 study has investigated the synergistic and independent effects of these components in physically active humans (159). West et al. (159) reported that synbiotic supplementation (Lactobacillus paracasei 431, Bifidobacterium animalis subsp.lactis BB-12, L. acidophilus LA-5, L. rhamnosus LGG, raftiline, raftilose, lactoferrin, immunoglobulins, acacia gum) was associated with a smaller increase in serum IL-16 concentrations compared with prebiotic (acacia gum) supplementation alone, but neither synbiotic supplementation nor acacia gum alone influenced SCFA concentrations, immunity, or gastrointestinal permeability. Therefore, synbiotics may have different or additional effects on athlete health and performance than prebiotic or probiotic supplementation alone.

Micronutrients contribute to immune function, inflammation, energy metabolism, and bone health, impacting athletic performance (51, 188–190). Adequate intakes of iron, zinc and vitamins A, E, C, B-6, and B-12 are essential for proper immune function, which may be compromised under conditions of heavy training and competition in athletes (51). Furthermore, dietary requirements for some micronutrients may be increased in athletes due to losses in sweat and urine and increased oxidative stress (51, 188). Additionally, female athletes are at higher risk of iron deficiency, compromising health and performance (191).

Calcium and vitamin D support bone health. Additionally, vitamin D may impact skeletal muscle mass and strength via regulation of calcium-dependent contraction, protein-dependent skeletal muscle anabolism, mitochondrial function, and insulin sensitivity (196, 197). Increases in Bifidobacterium, Lachnospiraceae, and Bacteroides in response to fiber intake are positively correlated with increased calcium absorption (195, 198). This may be due to SCFA production, which increases calcium absorption by lowered colonic pH or regulation of signaling pathways or gene expression (199). Vitamin D intake also impacts the gut microbiota, although variability in results precludes the ability to determine the effect of supplementation on specific taxa (200). The bidirectional relation between intake calcium and vitamin D and the gut microbiota has important implications for bone health (201) in athletes of all ages, whether for growth or maintenance of bone density, to reduce the risk of fractures.

Gastrointestinal issues are common among athletes. To alleviate symptoms, athletes may avoid or restrict certain foods that trigger symptoms. Athletes may also adopt nutritional strategies to increase gastric emptying and improve absorption of water and nutrients, including avoidance of high-FODMAP foods and gluten-containing foods (202).

It has been postulated that it is the reduction in FODMAP foods on the gluten-free diet that may be affecting improvement in gastrointestinal symptoms rather than gluten itself (208–210). To our knowledge, only 1 study has investigated the effects of a gluten-free diet in nonceliac endurance athletes (211), which reported no effect of the gluten-free diet on performance, gastrointestinal symptoms, well-being, intestinal injury, or inflammatory markers relative to a gluten-containing diet. However, this was a small study (n = 13) with a short duration (7 d) and did not assess effects on the gut microbiota, limiting its ability to draw conclusions on effects for the general athlete population or assess potential long-term effects on health or the gut microbiota.

Food avoidance may also be applied more generally to energy restriction to achieve a particular physique or weight for sport. This is prevalent among female athletes and may result in inadequate energy availability, menstrual dysfunction, and decreased bone mineral density termed the “female athlete triad” (212). Energy deficiency contributes to gastrointestinal distress in athletes (213). At the extreme, anorexia decreases gut microbiota diversity and richness and increases Methanobrevibacter smithii, Proteobacteria, and the ratio of Bacteroidetes to Firmicutes (214). Anorexia is also associated with an altered metabolomic profile, including reduced SCFAs (215). These differences in the microbiota and metabolomic profiles may contribute to the clinical manifestations of inadequate energy availability, including gastrointestinal symptoms and compromised bone density (214). Prebiotic and probiotic supplementation and SCFAs have shown promising effects in the maintenance of and improvement in bone density and bone resorption, potentially via increased calcium absorption or IGF-I (214, 216). Therefore, microbiota-targeted therapies may complement dietary and psychiatric treatments for athletes with inadequate energy intake and/or disordered eating.

On the other side of the spectrum, many athletes have increased energy intake relative to sedentary controls (83). Much of this energy is utilized to support the energy demands of exercise, muscle remodeling and repair, and the health of the brain and immune system. However, greater quantities of food intake result in greater amounts of substrates being delivered to the large intestine due to the general efficiency of digestion and absorption. Each day, ∼15% of carbohydrates, 10% of protein, and 7% of fat escape digestion and are available for microbial fermentation (217). Maldigestion and malabsorption of nutrients may also be exacerbated by decreased blood flow and oxygen delivery (i.e., hypoxia) to the gut during exercise, causing changes in absorption, gut motility, and transit time (218). Intestinal hypoxia may also alter the mucosal-associated gut microbiota composition and disturb the balance of metabolic functions within this niche, potentially compounding the effects of these changes in gastrointestinal physiology on maldigestion and malabsorption. Increased caloric intake, independent of macronutrient composition changes, increases Firmicutes and decreases Bacteroidetes and microbiota diversity (219). Total calorie intake is positively correlated with the abundance of circulating serum zonulin, a marker of gastrointestinal permeability, in a large cohort of women, including athletes, anorexia nervosa patients, and normal-weight, overweight, and individuals with obesity (220). Zonulin was also negatively correlated with Ruminococcaceae and Faecalibacterium, both of which are butyrate-producing taxa, suggesting alterations in the gut microbiota composition (220). There were no differences in zonulin or gut microbiota composition detected between athletes and nonathletes, but differences in dietary intakes between the groups were not discussed, and therefore it is unclear whether disparities in dietary intake, or lack thereof, may have contributed to this homogeneity. Thus, while higher energy intake may contribute to differences in gastrointestinal function and the microbiota, athletes should obtain adequate dietary intake to support increased energy demands.

Hydration status is crucial for athlete health and performance and is supported by water and electrolyte transport across the gastrointestinal barrier. There is limited information on the effects of hydration status on the gut microbiota. However, lubiprostone, a clinical agent that is used to stimulate Cl– secretion and thus cause water and electrolyte secretion in the gut, alters in the intestinal mucus layer and increases Lactobacilli in mice (221, 222). Additionally, dehydration can lead to constipation (223). Constipation has been associated with decreased Bacteroides, Roseburia, and Coprococcusand increased abundances of genes involved in gas production (224). Furthermore, stool consistency and transit time are linked to the diversity and composition of the gut microbiota (225). Dehydration also increases gastrointestinal distress symptoms (218), suggesting that insufficient fluid replacement affects gut function and may impact the gut microbiota.

Additionally, carbohydrate, electrolyte, and energy beverages are commonly used by endurance athletes (228) but, to our knowledge, no studies have investigated the effects of carbohydrate or concentrated sports drinks on the gut microbiota (17). However, intake of both caloric and low/noncaloric sweeteners and food emulsifiers commonly contained in these beverages may have harmful, proinflammatory effects (229). Both sucralose and emulsifiers such as carrageenan have been shown to trigger proinflammatory responses, including upregulation of TNF-α as well as increased gastrointestinal permeability in both humans and animal models (146, 229). Ultimately, the effects of low/noncaloric sweeteners on the gut microbiota of athletes remain unclear (138, 230–233).

To support and enhance athletic performance, athletes frequently consume nutritional supplements that may also have additional, unintended, impacts on the gut microbiota (17). Some of these, such as protein supplements, BCAAs, taurine, ɷ-3 fatty acids, vitamin D, and probiotics, have already been discussed. However, other commonly used supplements include antioxidants, nitrates, sodium bicarbonate, creatine, B-alanine, and caffeine (17, 234).

Overall, there is evidence to suggest that supplements commonly used by athletes may also affect the gut microbiota and the production of metabolites such as SCFAs. The implications of these changes in the gut microbiota on the ergogenic effects of these supplements are unclear but could involve mediation of effects via the gut–muscle axis.

There is currently a lack of research in humans on the interaction between the gut microbiota and exercise, particularly in combination with a controlled diet, which is a significant confounding factor. Researchers should implement validated approaches to assess acute (Automated Self-Administered 24-hour [ASA-24] dietary recall) and habitual dietary intake (Food-Frequency Questionnaire [FFQ]), which also allow for the calculation of standardized values such as the Healthy Eating Index (HEI). Dietary quality, commonly measured using the HEI, is associated with better physical performance (251), although it has been proposed that an Athlete Diet Index targeted specifically at assessing dietary quality for athletes may be more relevant (252). In terms of nutrient intake, higher protein intake in athletes compared with sedentary controls has been documented (83). However, an emphasis on protein, carbohydrate, and fat intake differs by sport modality (84, 253), gender (254), and as a result of fluctuations in training (255). Therefore, accurate measurement of both nutrient content and diet quality will help separate the effects of sport on the gut microbiota from other confounding factors. Studies should also record fluid intake or measure hydration biomarkers (e.g., copeptin) to determine whether hydration status affects the gut microbiota or vice versa. Additionally, the effects of diet and exercise on the gut microbiota are often transient and do not persist after completion of the intervention (23, 256, 257). This suggests that long-term lifestyle habits are necessary to induce stable shifts in the gut microbiota. Alternatively, certain interventions or interventions during critical development windows may have more lasting effects on the gut microbiota, although this requires further investigation.

It is increasingly recognized that the responses of an individual's gut microbiota to diet are personalized depending on characteristics such as the presence or abundance of keystone species (e.g., Ruminococcus bromii or Prevotella copri) (155, 263) or metabotypes (264). Interindividual variability in microbial responses then contributes to variability in metabolic responses (e.g., glycemic response) and health outcomes (e.g., weight loss) (7, 8). Therefore, dietary strategies require a nuanced approach to optimize health via the gut microbiota. To capture this complexity, future research should also integrate other “omics” data to determine potential metabolites, genes, and epigenetic modifications that may cause, contribute to, mediate, or modulate the effects of diet and exercise on the gut microbiota (265–267). The use of “omics” data coupled with machine-learning methods has the potential to uncover novel associations between the gut microbiota and its metabolites, diet, and athletic performance, as well as predict personalized responses to dietary strategies (16). The impacts of these findings include the potential for enhanced performance in athletes and improved health, particularly gastrointestinal and respiratory health. Additionally, the research will lead to a greater understanding of the interaction between the gut microbiota, diet, and human health that may have implications and applications that extend beyond the athletic population to benefit the health of all.

To achieve optimum performance, athletes must fuel, train, and utilize their entire supraorganism, including their gut microbiota, by implementing gut-centric dietary strategies (Text Box 2). There is a growing body of research on the role of the gut microbiota in sport and performance. Current evidence suggests that the gut microbiota may contribute to the effects of dietary intake on athletic performance via production of metabolites (e.g., SCFAs, secondary bile acids), influence on gastrointestinal physiology (e.g., nutrient absorption, barrier integrity, motility, gas production), and immune modulation (e.g., pathogen inhibition, GALT). Common dietary strategies in athletes, such as high protein and simple carbohydrate intake, low intake of nondigestible carbohydrates, and food avoidance, may adversely impact the gut microbiota and predispose athletes to gastrointestinal distress and thus impair performance. Conversely, intake of adequate dietary fiber, a variety of protein sources, and emphasis on unsaturated fats, especially ɷ-3 fatty acids, as well as supplementation with pre-, pro-, and synbiotics, have shown promising results in optimizing the health of the athlete and their gut microbiota with potential beneficial effects on performance.

