Dietary Protein, Fiber and Coffee Are Associated with Small Intestine Microbiome Composition and Diversity in Patients with Liver Cirrhosis

The gut microbiome is a key factor in chronic liver disease progression. In prior research, we found that the duodenal microbiome was associated with sex, ethnicity, and cirrhosis complications. Here, we examined the association between diet and the duodenal microbiome in patients with liver cirrhosis. This study included 51 participants who completed a detailed food frequency questionnaire and donated duodenal biopsies for microbiome characterization by 16S ribosomal RNA gene sequencing. Data were analyzed for alpha diversity, beta diversity, and association of taxa abundance with diet quality and components using QIIME 2 pipelines. Diet quality was assessed through calculation of the Healthy Eating Index 2010. Participants with higher adherence to protein recommendations exhibited increased microbial richness and evenness (p = 0.03) and a different microbial profile compared to those with lower adherence (p = 0.03). Prevotella-9 and Agathobacter were increased in association with increased protein adherence. Fiber consumption was also associated with the duodenal microbial profile (p = 0.01), with several taxa exhibiting significantly decreased or increased abundance in association with fiber intake. Coffee drinking was associated with microbial richness and evenness (p = 0.001), and there was a dose–response association between coffee drinking and relative abundance of Veillonella (p = 0.01). We conclude that protein, fiber, and coffee are associated with diversity and composition of the duodenal microbiome in liver cirrhosis.

Liver cirrhosis is characterized by an irreversible state of hepatic injury that includes vascular distortion, fibrosis, and inflammation, and is considered the penultimate step of the multistage pathogenesis of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). HCC is a highly lethal cancer with rising incidence and mortality rates [1,2]. Latinos carry a heavy burden, and also appear to have a more rapid progression from cirrhosis to HCC compared to other major racial/ethnic groups [2,3]. U.S.-born Latinos, particularly male adults, are at greater risk of HCC than foreign-born Latinos, suggesting an adverse acculturation effect that has been attributed in part to changes in dietary habits [2].

In this study, we examined the association of specific dietary habits selected a priori (overall diet quality, protein, whole grains, fiber, and coffee consumption) with microbiome diversity and composition in patients with liver cirrhosis at risk of HCC. In view of the critical role played by the small intestine in digestion through hormone secretion, absorption, bile acid metabolism, and development of mucosal immunity, we have focused our efforts here to characterize the small intestine microbiome.

We conducted a cross-sectional study including 51 participants with liver cirrhosis enrolled in an ongoing prospective cohort study designed to uncover biomarkers and pathways for development of HCC, called the Microbiome, Microbial Markers, and Liver Disease (M3LD) Study [32]. Patients with a diagnosis of liver cirrhosis confirmed by biopsy or imaging, who were 18 years of age or older, were eligible for the study. Having a prior organ transplant or diagnosis of HCC were the only exclusion criteria. We kept the inclusion broad in order to most closely represent the underlying population of patients with liver cirrhosis. Participants were recruited from three medical centers in southern California: Cedars-Sinai Medical Center (CSMC), Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center, and Veterans Affairs Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System (VAGLA). Clinical data (e.g., cirrhosis etiology, cirrhosis complications, medications, and clinical laboratory tests) were captured from electronic medical records using standardized case report forms. Written informed consent was obtained from all patients, and the study was approved by the Institutional Review Boards at each of the three institutions.

All participants underwent a standard of care upper gastrointestinal endoscopy screening at their baseline study visit at their recruitment site and were asked to donate four duodenal biopsies (1–2 mm each). The biopsies were collected from the 2nd portion of the duodenum, distal to the Ampulla of Vater, using biopsy forceps. Each biopsy was placed in separate 2 mL cryovials and flash frozen using ethanol and dry ice and stored in −80 °C freezers until testing.

At the baseline study visit, participants completed a food frequency questionnaire (FFQ) to capture usual diet over the last 90 days, using VioScreen® (Viocare, Inc., Princeton, NJ, USA) a web-based, interactive, and graphical dietary assessment that utilizes over 1200 food images. VioScreen was self-administered using a portable tablet. VioScreen’s dietary analysis utilizes the food and nutrient information from the Nutrition Coordinating Center (NCC) Food and Nutrient Database, and it was developed and is maintained by the NCC at the University of Minnesota. VioScreen has been validated against traditional paper-based FFQs [33].

ZymoBIOMICS DNA Microprep Kit (Zymo Research, Irvine, CA, USA) was used for DNA extraction from the biopsy specimens, per the manufacturer’s protocol. PCR amplification of the V4 region of the 16S ribosomal RNA gene was followed by 250 × 2 paired-end sequencing on an Illumina HiSeq (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA), as previously described [32,34]. The sequences were processed using the DADA2 pipeline in R, and SILVA 132 database was used for taxonomy assignment [35]. Next, data were incorporated into QIIME 2 version 2019.10 [36]. Amplicon sequence variants were filtered out if they were not present in at least 15% of all samples (3,449,114/4,777,389 sequences were kept after this filtering step). Sequence depths ranged between 9,030 and 246,235 per sample with a median value of 71,618.

For each participant, we calculated the Healthy Eating Index 2010 (HEI-2010) as a measure of diet quality. This instrument assesses conformance with 2010 U.S. federal dietary guidance, the basis for nutrition policy in the U.S. [37]. The HEI-2010 is made up of 12 components that include 9 adequacy components and 3 moderation components. The 12 components were scored for a total of 0 (nonadherence) to 100 (optimal adherence) points. For the adequacy components, participants with a minimum intake that met the dietary recommendation received higher scores. The components included total fruit, whole fruits, total vegetables, greens and beans, total protein foods, seafood and plant proteins, whole grains, dairy, and fatty acids. The last three components were weighted more heavily. For the moderation components, which included refined grains, sodium, and empty calories, intakes at the level of the standard or lower received higher scores, with the most weight given to empty calories. HEI-2010 was analyzed in tertiles of scores over all participants. Additionally, two of the HEI component scores, total protein and whole grains, were analyzed individually in tertiles. For the final presentation, the mid and low tertiles of protein were combined into a single category, because 53% of participants had the highest score (5) for protein adequacy, skewing the distribution of subjects across tertiles. Variables capturing protein categories, animal protein and vegetable protein, were also examined as well as a combined variable for the animal:vegetable protein ratio. Fiber was examined according to compliance with the USDA dietary guidelines of 14 g/kcal [38]. Coffee frequency was examined according to categories of ≥5 cups/week versus <5 cups/week.

Metagenomic data were predicted from the 16S rRNA sequencing data using PICRUSt2 implemented in QIIME2 using default parameters [44]. The DEICODE plugin in QIIME2 was used to create the dissimilarity matrix and ordination was performed by principal coordinate analysis. Significance of differences in predicted metagenomics profiles was assessed using the adonis package in R. Differential abundance testing of predicted bacterial genes was performed using DESeq2 with p-values adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing.

At the time of this study, baseline FFQs were completed by 31% of participants enrolled in the M3LD study. We assessed differences in demographic and clinical factors between participants who completed the FFQ (n = 51) and those who did not (N = 114) (Table S1). Participants who completed the FFQ were more likely to be female and not Hispanic or Latino. There were no substantial differences between groups in age, race, cirrhosis etiology, cirrhosis complications, or baseline clinical labs.

Abbreviations: HEI, healthy eating index; CSMC, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center; UCLA, Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center; VAGLA, Veterans Affairs Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System. HCV, hepatitis C virus; HBV, hepatitis B virus; ALD, alcoholic liver disease; NASH, non-alcoholic steatohepatitis; AIH, autoimmune hepatitis; PBC, primary biliary cirrhosis; PSC, primary sclerosing cholangitis; AFP, alpha-fetoprotein; AST, aspartate aminotransferase; ALT, alanine aminotransferase; INR, international normalized ratio; MELD, model for end stage liver disease; PPI, proton pump inhibitor.

There were no statistically significant differences in the predicted metagenome by HEI-2010, protein, whole grains, or coffee intake. There was a significant difference in the predicted metagenomic profile of participants who met the daily recommended dietary intake of fiber as compared to those that did not (p-value = 0.04) (Figure 6A). There was no difference in bacterial gene richness (i.e., the number of predicted genes) between the two groups (Figure 6B). Differential abundance testing demonstrated a significant association of 11 functional pathways with fiber intake. Pathways enriched in participants with higher fiber intake were related to fermentation of short-chain fatty acids, while the pathways that were less abundant in participants with higher fiber intake were related to aromatic compound degradation and fatty acid biosynthesis (Figure 6C).

To our knowledge, this is the first study to report on the association between diet and the microbiome of the proximal gut in patients with liver cirrhosis. Our results suggest that patients with cirrhosis have duodenal microbial profiles that are responsive to underlying dietary practices. We observed differences in the microbiome in relation to total protein, whole grains, fiber, and coffee consumption. There is a growing appreciation that diet quality is an important factor in liver disease progression. Large national cohorts have reported that adherence to a healthful diet, measured using HEI-2010 or other diet quality indices, is associated with a lower risk of chronic liver disease mortality and HCC risk [31,45]. We speculate that the diet’s influence on the microbiome may be a factor in liver disease progression.

In conclusion, we present results on the first known study of the duodenal microbiome and diet in patients with liver cirrhosis. We conclude that protein, fiber, and coffee are associated with diversity and composition of the duodenal microbiome in liver cirrhosis.

