Sexual dimorphism of cardiometabolic dysfunction: Gut microbiome in the play?

Sex is one of the most powerful modifiers of disease development. Clear sexual dimorphism exists in cardiometabolic health susceptibility, likely due to differences in sex steroid hormones. Changes in the gut microbiome have been linked with the development of obesity, type 2 diabetes, and atherosclerosis; however, the impact of microbes in sex-biased cardiometabolic disorders remains unclear. The gut microbiome is critical for maintaining a normal estrous cycle, testosterone levels, and reproductive function. Gut microbes modulate the enterohepatic recirculation of estrogens and androgens, affecting local and systemic levels of sex steroid hormones. Gut bacteria can also generate androgens from glucocorticoids.

This review summarizes current knowledge of the complex interplay between sexual dimorphism in cardiometabolic disease and the gut microbiome.

Emerging evidence suggests the role of gut microbiome as a modifier of disease susceptibility due to sex; however, the impact on cardiometabolic disease in this complex interplay is lacking. Elucidating the role of gut microbiome on sex-biased susceptibility in cardiometabolic disease is of high relevance to public health given its high prevalence and significant financial burden.

Humans harbor over 100 trillion microbes, with the gastrointestinal tract being the most densely populated body habitat [1], [2]. Gut microbial communities include members of the Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya (fungi, protozoa) domains, as well as viruses. Their collective genomes encode for metabolic pathways essential for acquiring nutrients that are indigestible to us and for the generation of metabolites that modulate our metabolism. While some of the effects of gut microbes on the immune system and gut physiology have been recognized for a long time, over the last decade, we have developed a deeper appreciation for the many roles these organisms play in virtually every aspect of our biology.

This evidence highlights the importance of the gut microbiome on the etiology of cardiometabolic disease. Additionally, clear sexual dimorphism exists in cardiometabolic disease. Cardiovascular diseases (CVD) are more common in men than age-matched pre-menopausal women. However, this cardioprotection in women is lost once menopause occurs, suggesting the contribution of sex steroid hormones on varying disease susceptibility. Globally, more men are diagnosed with type 2 diabetes (T2D) than women [10]. Men tend to be overweight at a younger age, whereas women tend to be overweight or obese after the age of 45 [11]. Similarly, male mice develop diet-induced obesity and insulin resistance more rapidly than females [12], [13]. Furthermore, obese female mice are more protected against inflammation and glucose intolerance relative to age- and weight-matched males, indicating that the protective effect of estrogen persists in the obese state [12]. Sex steroid hormones also modulate gastrointestinal (GI) health [14], [15]. Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) are more prevalent in women than in men. These GI disorders have been associated with greater gut permeability due to compromised gut barrier function, which can result in increased levels of pro-inflammatory molecules entering into systemic circulation. Moreover, the symptoms of IBD fluctuate across the menstrual cycle in humans [16] and the mucosal infiltration of immunocytes (i.e., immunologically competent cells) in IBS patients differs between females and males [17]. Data from experimental models show that female rats are more resistant to intestinal injury and inflammation than males [18]. In females, GI permeability fluctuates throughout the estrous cycle, and ovariectomy-induced estrogen deficiency leads to compromised barrier function [19], [20]. This evidence supports that, besides the role in reproductive functions, sex steroid hormones play important roles in GI homeostasis and modulate the susceptibility of diseases, fundamentally contributing to sexual dimorphism (Figure 1).

Sex steroid hormones and bile acids (BAs) share structural similarity as they are both derivatives of cholesterol which contains cyclic steroid nucleus. They can both be recycled through enterohepatic circulation—a process, in part, regulated by the gut microbiome. Therefore, the action of gut microbes on these steroids is critical in determining whether they are excreted or recycled. Various microbial modifications also alter the cytotoxicity and/or potency of these steroids. The term “sterolbiome” has been recently proposed to describe the genetic potential of the gut microbiome to produce endocrine molecules from endogenous and exogenous steroids [21]. Below, we discuss the current knowledge on the sterolbiome and its impact on sexual dimorphism and cardiometabolic disease.

Traditionally viewed as surfactants, BAs facilitate the absorption of lipids and fat-soluble vitamins, have antimicrobial effects, and play important signaling roles modulating glucose homeostasis, lipid metabolism, energy expenditure, and intestinal motility. Primary BAs are synthesized in the liver from cholesterol and stored in the gallbladder. Upon consumption of food, primary BA conjugates of taurine (most mammals) and glycine (humans) are secreted into the duodenum, with a large fraction then reabsorbed in the ileum. BAs that escape reabsorption modulate the composition of the gut microbial community at least in part by inhibiting growth of specific microbes [22], [23], and are subjected to microbial modification which generate secondary BAs via deconjugation, dehydrogenation, epimerization, and dehydroxylation of primary BAs. BAs with different modifications vary in their ability to activate receptors, act as antimicrobial agents, and impact host physiology. Changes in the homeostasis of BA have been associated with alterations in metabolic health: (i) a bacterial enzyme responsible for deconjugating BA has been shown to regulate lipid metabolism, adiposity, and cholesterol concentration of the host [24]; (ii) oral supplementation of a primary BA, chenodeoxycholic acid, increases brown adipose tissue activity and whole-body energy expenditure in humans [25]. (iii) a secondary BA, tauroursodeoxycholic acid (TUDCA), exerts a potent metabolic effect by markedly rescuing hyperinsulinema and hepatic steatosis in genetically obese mice and increasing hepatic insulin sensitivity in obese human [26], [27], [28]; (iv) patients with T2D have altered BA profile; (v) supplementation of cholestyramine and other bile acid sequestrants, which increase fecal excretion and modify the composition of BAs, leads to improvement in circulating lipid profile [29]. Altogether, these studies emphasize the critical role of BAs homeostasis on metabolic health and highlight the importance of gut microbial modifications that determine the effects of specific BAs on metabolism.

Two estrogen-specific receptors, estrogen receptor-α (ERα) and G protein-coupled receptor 30 (GPR30), are expressed in the smooth muscle and epithelial cells of gallbladder, respectively. The disruption of these key receptors impairs gallbladder emptying in response to a fatty meal [34]. Furthermore, recent studies indicate that activation of ERα, similar to farnesoid X receptor (FXR; a central BA sensor), suppresses BA synthesis via induction of the hepatic small heterodimer partner (SHP) transcription in liver [38]. However, the effects of ERα may vary depending on the hormonal status of the hosts. For example, pregnancy leads to elevation of serum and hepatic levels of BAs. In pregnant mice, ERα activation has an inhibitory effect on FXR, which results in downregulation of SHP depression and greater accumulation of BAs. In contrast, as mentioned above, in non-pregnant mice, activation of ERα results in lower BA levels [39]. The interactions between estrogen signaling and BA metabolism emphasize the importance of sex steroid hormones on bile acid-gut microbiome homeostasis that may contribute to sex-specific phenotypes.

Similar to BAs, endogenous sex steroid hormones such as androgens, estrogens, and progestogens, are derived from cholesterol. Differences in gut microbiota composition have been described between sexually-mature male and female mice, with male having less diverse gut microbiota than female littermates [40], [41], [42]. This difference is minimized with the castration of males, highlighting the influence of androgens on gut microbiome composition [40]. Although declining gradually with age, concentrations of sex steroid hormones in males are relatively stable after puberty throughout their lifespan. In contrast, women encounter more dramatic fluctuations in sex steroid hormones due to reproductive factors throughout life, which add into the complexity of hormonal effects on metabolism and the gut microbiome. Remarkably, the presence of the gut microbes is critical in maintaining a normal estrous cycle in female mice, testosterone levels in male mice, and reproductive function in both sexes [40], [41], [43].

Supplementation of probiotic Lactobacillus reuteri elevates circulating testosterone, enough to prevent age-associated testicular atrophy in mice [60]. Germ-free non-obese diabetic (NOD) male mice have lower systemic testosterone levels compared to conventionally-raised counterparts [41]. Additionally, inoculation of the gut microbiome from male NOD mice into female NOD mice elevates circulating testosterone levels of the female recipients and exerts a protective effect against type 1 diabetes (T1D) [41]. This evidence highlights the interactions between testosterone and the gut microbiome, which are sufficient to influence host phenotypes. Similar to estrogens, androgens also go through significant enterohepatic recirculation through deconjugation via the gut microbiome. Bacterial β-glucuronidase cleaves off glucuronide from androgen conjugates, releasing free androgens for reabsorption [61], [62]. Furthermore, the gut microbiome also modulates glucocorticoids and androgens through reductive and oxidative reactions [63], [64]. Androgens, such as androstenedione and testosterone, are C-19 steroids derived from C-27 cholesterol through reductive reactions. These androgens can then be converted into C-18 estrogens. The ability of gut microbes to convert steroids anaerobically through side-chain cleavage has been known for decades [65], [66], but the pathways involved have only been recently identified. Work from Riddlon and colleagues has revealed that the side-chain cleavage product of glucocorticoids generated by the human gut bacterium Clostridium scindens is an androgen, 11β-hydroxyandrost-4-ene-3,17-dione (11β-OHA). This work also identified a cortisol-inducible operon (desABCD) encoding (i) the enzyme involved in anaerobic side-chain cleavage (DesC, a 20α-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase [HSDH]), (ii) a putative transketolase (encoded by desAB) which is hypothesized to have steroid-17,20-desmolase/oxidase activity, and (iii) a possible corticosteroid transporter (encoded by desD) [64]. This conversion may potentially impact testosterone concentrations in vivo. While further work is required to ascertain the host phenotypes affected by these bacterial functions, modulation of sex steroid hormones through bacterial β-glucuronidase and desABCD-encoded enzymes may result in changes in local and systemic levels of steroid compounds that ultimately impact host hormonal homeostasis.

There are several factors related to the GI tract may contribute to the sex-associated differences observed in gut microbiome composition. These include varying GI motility due to sex hormones that impact GI transit time and the distribution and effector response of the estrogen and/or androgen receptors along the GI tract. Pre-menopausal women have slower gastric emptying and greater GI transit time than men; this difference disappears in post-menopausal women who are not on hormone replacement therapy [67], [68]. Differences in GI transit time likely affects the time gut microbes are in contact with dietary substrates, hence impacting fermentation and accumulation of metabolites. End-products of fermentation can alter the pH within the GI tract and consequently, impact microbiota composition, as pH imposes a selective pressure on microbial growth and metabolism that is differentially tolerated among bacteria (e.g., acidic pH dramatically affects the growth of Bacteroides species, but to a significantly lower extent the growth of Gram-positive bacteria [69]). Sex steroid hormones are thought to be the main contributor to the sexual dimorphism observed in GI transit time [70], [71], [72], [73], [74]. The luteal phase of the menstrual cycles and during the second and third trimester of the pregnancy, when the concentrations of estrogen and progesterone are both elevated, have been associated with prolonged GI transit time; however, these findings have not been consistent among studies [70], [71], [72]. Administration of estrogen inhibits gastric emptying in intact diestrus and ovariectomized female rats, resulting in prolonged GI transit time, whereas progesterone has opposite effects [73]. When administering a combination of estrogen and progesterone to ovariectomized rats, the effect of estrogen dominates, and gastric emptying is inhibited. In contrast, testosterone does not impact the rate of gastric emptying in castrated male rats, suggesting the role of estrogens but not testosterone on GI motility [73]. Interestingly, both estrogen and progesterone inhibit gastric emptying in intact male rats [74]. The mechanisms by which sex steroid hormones modulate GI motility may be multifaceted and segment dependent, possible due to the distribution of ligand-binding receptors.

The localization of progesterone and androgen receptors in the GI tract of males and females is poorly defined for both sexes. The expression of progesterone receptors has been observed in the colon of women; whereas the expression of androgen receptors has been detected in the intestine of female and male fetuses [87], [88]. The distribution and localization of the sex hormone receptors and the abundance and potency of differential sex hormones in male and female may both contribute to the observed sexual dimorphism in GI-related disorder and further influence gut microbial communities.

The lining of the GI tract is primarily formed by a layer of epithelial cells held together by the tight junctions, along with a mucus layer coating the top of the epithelium and creating a physical barrier that separates host cells from luminal contents. This dynamic structure is an important first line of defense that prevents inflammatory macromolecules (e.g., lipopolysaccharides [LPS]) and bacteria from entering systemic circulation. The GI tract epithelium has a rapid (2–6 days) turnover in most adult mammals. This process is initiated by the epithelial stem cells located near the base of the crypts. ERβ is preferentially expressed in stem cells and regulates cellular differentiation [89], [90]. Colonic tissue from ERβ−/- mice exhibits epithelial hyperproliferation, incomplete differentiation, and increased shedding, highlighting a key role of sex steroid hormones on maintaining epithelial homeostasis and integrity of the colon [89]. The mucus that coats the colon consists predominantly of mucin-2 (MUC2), which is generated and secreted by intestinal goblet cells. Estrogen has also been shown to dramatically increase mucin content in mucin-producing intestinal epithelial cells in vitro and deletion of ERβ leads to disorganization of the colon mucin layer in mice [89], [91]. Female mice are protected against intestinal injury during proestrus stage (high estrogen) compared to diestrus stage (low and stable estrogen) and compared to male mice [18], [92]. In fact, diestrus female mice and male mice have similar mucus thickness within the colon [93]. Altogether, these studies support the notion that estrogens play an important role in maintaining the health of the intestinal epithelium and integrity of the GI mucus layers through ERβ signaling.

Obesity leads to a compromised intestinal barrier function characterized by disrupted tight junctions, resulting in increased paracellular permeability which allows pro-inflammatory molecules such as bacterial LPS into systemic circulation [94], [95]. As a cellular component of gram-negative bacteria, LPS is a potent inflammatory mediator that is recognized mainly through the Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4). Subcutaneous infusion of LPS leads to weight gain, adiposity, hepatic insulin resistance, and liver triglycerides in rodent models [96]. Similarly, higher plasma levels of LPS have been reported in obese patients relative to lean and healthy individuals [97], [98]. Estrogens promote gut barrier function not only by increasing mucus production as mentioned above but also through ERβ-mediated upregulation of tight junction transmembrane proteins, in both male and ovariectomized female rodent models and in vitro monolayer cultures [18], [19], [99]. Similar protective effects of estrogen have been observed in the vaginal epithelium [100]. In contrast, a recent study showed that estrogen decreases tight junction protein zonula occludens 1 (ZO-1) expression in primary colonic tissues isolated from post-menopausal women and men [101]. Consistent with this finding, the effect of hormone supplementation in metabolic health of post-menopausal women contrasts to those observed in pre-menopausal women, suggesting that the loss of ovarian function due to menopause may have profound and differential impact on estrogen signaling compared to pre-menopausal women [102], [103], [104]. Temporal and regional changes on GI permeability via tight junction disruption have been recently shown in ovariectomized mice, suggesting that loss of ovarian function alters the homeostasis of GI integrity in time-sensitive manner though dynamic adaptations [105].

Microbiota transplant experiments in germ-free mice have recently demonstrated that the sex of the recipient animal shapes the composition of the gut microbiota [42]. Additionally, sex influences susceptibility and severity of various diseases, including CVD, obesity, T1D, and gastrointestinal disorders, as discussed above. Emerging evidence suggests that sex-associated differences in gut microbiota composition may contribute to sex-specific susceptibility to disease. For example, females are known to be more susceptible to T1D than males, a phenomenon that has been observed in both humans and rodents. However, this sex-bias in disease susceptibility does not exist in germ-free NOD mice (a mouse model of T1D) [40]. Gut microbiota composition differs between sexually-mature male and female NOD mice with males having greater relative abundance of several genera including Roseburia, Coprococcus, and Bilophilia [41]. Furthermore, cecal microbial transplants from male to female increase the circulating testosterone levels and significantly decrease the incidence of T1D among recipients [41]. While the sexual dimorphism in disease susceptibility may be due to either the distinct sex steroid hormones or sex chromosome, sex hormones appear to be the major component driving the gut microbiota differences between males and females. For instance, male and female NOD mice exhibit similar gut microbiomes up to puberty; differences do not appear until adulthood/postpubescent stage [40], [41]. Removal of endogenous source of androgens through castration of male mice results in a gut microbial community that shows similar composition to those of intact female littermates and increases T1D incidence [40], [106]. Altogether, these results highlight the complex interactions between microbes and sex hormones and support the notion that this microbes-hormonal interplay alters disease susceptibility.

The gut microbiome is highly sensitive to environmental perturbation; therefore, variations in diet, hormonal status, exercise (duration and intensity), and stress levels should be considered when designing microbiome studies in humans. Furthermore, genetic variations also shape the human gut microbiome in humans and rodents [138], [139]. A study analyzing the gut microbiome of 89 distinct inbred mouse strains showed that the gut microbial differences between male and females varies as a function of host genotype [54]. For example, female BXD79/RwwJ mice have greater relative abundance of Roseburia than male, but the same taxon is more abundant in the gut microbial community of male BXD85/Rww mice than females, suggesting that host genetics could mask the sex differences on the gut microbial community [54], [93], [140]. Further, it has been shown that gut microbiota differences are mediated by sex hormones and the influences of gonadectomy on bile acid profiles significantly differ between sexes [54]. Of note, the relationship between sex chromosome and the gut microbiome has not been assessed, even though gene variance on the Y chromosome has been associated with sex differences in cardiovascular traits, contributing to dyslipidemia, hypertension, inflammation, atherosclerosis, and coronary heart disease [141], [142]. Thus, the potential influence of gene variants on the sex chromosomes on the colonization of the gut microbiome should not be overlooked.

Sexual dimorphism in cardiometabolic disease is evident, but the mechanisms involved remain largely unknown. In the past decade, many studies have linked cardiometabolic dysfunction with alterations in the gut microbiome. Although emerging evidence suggests a role of the gut microbiome as a modifier of disease, its impact on differential suceptibility to cardiometabolic disease due to sex is lacking. The gut microbiome is critical in maintaining normal estrous cycle, testosterone level, and reproductive function. Elucidating the role of gut microbiome in sex-biased susceptibility to cardiometabolic disease is of high relevance to public health. Metagenomic, metatranscriptomic and metabolomic analyses are warranted to characterize the functional changes in the gut microbiome in response to alterations in sex hormones and to identify sex-specific signals that modulate microbial community composition and activity. Identifying host and microbial genes responsible for selective gut microbial colonization due to sex may contribute to novel approaches in disease prevention. Furthermore, unlike polymorphisms in our human genomes, gut microbial community composition can be rapidly modified through diet or drugs, opening the door to new approaches in translational and personalized medicine.

None declared.

