The Role of the Microbiome in Oral Squamous Cell Carcinoma with Insight into the Microbiome–Treatment Axis

Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is one of the leading presentations of head and neck cancer (HNC). The first part of this review will describe the highlights of the oral microbiome in health and normal development while demonstrating how both the oral and gut microbiome can map OSCC development, progression, treatment and the potential side effects associated with its management. We then scope the dynamics of the various microorganisms of the oral cavity, including bacteria, mycoplasma, fungi, archaea and viruses, and describe the characteristic roles they may play in OSCC development. We also highlight how the human immunodeficiency viruses (HIV) may impinge on the host microbiome and increase the burden of oral premalignant lesions and OSCC in patients with HIV. Finally, we summarise current insights into the microbiome–treatment axis pertaining to OSCC, and show how the microbiome is affected by radiotherapy, chemotherapy, immunotherapy and also how these therapies are affected by the state of the microbiome, potentially determining the success or failure of some of these treatments.

In the Global Cancer report 2018, head and neck cancer is thought to be the eighth most commonly occurring cancer in the world [1], with oral squamous cell carcinoma being the most common presentation. According to The International Classification of Diseases for Oncology, World Health Organisation, oral cavity cancer includes the locations of the inner lip (C00.3–C00.9), the tongue, excluding lingual tonsil (C02), the gum (C03), the floor of the mouth (C04), the palate (C05), and other or unspecified parts of the mouth (C06) [2].

Indeed, on that latter note, chronic inflammation is thought to be the cause of one in four cancers [6]. How this may relate to the aetiopathogenesis of oral squamous cell carcinoma is an important undertaking. Compelling evidence now exists for the association of chronic periodontal disease and the development of head and neck cancer in general and oral squamous cell carcinoma specifically. For every millimetre of alveolar bone loss, a four-fold increased risk of developing squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck cancer unfolds. Furthermore, those with periodontal disease are thought to be at greater risk of poorly differentiated cancers [7,8]. Since periodontal disease is a microbial disease, this sets the tone for the question: what is the role of microorganisms in the aetiology of oral squamous cell carcinoma? This review sets out to answer this question, delving into how both the oral and gut microbiome may sculpt, in many ways, the outcome of an oral squamous cell carcinoma from start to finish.

The microbiome, including oral, is the genome of all microorganisms, their interactions and their products which include bacteria but also viruses, archaea and fungi [9,10]. The “bacterial” microbiome resides in the lumen of the gut and the oral cavity; however, the skin and vagina also harbour a diverse microbiome. Bacteria in the gut reside either on the epithelium or pass through the lumen, both offering important yet different roles in maintaining homeostasis between the host and the microbiome and have the distinct ability, from an early age, to sculpt the systemic immune response, whereby constant interactions between the gut microbiome and the mucosa regulate inflammation and mediate immune tolerance through bacterial translocation [11,12]. Commensal bacteria help sustain a healthy immune state throughout the whole body, serving to educate the various stages of development of different immune cells that later become necessary in the fight against cancer cells, including oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) [13]. The functions of the gut microbiome include the metabolism of diet components and vitamin production, as well as release of short chain fatty acids, microbial metabolites that further promote anti-inflammatory responses such as the release of interleukin (IL) 10, the inhibition of IL-6, tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNF) [14] and the activation of G protein-coupled receptors, present on epithelial cells as well as immune cells, and have a wide range of immune-inflammatory responses, including tumour cell deactivation [15,16].

In the oral cavity, the normal microbiota colonise space, preventing pathogenic microbes from establishing themselves as well as exerting healthy microbial antagonism and quorum sensing. Meanwhile, the host immune system is quite successful in maintaining a tolerant state, mainly through the function of mucosal dendritic cells and the secretion of anti-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-10, and prostaglandin E2, which suppress the immune system through the formation of T regulatory cells [17], thus displaying an intricate and well-ordered harmony of stability between oral mucosal dental tissue health and the different microorganisms’ requirements for survival. It is only when the environment starts to favour shifts towards a dysbiotic picture that pathogenic bacteria begin to act at the forefront, unravelling their roles in various oral diseases.

In 2010, Delwhirst et al. assembled the Human Oral Microbiome project, identifying 619 bacterial taxa in 13 phyla, utilising 16S rRNA gene sequencing technology [9]. Figure 1 depicts the classification of the oral microbiome ecosystem in health. The most abundant genera of the oral cavity are noted with regard to their respective phyla, while archaea are recognised as either methanogenic or non-methanogenic forms and have been isolated predominantly from subgingival pockets. Fungal genera are also described according to their respective divisions; however, 30% of fungal communities remain largely unculturable. Protozoa such as Entamoeba gingivalis have been identified from within the oral cavity [18], while the commonest mycoplasma include Mycoplasma salivarium and orale [19] and are regarded as parasitic organisms.

Bacterial communities of a healthy person and those of an OSCC patient have been shown to differ considerably with regard to function, such that those bacterial genes involved in methane metabolism, oxidative phosphorylation and carbon fixation are enriched in the OSCC microbiome, while those involved in amino acid metabolism and folate biosynthesis are not. [30]. Some members of the microbiome are regarded as “key players”, whereby, even in low abundance, their effect is powerful enough to impact on the remaining environment [31]. A richer and diverse microbiome with a higher number of reads and operational taxonomic units is generally well recognised in healthy persons, while edentulousness and disease affiliations have been associated with reduced richness and low diversity in the microbiome [32]. Guerrero-Preston et al., 2016, highlighted this phenomenon in OSCC cases specifically, where the total number of bacterial operational taxonomic units amongst OSCC samples was 3659, compared to that of healthy individuals (13,849) [33].

Ever since Virchow in 1863, the link between “bacteria, inflammation and cancer” progression has been put forward [34]. A statement more applicable to the present day would include how the oral microbiome, the epithelial barrier, the immune system and chronic inflammation exist in an elaborate oncogenic parallelogram [35]. A background of inflammation in relation to cancer development occurs in the context of infections, autoimmune disease and chronic and low-grade stimuli, such as from continuous irritation [36]. The oral microbiome not only drives the chronic inflammation that may precede OSCC, but is also involved in the direct influence on the host cell response [37]. Yost et al., 2018, showed that Fusobacteria had the highest number of transcripts or active genes in OSCC sites than any other bacteria, followed by Selenomonas and Prevotella, while Bacillales, Gemella and Neisseria evidenced more activity in healthy sites. Metatranscriptomic analysis of the OSCC-associated microbiome or “oncobiome” has shown the specific activities that are undertaken by these bacteria such as increased metal ion transport and nitrous oxide reductase, as well as tryptophanase and protease activity [38]. Increased ion transport around cancer sites is associated with catalysing radical ions and the promotion of cancer cell growth [39,40]. Other functional activities of the OSCC-associated microbiome include anaerobic respiration, proteolysis and the response against oxidative stress or radical species damage [41].

Volatile sulphur compounds, predominantly hydrogen sulphide and methyl mercaptan, are normally known to cause halitosis, and are produced by bacteria such as Porphyromonas gingivalis, Prevotella intermedia and Fusobacterium nucleatum, i.e., periodontal pathogens. These compounds have now been implicated in oxidative stress and DNA damage in oral cells. Even low levels of hydrogen sulphide can inhibit the enzyme superoxide dismutase, which is critical in preventing destructive ROS build up in human cells, while methyl mercaptan has been implicated in collagen breakdown, including type 4, and thus may have a role in OSCC invasion across the basement membrane [60]. Host proteins may also be metabolised or fermented into sulphides and nitrosamines by Firmicutes and Bacteroides, potentiating cell mutations [35].

There are various similarities and differences that exist in the microbiome environment of potentially malignant lesions such as leukoplakia, submucous fibrosis and lichen planus, as well as OSCC and other cancers. Lee et al., 2017, noted significant variations in the salivary microbiome of those with OSCC and oral premalignant lesions in the genera Bacillus, Enterococcus, Parvimonas, Peptostreptococcus, and Slackia [61]. Indeed, an interesting species is Rothia mucaliginosa, which was found to be abundant in leukoplakic lesions, but less so within OSCC lesions, indicating a possible role in early OSCC establishment [62]. An excellent producer but poor detoxifier of acetaldehyde, this species imparts significant oxidative stress in oral keratinocytes [63]. This species has also been found to be increased more so in those who use smokeless tobacco and may have a significant role in OSCC development, particularly in those with a high alcohol consumption.

Taking lichen planus as an example, in a study by Choi et al., 2016, the genera Leptotrichia and Acinetobacter were increased amongst lichen planus cases, while Streptococcus was significantly decreased compared to controls. Notably, bacteria were found to be significantly more abundant in the basal layer and deeper lamina propria tissues of patients with oral lichen planus compared to controls, suggesting a bacterial causation in the liquefaction process associated with lichen planus histology. The rare finding of the intracellular bacterial infection of T cells was also noted and may explain the unique T cell infiltration that defines oral lichen planus [65] and provide a bacterial cause for why some lesions progress to OSCC.

Particular genera from the oral cavity that have been implicated in colorectal cancer development include Fusobacterium, Peptostreptococcus, Porphyromonas and Parvimonas [66]; thus, it is highly likely that such bacteria also have a role to play in the pathogenesis of OSCC. Examples of OSCC-associated genera include Actinobacillus, Actinomyces, Aggregatibacter, Bacillus, Campylobacter, Catonella, Citrobacter, Clostridium, Dialister, Eikenella, Enterococcus, Exiguobacterium, Filifacter, Fusobacterium, Gemella, Haemophilus, Klebsiella, Lactobacillus, Micrococcus, Moraxella, Oribacterium, Parvimonas, Peptostreptococcus, Porphyromonas, Propionibacterium, Proteus, Pseudomonas, Rothia, Slackia, Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, Streptomyces and Tannerella [33,61,67,68,69,70,71,72,73].

Furthermore, an important concept in the relationship between the microbiome and OSCC is that of “bacterial trending”, portrayed by Mukherjee et al. (2017). Here, it is suggested that there are multiple different combinations of genera that exist in parallel, but may contribute to the same phenotypical outcome, that is, OSCC development. An example of these are the high Rothia and low Fusobacterium and high Eikenella and high Fusobacterium combinations [72]. This indicates that the oncobiomic communities of OSCC are quite dynamic and maybe even interchangeable, as well as being much more individualistic from person to person. Indeed, both intra- and interkingdom connectivity (bacterial–bacterial/ fungal–fungal and bacterial–fungal relationships) may be vital in the better understanding of OSCC pathogenesis. Such examples include the synergistic and mutualistic relationship between Candida albicans and Streptococcus species, the cross feeding between Streptococcus gordonii and Fusobacterium nucleatum [106] and the required presence of the latter bacteria in the survival of Porphyromonas gingivalis, as has been previously highlighted.

Leptotrichia, Neisseria, Streptococcus mitis, and Haemophilus parainfluenza have been shown by several authors to be absent or less abundant in OSCC sites [71,79]. The presence of Corynebacterium and Kingella in one study was associated with a decreased risk of developing head and neck cancer (HNC); their presence was suggested to be cancer protective due to their ability to metabolise various toxic compounds by xenobiotic biodegradation. Other members of the oral microbiome that have been associated with a reduced risk of OSCC development include Neisseria sicca, Parvimonas micra and Streptococcus anginosus [78,107] Indeed, Streptococcus anginosis, in particular, has been associated much more with oesophageal cancer rather than oral cancer [108].

Lactic acid bacteria are a controversial issue in both pro- and anti-cancer progression arguments. These bacteria, commonly used in probiotic therapy, have shown success in the management of several disorders that include diarrhoea, allergy to foods, inflammatory diseases and, recently, cancers such as colorectal cancer [109]. Lactic acid bacteria have been shown to harbour anti-cancer growth properties, by promoting apoptosis, exhibit anti-oxidative protection to cells, increase immune cell numbers and improve tumour suppression gene expressions [109]. Lactic acid bacteria can help eliminate the damaging effects of substances in the body, as well as being capable of the promotion and regulation of both innate and adaptive immune responses in the prevention of tumourigenesis. Such examples include Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG, a strain thought to have the ability to lower the chronic inflammation that is linked with cancer development [110].

On the other hand, lactic acid production by Lactobacillus, Lactococcus, Leuconostoc, Pediococcus, Streptococcus and Peptostreptococcus has been implicated in OSCC development [51]. Other acids produced by these bacteria include acetic, butyric, isobutyric, isovaleric, and isocaproic acids, which all reduce the environmental pH of an OSCC, contributing to cancer growth and spread. Furthermore, lactic acid itself can enhance gene transcription and DNA repair by the blocking of histone deacetylases [36]. Lactobacillus, in one study, was found to be increasingly abundant, relative to the increasing TNM staging of cancer patients [33,114]. Table 1 summarises both the possible protective and harmful roles associated with protumoural and protective bacterial strains in OSCC pathogenesis and progression.

Lactic acid bacteria have both protumoural and protective effects. Protumoural factors include; lactic acid production that reduces the pH of the cancer environment, potentiating spread. Enhanced gene transcription alters DNA repair by the blocking of histone deacetylases. The protective factors of these bacteria include the binding and degrading of carcinogens, the production of anti-carcinogenic compounds [160], promotion of apoptosis (enhances MAPK activity), providing anti-oxidative (against reactive oxygen species (ROS)) protection to cells, increased immune cell numbers (T cells) and the induction of cytokines (INF-gamma, TNF-alpha) and improved tumour suppression gene expression [109].

The use of the microbiome as a diagnostic tool may be an important, non-invasive opportunity in the diagnosis of preclinical or early OSCC. Mager et al. (2005) described the species Capnocytophaga gingivalis, Prevotella melaninogenica and Streptococcus mitis as significantly elevated in the saliva of patients with OSCC with a diagnostic sensitivity and specificity of 80% and 82%, respectively [76]. In a study by Yang et al., 2018, an increased abundance of Fusobacteria was found in association with cancer staging, whereby those with Stage 1 and 4 OSCC had 4.35% and 7.92% abundances of this phylum, respectively. Of note in this study was the further decreased abundance of Fusobacteria amongst non-OSCC patients (2.98%) [30]. Thus, whether analysis of Fusobacteria levels in patients who are at risk of developing OSCC is a useful futuristic and non-invasive diagnostic tool may be of questionable interest. Indeed, the OSCC-associated microbiome may even be accurate enough to differentiate between OSCC and neighbouring cancers. The genera of Actinomyces, Parvimonas, Selenomonas and Prevotella were found to be in higher abundance in OSCC patients compared to oropharyngeal cancer patients [73].

The oral microbiome is affected by habits such as smoking, smokeless tobacco use and alcohol intake that can modify the oral mucosal ecological niche, allowing for modifications that may predispose a person to OSCC. Smoking is thought to shift the oral microbiome to a more “pathogenic rich” environment with enhanced pro-inflammatory virulence promotion [115]. Furthermore, commensal bacteria such as Neisseria, in particular, seem to be lost amongst smokers [114,116], while an abundance of Fusobacteria, Mogibacterium and Tannerella occurs [117]. Whether Neisseria has a protective effect on the oral mucosa requires further investigation; however, the loss of the proteobacteria Neisseria and Haemophilus is also a pattern amongst gastric cancer patients [118]. Nicotine has been shown to promote bacterial adherence to the oral mucosa [119], while the metabolite of nicotine, cotinine, can significantly increase epithelial cell invasion by Porphyromonas gingivalis [120]. Smoking has also been shown to reduce the host response to Porphyromonas gingivalis [121] and it is thought that the local immunosuppression caused by smoking can be one cause of a more novel and pathogenic microbiome picture [122].

Meanwhile, the effects of alcohol consumption (> 1 unit per week), are also quite significant on the microbiome, with the enrichment of OSCC-associated bacteria such as Campylobacter species [64]. In another study, those whose alcohol intake was > 40 g/day, were shown to have significantly increased salivary acetaldehyde production while in combination with smoking, an alcohol consumption <30 g/day (females) and <40 g/day for males, increased salivary acetaldehyde by 100% [125]. Interestingly, while Neisseria are generally regarded as commensal organisms and are associated with an anti-OSCC picture, the genus is still involved in the significant production of acetaldehyde from ethanol. Neisseria genera were found to be increased amongst alcohol drinkers, suggesting that, among alcohol users, they have the ability to turn into commensal pathogens. Furthermore, both oral and gut Lactobacillus have been found to be decreased amongst heavy alcohol drinkers (>1–2 drinks/day) and amongst those who both smoke and drink. Lactobacillus are able to break down acetaldehyde and thus alcohol is directly implicated in the disruption of the microbiome, potentiating acetaldehyde-associated carcinogenesis [123,126].

In a study by Henrich et al, 2014, It was found that Mycoplasma salivarium colonisation was significantly related to the surface of tongue OSCC in a patient with immunosuppressive disease [127]. Mycoplasma have been associated with the inhibition of the P53 tumour suppressor gene and the activation of the NF-kB pathway [128] in rodents. Interestingly, Mycoplasma salivarium has been detected by immunohistochemistry from epithelial cells of leukoplakic lesions [129] undergoing hyperplastic changes. Whether oral mycoplasma play a role in acting as immunomodulators in targeted persons, particularly those with immunosuppressive states, aiding OSCC progression, is yet to be investigated further.

Both methanogenic and non-methanogenic archaic forms have been isolated from the oral cavity. Archaea have been isolated from disease locations such as chronic and aggressive periodontal disease, apical periodontitis, recalcitrant chronic rhinosinusitis and peri-implantitis [130,131]. They can illicit both an IgG humoral immune response [132,133,134,135] as well as proinflammatory cytokine reactions that include TNF alpha and IL-1 [20], and thus may be a hidden cause of chronic inflammation in the oral cavity. Importantly, through interspecies hydrogen transfer, a harmonious syntrophic environment develops between archaea and many bacteria, including pathogenic periodontal forms and fermenting bacteria, such that the presence of oral archaea can indirectly support the growth of bacteria that may be involved in the pathogenesis of OSCC [136]. Furthermore, methanogenic archaea are also known to be capable of methylating heavy metals to volatile forms that are toxic to human cells [137], as well as the possibility that the carcinogen formaldehyde can be produced from methane. Increases in methanogenic archaea have been associated with colorectal cancer [138]; however, no literature exists with OSCC; thus, this is an important area for future research.

The physical (adhesion and exclusion) and chemical (metabolic dependency and quorum-sensing) relationships between the mycobiome and bacteriome in the oral cavity are essential to maintain oral health. One of the limitations so far in microbiome research studies associated with OSCC is the continuous exclusion of fungal dynamics [31].

On the other hand, the fungal mycobiome has been implicated in both premalignant disorders and OSCC. Candida albicans, dubliniensis, tropicalis, pintolopesii, and glabrata, as well as Saccharomyces cerevisiae, have been isolated from chronic hyperplastic candidiasis, a premalignant lesion with a higher rate of severe dysplastic transformation [165]. Thus, increased oral Candidal presence has been associated with both oral epithelial dysplasia and its severity [166]. In a study by Perera et al., 2017, the genera Candida, Hannaella, and Gibberella were increased amongst OSCC lesions and Candida albicans, Candida etchellsii, and a fungus resembling Hannaella luteola were the enriched species in OSCC [161]. Candida albicans is also thought to impart a protective role at tumour sites for bacterial species such as Porphyromonas gingivalis; the implications of this bacteria in OSCC development are described earlier in this review [167]. Indeed, it is Candida albicans that has been the most extensively studied with regard to its role in OSCC development and progression. This species can colonise the epithelium by secreting aspartic proteases as well as stimulating epithelial cell endocytosis, which ultimately leads to keratinocyte cell damage. Candida species have been shown to produce N-nitrosobenzylmethylamine and acetaldehyde, both of which are potent carcinogens [165]. Furthermore, Candidal proteinases have been implicated in the degradation of the basement membrane protein laminin-332. Interestingly, this has been found only to occur at acidic pH [168] and thus the acidic nature of a tumour, promoted by certain bacteria, may play a synergistic role with Candida species in enhancing this effect.

While all these viruses are known to cause various different forms of oral disease, they are generally not considered to play a role in OSCC development. The human papilloma virus is not considered to play a role in OSCC pathogenesis, as it is with oropharyngeal cancer, and is found in very low frequency amongst OSCC patients [169,170]; however, the Epstein–Barr virus is controversial. Although present in OSCC cells, this is thought to be due to normal clonal presence and continuous shedding [171,172]; however, a recent meta-analysis concluded that Epstein–Barr virus infection is in fact statistically associated with an increased risk of OSCC and that DNA regions such as Bam H1W, which is an oncogene, were detected in OSCC tissue [173]. In a large study of 155 OSCC samples from eight different countries and ethnicities, 55% of samples were positive for Epstein–Barr virus, while only 35% were positive for the human papilloma virus, with double infection occurring in 21% of samples [174]. However, there is still no clear evidence for a reproducible aetiopathogenetic link between Epstein–Barr virus and OSCC development.

Herpes simplex 1 is another virus associated with oral infection, but with no known association with OSCC development. However, antibody levels to herpes simplex viruses have been found to be higher amongst OSCC patients when compared with controls [175]. Interestingly, it has been shown that lactic acid bacteria and their bacteriocins can act as antiviral agents, particularly to herpes simplex virus. Lactobacillus species can prevent viral replication in host cells [176] and can suppress herpes simplex virus type 2 by lactic acid production in the vagina [177] and, as such, this may also be the case orally for herpes simplex type 1. Due to its toxicity to cancer cells, some authors have utilised attenuated forms of the herpes simplex virus in the treatment of OSCC, which was shown in mouse models to inhibit the growth of oral cancer cells [178]. However, there are several limitations to this form of cancer therapy—primarily the elimination of the virus from the cancer cells and the inhibition of the virus by the immune system [179].

While some authors advocate a similar oral bacterial microbiome between human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) patients and healthy individuals [180,181], others have found considerably reduced microbial diversity amongst HIV-positive persons, with increased abundance of the pathogenic genera Megasphaera, Campylobacter, Veillonella and Prevotella, and decreased abundance of commensal forms such as Lactobacillus and Streptococcus species [46,177]. Indeed, the gut microbiome in HIV infection resembles many other proinflammatory conditions such as inflammatory bowel disease of the gut [182].

The mycobiome of those with HIV varied considerably compared to controls in a study by Mukherjee et al. (2014) [180]. Interestingly, in this study, the fungus Pichia was found only in non-HIV persons and was found to have considerable inhibitory properties in the growth of Candida, Aspergillus and Fusarium [180]. This would suggest that the oral candidiasis that often presents itself in HIV-infected persons may be, in part, due to the absence of the antagonistic role that Pichia plays in healthy persons.

During OSCC treatment, both the oral and gut microbiome are affected by many factors that include host diet, side effects of surgery and radiation, antibiotic administration, as well as local implications such as the development of oral mucositis and dry mouth [188]. A new concept in cancer treatment is pharmacomicrobiomics, that is, how the gut microbiome interacts with drugs, affecting the success or failure of a treatment. Through the use of probiotics, prebiotics and antibiotics, subsequent interventions may be carried out to gear up the microbiome for a successful interaction with a wide range of cancer therapies. Early stage OSCC is predominantly treated via a surgery and radiation-based approach, while, where used, chemotherapy is often in the form of the platinum-based drug cisplatin, which is used to radiosensitise oral cancer cells [189] or in more advanced case settings.

The effect of the CTLA-4 blockade is now shown to depend on distinct Bacteroides species, while Firmicutes, in particular Faecalibacterium, were associated with an improved clinical response to ipilimumab, by increasing CD8+ cell infiltration to tumours; however, at the same time, this concurred with the increased presentation of a more toxic side effect profile [224]. High levels of the short chain fatty acids butyrate and propionate have also been associated with resistance to the CTLA-4 blockade [225].

This review highlights the current science linking both the gut and oral microbiome to OSCC aetiopathogenesis and management, but also serves to shed a light on the limitations that exist in this field. Our understanding of the role of the gut and oral microbiome on OSCC development and behaviour is still evolving, but has grown considerably in the last decade. However, it is still difficult to fully impart the true mechanisms by which the oral microbiome may directly lead to OSCC development [226]. Strong reproducible data have now emerged that fully link specific families, genera and species to OSCC aetiopathogenesis; however, there is still room for studies that are longitudinal and that employ increased participant numbers with similar methodologies and less variables. It is imperative that researchers begin to undertake such projects, examples of which have already been employed in other areas of cancer research such as The Cancer Genome Atlas project and the International Genomic Consortium, which provide robust current insights into molecular cancer associations [227]. Longitudinal studies are critical in assessing dynamic and more accurate shifts in the oral microbiome before, during and after OSCC development and can provide key insights into the association of the microbiome with OSCC.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

