The gut microbiome as an indicator of habitat disturbance in a Critically Endangered lemur

Habitat disturbance affects the biology and health of animals globally. Understanding the factors that contribute to the differential responses of animals to habitat disturbance is critical for conservation. The gut microbiota represents a potential pathway through which host responses to habitat disturbance might be mediated. However, a lack of quantitative environmental data in many gut microbiome (GM) studies of wild animals limits our ability to pinpoint mechanisms through which habitat disturbance affects the GM. Here, we examine the impact of anthropogenic habitat disturbance on the diet and GM of the Critically Endangered black-and-white ruffed lemur (Varecia variegata editorum). We collected fecal samples and behavioral data from Varecia occupying habitats qualitatively categorized as primary forest, moderately disturbed forest, and heavily disturbed forest.

Varecia diet and GM composition differed substantially across sites. Dietary richness predicted GM richness across sites, and overall GM composition was strongly correlated to diet composition. Additionally, the consumption of three specific food items positively correlated to the relative abundances of five microbial strains and one microbial genus across sites. However, diet did not explain all of the GM variation in our dataset, and differences in the GM were detected that were not correlated with diet, as measured.

Our data suggest that diet is an important influence on the Varecia GM across habitats and thus could be leveraged in novel conservation efforts in the future. However, other factors such as contact with humans should also be accounted for. Overall, we demonstrate that quantitative data describing host habitats must be paired with GM data to better target the specific mechanisms through which environmental change affects the GM.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12862-021-01945-z.

Increasingly, wild animals are being confronted with rapidly changing environments due to habitat degradation, climate change, and other anthropogenic factors. While these environmental insults have negative effects on the health and survival of a range of taxa [1–5], primates have been particularly impacted, with an estimated sixty percent of the world's primates currently in danger of extinction [6]. Nevertheless, the magnitude of impact varies across species. Even within the order Primates closely related taxa exposed to the same disturbance can exhibit distinct outcomes. For example, in Colombia, the brown spider monkey (Ateles hybridus) exhibits a more marked stress response to logging and is at greater risk for extinction compared to the sympatric red howler monkey (Alouatta seniculus) [7]. Understanding the factors that contribute to the differential responses of primate species to habitat disturbance is critical for conservation. A wide body of literature addressing this topic suggests that factors such as life history and dietary niche are key in determining these outcomes [8, 9]. However, critical gaps remain in our knowledge of the mechanisms driving these dynamics. As a result, it is often difficult both to predict the impact of specific disturbances on animal health and survival, and to design effective interventions accordingly.

To determine the extent to which variation in diet across habitats shapes the GM, we compared focal-individual behavioral data paired with 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing data of fecal samples from Varecia in three geographically proximate populations: a primary forest (Mangevo, Ranomafana National Park), a moderately disturbed forest (Vatovavy), and a heavily disturbed forest (Sangasanga) (Fig. 1, Table
1). We hypothesized that habitat degradation would affect both the Varecia diet and GM and that variation in diet would explain a large proportion of the variation in the GM across sites. Specifically, we predicted that in both degraded habitats, Varecia would consume similar, less diverse diets with reduced proportions of fruit and exhibit similar, less diverse GMs. We also predicted that across habitats, individual dietary richness would predict individual microbiome richness and that the consumption of specific food items would be associated with variation in the relative abundances of specific microbial taxa (e.g., increased leaf consumption predicts increased relative abundance of fiber-degraders such as Roseburia).

Varecia activity budgets were similar for individuals across sites (Fig. 2). There were no significant differences in percent time spent resting, feeding, foraging, traveling, or engaging in social behavior (Additional file 2: Table S1). However, the proportion of food items making up the diet of individuals at each site varied (Additional file 2: Table S2). Mature leaves made up a higher proportion of the diet in Mangevo compared to the other sites (χ2 = 12.7, df = 2, p = 0.004), while nectar was higher in Vatovavy (χ2 = 18.1, df = 2, p = 0.00004; Fig. 3). The least amount of fruit was consumed in Vatovavy (χ2 = 7.4, df = 2, p = 0.01; Fig. 3). Overall, dietary richness was greatest in the undisturbed site, and there was little overlap in the plant species consumed across sites (Fig. 4, Table
2). The only two food items consumed at more than one site were Canarium madagascariensis fruit in both Mangevo and Sangasanga, and Ravenala madagascariensis nectar in both Vatovavy and Sangasanga. At the individual level, dietary richness differed significantly across sites (F2,17 = 4.1, p = 0.04). However, in contrast to patterns at the group level, individuals in Sangasanga consumed more food items on average (5.5 ± 2.0 food items) compared to individuals in Mangevo (4.7 ± 3.4 food items), while individuals in Vatovavy consumed fewer food items on average (1.5 ± 0.6 food items).

Although our behavioral data are based on a relatively small number of contact hours with each group, in terms of time spent consuming different plant parts, overall they agree with long-term dietary patterns reported for each site (Additional file 1: Fig. S1). The main differences are that Varecia consumed less fruit and more flowers/nectar at Vatovavy during our study period compared to long-term patterns, while Varecia at Mangevo consumed somewhat fewer flowers during our study period compared to long-term patterns. Therefore, long-term data suggest that fruit consumption is similar across sites, and that Varecia at Mangevo consume more leaves and fewer flowers compared to the other two sites.

Although multiple samples from each individual were collected within a single season, the bacterial taxonomic composition of samples from a single individual were not more similar to each other than they were to samples from other individuals overall (unweighted UniFrac: pseudo-F28,66 = 0.93, p > 0.05; weighted UniFrac: pseudo-F28,66 = 1.1, p > 0.05). This pattern generally held within two of the three sites (Sangasanga unweighted UniFrac: pseudo-F3,18 = 1.2, p > 0.05; Sangasanga weighted UniFrac: pseudo-F3,18 = 0.75, p > 0.05; Mangevo unweighted UniFrac: pseudo-F20,30 = 1.2, p > 0.05), except when considering relative abundance of microbial taxa at Mangevo (Mangevo weighted UniFrac: pseudo-F20,30 = 1.8, r2 = 0.78, p = 0.02). This pattern did not hold in Vatovavy (unweighted UniFrac: pseudo-F4,16 = 1.8, r2 = 0.37, p = 0.003; weighted UniFrac: pseudo-F4,16 = 2.1, r2 = 0.41, p = 0.03).

Using one randomly chosen sample per individual (n = 29 individuals), overall GM composition differed significantly across sites (unweighted UniFrac: pseudo-F2,28 = 2.7, r2 = 0.17, p < 0.001; weighted UniFrac: pseudo-F2,28 = 3.0, r2 = 0.19, p = 0.003; Fig. 5). In particular, Varecia at Mangevo had a distinct GM from Varecia at both Vatovavy and Sangasanga (Additional file 2: Table S3, Fig. 5). Microbial diversity was lowest in Vatovavy compared to both Mangevo and Sangasanga regardless of the metric utilized, and both microbial richness and phylogenetic diversity were highest in Sangasanga (richness: F2,25 = 7.6, p = 0.003; Faith’s PD: F2,25 = 5.4, p = 0.01; Shannon: F2,25 = 4.4, p = 0.02; Fig. 5a). The relative abundance of 56 microbial ASVs and 30 microbial genera differed significantly across sites (Additional file 2: Table S4, S5). In particular, Varecia in Sangasanga exhibited the highest relative abundances of Paraprevotella, Coprobacillus, YRC22, Faecalibacterium, Megamonas, Phascolarctobacterium, Sutterella, and Pseudomonas (Fig. 6). Varecia in Vatovavy, exhibited the highest relative abundances of Bacteroides (Fig. 6). In contrast, Varecia in Mangevo exhibited the highest relative abundances of Prevotella and Roseburia and low relative abundances of Paraprevotella, Coprobacillus, and Bacteroides (Fig. 6). Additionally, the absolute abundance of an unknown strain of YS2 was highest in Sangasanga and absent in Vatovavy, while an unknown strain of Bacteroides was highest in Vatovavy and absent in Mangevo (Additional file 2: Table S6). At the genus level, the absolute abundances of an unknown Chloroflexi, Sinobacteraceae, Sphaerochaetaceae were highest in Sangasanga, and the absolute abundance of an unknown Erysipelotrichaceae was highest in Vatovavy (Additional file 2: Table S7). Results were similar when we calculated the average GM composition for each individual from multiple samples (Additional file 1).

Using GM data from only the samples for which we collected host behavioral data simultaneously, Mantel tests showed a positive correlation between the overall Varecia diet and overall gut microbiota composition (Mantel r = 0.56, p < 0.001). Overall dietary richness was a significant predictor of GM richness (F1,17 = 4.4, p = 0.05; Fig. 7). After FDR correction, Ficus soroceoides fruit consumption was positively correlated with the relative abundances of an unknown Lachnospiraceae strain (r = 0.90), an unknown Bacteroidales strain (r = 0.85), an unknown Sphaerochaeta strain (r = 0.75), and the genus Sutterella (r = 0.82; Fig. 8). Cryptocarya crassifolia mature leaf consumption was positively correlated with the relative abundance of an unknown Clostridiales strain (r = 0.82), and Medinilla sp. mature leaf consumption was positively correlated with the relative abundance of an unknown Ruminococcaceae strain (r = 0.93; Fig. 8). All of these microbial strains except the unknown Ruminocacceae and Spirochaeta also exhibited significantly different relative abundances across sites.

To build upon growing interest in using the GM as a conservation tool, here we used an endangered lemur, Varecia variegata, to explore the relationship between habitat disturbance, diet, and GM composition. As hypothesized, we found significant differences in Varecia dietary composition (i.e., plant parts consumed), richness (i.e., the number of taxa consumed), and GM composition and richness across habitats with distinct anthropogenic disturbance exposures. Patterns in Varecia diet and microbiome composition were correlated. However, in contrast to expectations, Varecia occupying the site qualitatively categorized as ‘heavily disturbed’ had higher dietary and microbial richness than Varecia occupying the ‘moderately disturbed’ site. Furthermore, diet did not explain all of the variation in Varecia microbiome composition across populations. Overall, these findings emphasize the importance of quantitatively characterizing diet and other environmental factors when examining the influence of anthropogenic habitat disturbance on the GM. They also confirm that diet-GM interactions warrant further consideration when developing applied conservation efforts.

Although previous studies have reported some influences of habitat disturbance on mammalian GMs [16, 30, 31, 37, 68], direct comparisons with our findings are unlikely to provide robust insight based on the current state of the literature. Most existing studies of the effects of habitat disturbance on the GM do not quantitatively describe disturbance despite the fact that disturbance is likely to manifest itself differently at different sites and for different host species. Therefore, it is extremely challenging to determine the extent to which similar environment–GM interactions are being compared across studies. Although there are likely to be generalizable patterns through which different processes of disturbance alter the GM, we cannot begin to identify them without paired quantitative environmental and GM data from multiple sites and species.

Overall, our results show that anthropogenic habitat disturbance affects the GM of Varecia, a Critically Endangered, fruit-specialist lemur, but that broad categorical descriptions of disturbance are not useful predictors of Varecia GM composition. Additionally, while diet appears to be a major contributor to the observed GM patterns, it cannot fully explain them. These findings are likely to be generalizable across a variety of primate species and point to key gaps in conservation-based GM research more broadly. Qualitative descriptions of habitats limit the applied utility of many existing studies. GM surveys must be combined with detailed data describing the local manifestations of disturbance as well as host physiological status. Once generated, this information can be used to develop microbial biomarkers of environmental change for a range of animal populations and, ultimately, provide novel targets for both habitat restoration and health interventions. The current study provides an important foundation for this approach in Varecia and will hopefully serve as a model for developing similar studies in more wild mammal species globally.

We sampled Varecia at three sites with similar climates but different amounts and types of human impact (Table
1). Mangevo is a primary rainforest site with little evidence of human impact; signs of livestock, logging, and/or fire are rare [69]. It lies within the southern parcel of Ranomafana National Park, which protects 41,600 ha of montane rainforest within the larger Ambositra-Vondrozo Corridor (COFAV) [70, 71]. Vatovavy is a moderately disturbed 353 ha forest fragment located approximately 72 km southeast of Mangevo. It has been subject to logging, although a dense underbrush signals regrowth [72]. There is increased canopy openness compared to Mangevo as well as an altered plant community structure (Table
1). Sangasanga, the heavily disturbed site, is located within 6 km of Vatovavy and is a 99 ha forest fragment, a portion of which is used as a coffee plantation where regrowth is cut back regularly [72]. While canopy openness and plant community structure are similar to that of Vatovavy, Sangasanga is much closer to human settlements as well as other forest fragments (Table
1).

Data collection occurred from June 2018 through August 2018 at Mangevo (21° 22′ 59″ S, 47° 28′ 0″ E), Vatovavy (21° 24′ 20″ S, 47° 56′ 27″ E), and Sangasanga (21° 21′ 43″ S, 47° 50′ 54″ E). During this period, we collected behavioral data at each site using full-day continuous focal follows of radio-collared individuals. Observations were conducted at each site consecutively for three weeks, beginning with Mangevo and ending with Sangasanga. Due to logistical constraints, we followed individuals at Mangevo from 7:30 to 16:30 (N = 12 individuals, n = 99.3 observation hours; Additional file 2: Table S8) while in Vatovavy and Sangasanga, we followed individuals from 8:30 to 14:30 (N = 4 individuals at each site, 27.0 and 31.7 observation hours, respectively; Additional file 2: Table S8). To account for this bias, we only considered data from approximately 8:15 to 15:00 at each site (n = 136.9 observation hours) for subsequent analysis (Additional file 2: Table S8). Individuals were observed once each at Mangevo and multiple times at Vatovavy and Sangasanga, but to make the data comparable, we chose to include data from one focal follow randomly for each individual at the latter two sites. We recorded time spent resting, traveling, feeding, feeding out of sight, engaging in social interactions, and out of sight.

During feeding bouts we recorded the plant species, plant part, and stage of ripeness (ripe or unripe). We described dietary richness for each group by summing the total number of unique food items (plant part and plant species) Varecia was observed consuming at each site, as well as calculating the average number of food items consumed by individuals in the group. We described diet composition in terms of proportion of grams consumed of each food item. To do this, we recorded consumption rate for each food item (number of bites taken per bout). At the end of the study period in each forest, we collected, measured, and weighed thirty samples of each plant part consumed by Varecia, often from the same plants that had been utilized during focal sampling. We divided the average weight of each food item by the number of bites required to consume it. We then multiplied the number of minutes spent consuming the food item by the bite rate in grams. Because nectar was an important part of the Varecia diet during this period, we measured the milliliters of nectar in each flower (Ravenala madagascariensis). The nectar has a fourteen percent sucrose concentration, or fourteen grams of sugar per one-hundred milliliters of nectar [73]. We used this value to estimate the average grams of sugar per flower and combined it with the average grams of water per flower (converted from milliliters to grams with a one-to-one ratio), and multiplied this by the number of flowers consumed. Finally, for ‘feeding out of sight’, we used bite rates from a similar plant species. The plant species consumed as well as their estimated grams per bite are reported in Table
2.

We collected fecal samples from 20 individuals in Mangevo (N = 30 samples), five individuals in Vatovavy (N = 17 samples), and four individuals in Sangasanga (N = 20 samples; Additional file 2: Table S8). These included samples from our focal individuals at each site, as well as samples collected from other individuals opportunistically. Samples were collected immediately following defecation and stored in 99% ethanol at room temperature until transport to the Amato lab (~ 1 month), where they were stored at − 80 °C until processing.

We extracted DNA from fecal samples (Qiagen PowerSoil DNA Isolation Kit) and amplified the V4-V5 region of the 16S rRNA gene with the 515F/926R primers, using previously described PCR protocols [74, 75]. One sample that could not be amplified was discarded, and both extraction and PCR negatives were used for quality control. PCR products were purified, normalized, and sequenced (Illumina MiSeq with V4 chemistry) at the DNA Services Center at the University of Illinois at Chicago. To be able to transform 16S relative abundance data into count data, qPCR of the 16S rRNA gene was performed on our samples by the DNA Services Center as previously described [76, 77].

Alpha rarefaction indicated that all samples had sufficient sequencing coverage. Therefore, we used the breakaway plug-in in QIIME2 to estimate the taxonomic richness of all samples and the diversity plug-in to calculate Shannon and Faith’s Phylogenetic diversity. Breakaway indicated that four samples had an error greater than ten (VVAR.MADA.18.NM.18, VVAR.MADA.18.NM.37, VVAR.MADA.18.NM.60, VVAR.MADA.18.NM.61), so we removed these samples from diversity statistical analyses. We used the core-metrics-phylogenetic plug-in in QIIME2 to rarefy the data to 6956 reads/sample and generate unweighted and weighted UniFrac distance matrices. Finally, we used our 16S qPCR data to calculate the absolute abundances of all microbial taxa in our samples as previously described [77].

We evaluated differences in proportion of time spent in each activity and dietary richness across sites using an ANOVA. Variation in percent of total grams of each food item consumed was assessed using a Kruskal–Wallis rank-sum test due to non-normal data distributions.

With the subset of samples for which we had paired diet and GM data (Additional file 2: Table S9), we used a Mantel test to explore the correlation between overall Varecia diet composition and GM composition. We performed linear regressions to test for an association between dietary richness and GM richness. Finally, we used CCREPE [82] to test for correlations between the dietary percentage of nine food items consumed by more than two individuals and the relative abundance of all microbial ASVs. This package is designed for compositional datasets like ours and incorporates an FDR correction for multiple tests.



Publisher's Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

