Proton pump inhibitors affect the gut microbiome

Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) are among the top 10 most widely used drugs in the world. PPI use has been associated with an increased risk of enteric infections, most notably Clostridium difficile. The gut microbiome plays an important role in enteric infections, by resisting or promoting colonisation by pathogens. In this study, we investigated the influence of PPI use on the gut microbiome.

The gut microbiome composition of 1815 individuals, spanning three cohorts, was assessed by tag sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene. The difference in microbiota composition in PPI users versus non-users was analysed separately in each cohort, followed by a meta-analysis.

211 of the participants were using PPIs at the moment of stool sampling. PPI use is associated with a significant decrease in Shannon's diversity and with changes in 20% of the bacterial taxa (false discovery rate <0.05). Multiple oral bacteria were over-represented in the faecal microbiome of PPI-users, including the genus Rothia (p=9.8×10−38). In PPI users we observed a significant increase in bacteria: genera Enterococcus, Streptococcus, Staphylococcus and the potentially pathogenic species Escherichia coli.

The differences between PPI users and non-users observed in this study are consistently associated with changes towards a less healthy gut microbiome. These differences are in line with known changes that predispose to C. difficile infections and can potentially explain the increased risk of enteric infections in PPI users. On a population level, the effects of PPI are more prominent than the effects of antibiotics or other commonly used drugs.

Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) are among the top 10 most widely used drugs in the world. In 2013, 7% of the population of the Netherlands used omeprazole. In the same year, esomeprazole was the second largest drug in terms of revenue in the USA.1 2 PPIs are used to treat GORD and to prevent gastric and duodenal ulcers.3 4 Of the general population, 25% report having heartburn at least once a month, explaining the large demand for PPIs.4 Nevertheless, PPIs are frequently prescribed or taken for long periods without evidence-based indication.5 6

The gut microbiome plays an important role in these enteric infections.10–13 Gut microbiota can resist or promote the microbial colonisation of the gut by C. difficile and other enteric infections through several mechanisms that either directly inhibit bacterial growth or enhance the immune system.10 11 Moreover, substituting the gut microbiota of patients with C. difficile-associated diarrhoea with a healthy microbiome through faecal transplantation has been proven to cure C. difficile infection.14 The increased incidence of enteric infections in PPI users and the importance of the gut microbiome composition in the development of these infections led us to investigate the influence of PPI use on the gut microbiome.

We studied the effect of PPI use on the gut microbial composition in three independent cohorts from the Netherlands. These cohorts together comprise 1815 adult individuals, including healthy subjects and patients with GI diseases. Cohort 1 consists of 1174 individuals who participate in the general population study LifeLines-DEEP in the northern provinces of the Netherlands.15 Cohort 2 consists of 300 patients with IBD from the department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology University Medical Center Groningen (UMCG), the Netherlands. Cohort 3 consists of 189 patients with IBS and 152 matched controls from Maastricht University Medical Center (MUMC), the Netherlands.

Current medication use at the time of stool collection of Cohort 1 participants was extracted from a standardised questionnaire.16 Two medical doctors reviewed all the medication for 1174 participants. PPI use was scored if participants used omeprazole, esomeprazole, pantoprazole, lansoprazole, dexlansoprazole or rabeprazole. To exclude other possible drug effects on the gut microbiome, medication use was scored in eight categories, allowing for later correction of parameters or exclusion of certain participants. These categories were medication that: (1) changes bowel movement or stool frequency, (2) lowers triglyceride levels, (3) lowers cholesterol levels, (4) anti-diabetic medication (oral and insulin), (5) systemic anti-inflammatory medication (excluding NSAIDs), (6) topical anti-inflammatory medication, (7) systemic antibiotics, including antifungal and antimalarial medication, and (8) antidepressants including serotonin-specific reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), mirtazapine, and tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs). The definitions of these categories are described in the online supplementary appendix. Analysis of drugs used in Cohort 2 was based on the IBD-specific electronic patient record in the UMCG. Current PPI use, as well as current IBD medication (mesalazines, thiopurines, methotrexate, steroids, tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-α inhibitors and other biologicals) were scored at the time of sampling by the gastroenterologist treating the patient with IBD. Current PPI consumption in the IBS case-control Cohort 3 was based on self-reported questionnaires. Pseudonymised data for all three cohorts was provided to the researchers.

Information on age, gender and body mass index (BMI) was available for all three cohorts. In Cohort 1, gut complaints were investigated using an extensive questionnaire that included defecation frequency and the Bristol Stool Scale. Possible IBS and functional diarrhoea or constipation were determined using self-reported ROME III criteria. The patients with IBD in Cohort 2 were diagnosed based on accepted radiological, endoscopic and histopathological evaluation. All the IBD cases included in our study fulfilled the clinical criteria for IBD. IBS in Cohort 3 was diagnosed by a gastroenterologist according to the ROME III criteria.

A total of 1815 stool samples and 116 oral cavity mucus samples were collected. Cohorts 1 and 2 used identical protocols to collect the stool samples. Participants of cohort 1 and 2 were asked to collect one stool sample at home. Stool samples were frozen within 15 min after stool production in the participants’ home freezer and remained frozen until DNA isolation. A research nurse visited all participants to collect the stool samples shortly after production and they were transported and stored at –80°C. Participants of cohort 3 were asked to bring a stool sample to the research facility within 24 h after stool production. These samples were immediately frozen upon arrival at −80°C.

Oral cavity mucus samples were collected from 116 additional healthy volunteers using buccal swabs.

Microbial DNA from stool samples was isolated with the Qiagen AllPrep DNA/RNA Mini Kit (cat. # 80204). DNA isolation from oral cavity swabs was performed using the UltraClean microbial DNA isolation kit (cat.# 12224) from MoBio Laboratories (Carlsbad, California, USA). To determine the bacterial composition of the stool and oral cavity mucus samples, sequencing of the variable region V4 of the 16S rRNA gene was performed using Illumina MiSeq. DNA isolation is described in the Methods section of the online supplementary appendix.

Bacterial taxonomy was determined by clustering the sequence reads with UCLUST (V.1.2.22q) with a distance threshold of 97%, using Greengenes (V.13.8) as the taxonomy reference database. Sequencing and the determination of taxonomy are described in the Methods section of the online supplementary appendix.

In each cohort, differentially abundant taxa in the gut microbiome between PPI users and non-PPI users were analysed using the multivariate statistical framework MaAsLin.17 MaAsLin performs boosted, additive, general linear models between metadata and microbial abundance data. After running the association studies in the individual cohorts, we performed a meta-analysis of the three cohorts, using the weighted Z-score method. The Cochran's Q test was used to check for heterogeneity. The significance cut-off for the Cochran's Q test was determined by Bonferroni correction for the 92 significant results: p<5.43×10−4. Differences in richness (the number of species within a sample), principal coordinate analyses (PCoA) and Shannon diversity analysis were determined using the QIIME microbiome analysis software.18 The Wilcoxon test and Spearman's correlations were used to identify differences in Shannon's diversity and relations between the PCoA scores of PPI users and non-PPI users, while the χ2 test, Fisher's exact test, Spearman's correlation and Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney test (WMW test) were used to determine differences in age, gender, BMI, antibiotics use, and gut complaints between PPI users and non-users. In all the microbiome analyses, multiple test corrections were based on the false discovery rate (FDR). An FDR value of 0.05 was used as a statistically significant cut-off.

Significant results were graphically represented in cladograms using GraPhlAn.19 More details on the statistical analysis can be found in the Methods section (see online supplementary appendix).

Differentially abundant taxa were corrected for several parameters, which were identified by statistical analysis of cohort phenotypes or univariate MaAsLin runs and subsequently added as cofactors to the additive linear model. Analyses in the general population Cohort 1 were corrected for age, gender, BMI, antibiotics use, sequence read depth and ROME III diagnosis (IBS-Constipation (IBS-C), IBS-Diarrhoea (IBS-D), IBS-Mixed (IBS-M), IBS-Undetermined (IBS-U), functional bloating, functional constipation, functional diarrhoea or none). The analysis of patients with IBD in Cohort 2 was corrected for age, gender, BMI, antibiotics use, sequence read depth, diagnosis (Crohn's disease or UC) combined with disease location (colon, ileum or both) and IBD medication (use of mesalazines, steroids, thiopurines, methotrexate or anti-TNF antibodies). The analysis of the IBS case-control Cohort 3 was corrected for age, gender, BMI, sequence read depth and IBS status according to the ROME III criteria. In the meta-analysis, all microbiome data were corrected for age, gender, BMI, antibiotics use and sequence read depth.

PPI were used by 211 (11.6%) of the 1815 participants: 8.4% of the general population (Cohort 1), 20.0% of the patients with IBD (Cohort 2) and 15.2% of the participants of case-control Cohort 3. Women use PPI more often than men: 9.2% versus 7.4%, albeit this was not statistically significant (p=0.61, χ2 test). PPI users were generally older: 51.6 (SD 13.4) years of age versus 44.4 (SD 14.7) years of age (p=2.50×10-11 WMW test) and have a higher BMI of 26.9 (SD 5.0) versus 24.9 (SD 4.2) for non-users (p=1.89×10−8, WMW test). Antibiotics were concomitantly used by 2% of the 99 PPI users of Cohort 1 and 33% of the 60 PPI users of Cohort 2. There was no overlap between PPI users and antibiotics users in Cohort 3. Based on our data, we included age, gender, BMI and antibiotics as cofactors in the microbiome analyses. Table 1 provides an overview of the characteristics per cohort and the use of PPI.

*Unless otherwise stated

IBD, Inflammatory Bowel Disease; IBS, Irritable Bowel Syndrome; SD, standard deviation, BMI, body mass index.

MUMC, Maastricht University Medical Center; PPI, proton pump inhibitor, TNF-a, tumour necrosis factor; UMCG, University Medical Center Groningen.

The predominant phylum in each cohort was Firmicutes with abundances of 76.7%, 73.8% and 77.4% in Cohorts 1, 2 and 3, respectively. Information on the composition of the gut microbiome for all three cohorts and on all taxonomic levels is provided in online supplementary figures S1, S2 and table S1. Independent of PPI use, the overall high-level bacterial composition of the gut was homogeneous in all three cohorts (by phylum, class and order level, Spearman's correlations: r>0.94; p<1.6×10−13).

In all three cohorts we identified a lower species richness and lower Shannon diversity, although not significant (Cohort 1, p=0.85 ; Cohort 2, p=0.16; Cohort 3, p=0.53), however in combined analysis of all three data sets we identified, moderate but significant decrease in gut α diversity of PPI users was observed in the meta-analysis of all 1815 gut microbiome samples: Shannon index (p=0.01) and species richness (p=0.02) (see online supplementary figures S3 and S4).

The meta-analysis across all three cohorts showed statistically significant alterations in 92 of the 460 bacterial taxa abundance (FDR<0.05). These changes are depicted in a cladogram in figure 1 and in a heatmap in figure 2, and in online supplementary figure S5. Details of each taxon, including the individual direction, coefficient, p value and FDR for each cohort, as well as the meta-analysis, are provided in online supplementary tables S2 and S3. Cochran's Q test was used to check for heterogeneity. None of the 92 reported associations were significantly heterogeneous at the Bonferroni corrected p value cut-off (p<5.43×10−4) (see online supplementary table S2).

The overall difference of the gut microbiome associated with PPI use was also observed in the PCoA of all the data sets together (figure 3 and see online supplementary figure S6). The same PCoA with separate colours for each cohort has been added in online supplementary figure S7. Notably, we observed statistically significant differences between PPI users and non-users in two principal coordinates (PCoA1: p=1.39×10−20, PCoA3: p=0.0004, Wilcoxon test).

The order Actinomycetales, families Streptococcoceae, Micrococcoceae, genus Rothia and species Lactobacillus salivarius were increased in participants using PPI in each cohort. None of the individual cohorts contained any significantly decreased taxa (FDR<0.05). In the general population (Cohort 1), 41 of the 829 bacterial taxa were significantly increased, including the class Gammaproteobacteria, the family Enterococcoceae and the genera Streptococcus, Veillonella and Enterococcus (FDR<0.05) (see online supplementary table S4). In patients with IBD (Cohort 2), PPI use was associated with an increase of 12 of the 667 bacterial taxa, including the family Lactobacillaceae as well as the genera Streptococcus and Lactobacillus (FDR<0.05) (see online supplementary table S5). In IBS case-control Cohort 3, 18 of the 624 taxa were significantly increased, including the order Lactobacillales (FDR<0.05) (see online supplementary table S6).

We hypothesised that the changes in the gut microbiome associated with PPI use are caused by reduced acidity of the stomach and the subsequent survival of more bacteria that are ingested with food and oral mucus. Indeed, some of the statistically significantly increased bacteria in PPI users (eg, Rothia dentocariosa, Rothia mucilaginosa, the genera Scardovia and Actinomyces and the family Micrococcaceae) are typically found in the oral microbiome.20 By analysing 116 oral microbiome samples from participants in Cohort 1, we could compare the overall composition of bacteria in the oral microbiome with the composition of the gut microbiome. We observed a statistically significant shift in Principal Coordinate 1 in the gut microbiome samples of the PPI users towards the oral samples, compared with non-PPI users (p=1.39×10−20, Wilcoxon test) (figure 3). In online supplementary figure S8, the over-representation of oral cavity bacteria in the guts of PPI users is depicted in a cladogram.

Some of the significantly increased taxa were more abundant in the small intestine.11 To ensure that the changes observed in microbiota composition were not due to diarrhoea and/or more frequent bowel movements, we checked in our general population whether clinical symptoms of diarrhoea were more often present in PPI users. Neither diarrhoeal complaints (IBS-D and functional diarrhoea, p=0.22, Fisher's exact test), stool consistency as defined by the Bristol Stool Scale (r=0.027, p=0.36, Spearman's correlation) nor the defecation frequency (r=−0.001, p=0.98, Spearman's correlation) of the participants in Cohort 1 were related to PPI use.

In Cohort 1, 16 taxa were associated with antibiotics and other commonly used drug categories besides PPI (see online supplementary table S7). After correction for PPI use, only six taxa remained associated with certain drugs: statins, fibrates and drugs that change bowel movements. All 92 alterations in bacterial taxa associated with PPI use remained statistically significant if we correct the microbiome analyses for antibiotics and other commonly used drugs.

We show that PPI use is consistently associated with profound changes in the gut microbiome. In our study, these changes were more prominent than changes associated with either antibiotics or other commonly used drugs. While PPIs have proven to be useful in the prevention and treatment of ulcers and GORD, they have also been associated with an increased risk of C. difficile, Salmonella spp, Shigella spp, Campylobacter spp, and other enteric infections.4 5 7–9 The increased risk of acquiring one of these enteric infections is likely due to changes in the PPI user's gut microbiome. Gut microbiota can resist or promote colonisation of C. difficile and other enteric infections through mechanisms that either directly inhibit bacterial growth or enhance the immune system.10–13 In the case of C. difficile, spores might be able to germinate more easily because of metabolites synthesised by certain gut bacteria.12 13

PPI, proton pump inhibitor.

k__, kingdom; p__, phylum; c__, class; o__, order; f__, family; g__, genus; s__, species

associations are in bold

This paper reports the largest study to date investigating the influence of PPI on the gut microbiome. The profound alterations seen in the gut microbiome could be linked to the increased risk of C. difficile and other enteric infections. Given the widespread use of PPI, the morbidity and mortality associated with enteric infections, and the increasing number of studies investigating the microbiome, healthcare practitioners and microbiome researchers should be fully aware of the influence of PPI on the gut microbiome.

Contributors: AZ, RKW, CW and DJ designed the study. FI, EFT, SAJ, ZM, LV, MCC and GD acquired the data; FI, MJB and AVV analysed and interpreted the data; FI drafted the manuscript; MJB and AVV performed the statistical analysis; AZ, RKW, CW, DJ, GD, LF, JF, HJMH and RJX critically revised the manuscript; AZ, RKW, CW, DJ, LF and JF obtained funding; AZ, RKW, CW and DJ supervised the study.

Funding: Sequencing of the LifeLines-DEEP and IBS MUMC cohorts was funded by the Top Institute Food and Nutrition grant GH001 to CW. CW is further supported by an ERC advanced grant ERC-671274, AZ holds a Rosalind Franklin fellowship (University of Groningen) and MCC holds a postdoctoral fellowship from the Spanish Fundación Alfonso Martín Escudero. RKW, JF and LF are supported by VIDI grants (016.136.308, 864.13.013 and 917.14.374) from the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO).

Competing interests: None declared.

Patient consent: Obtained.

Ethics approval: The institutional review boards of the UMCG and the MUMC (MUMC http://www.clinicaltrials.gov, NCT00775060).

Provenance and peer review: Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.

