Changes in the gut microbiome associated with liver stiffness improvement in nonalcoholic steatohepatitis

Longitudinal studies are needed to decipher mechanistic links between the gut microbiome and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH). We examined shifts in the gut microbiome in persons with NASH with improvement in liver stiffness measurement (LSM) by magnetic resonance (MR) elastography.

Gut microbial profiling was performed at baseline and study completion (24 weeks) using 16 S rRNA gene sequencing in 69 adults with biopsy-confirmed NASH and significant fibrosis (stages 2–3) enrolled in a multi-center randomized controlled trial evaluating selonsertib alone or in combination with simtuzumab. Differential abundance of bacterial taxa at baseline and end of study were examined in participants with and without longitudinal improvement in LSM. Gut microbial shifts that correlated with secondary outcomes, including reduction in MR imaging-derived proton density fat faction (MRI-PDFF) and histologic fibrosis regression were evaluated. Fecal samples from 32 healthy adults were profiled and genus-level multidimensional scaling was used to determine if microbial shifts in persons with NASH improvement represented a shift toward a healthy gut microbiome.

Shifts in abundance of 36 bacterial taxa including Lactobacillus (log2FC = –4.51, FDR < 0.001), Enterococcus (log2FC = –6.72, FDR < 0.001), and Megasphaera (log2FC = 7.74, FDR < 0.001) were associated with improvement in LSM. Improvement in LSM was associated with microbial shifts toward healthy reference (p = 0.05). Significant shifts in 10 and 12 bacterial taxa were associated with improvement in LSM in addition to MRI-PDFF and fibrosis regression, respectively, indicating consistent taxonomic changes across multiple clinical endpoints.

Longitudinal changes in the gut microbiota are observed in adults with NASH and clinical improvement and represent a shift toward a healthy microbiome.

Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), a hepatic manifestation of metabolic syndrome, has become the leading cause of chronic liver disease worldwide.1,2 Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), a progressive and severe form of NAFLD, is associated with increased risk for cirrhosis, hepatocellular carcinoma, and liver-related death,3–5 representing a major public health burden. Effective therapeutic interventions for NASH, and in particular NASH-related fibrosis, are sorely needed.

In this study, we prospectively examined gut microbial shifts in adults with NASH and stage 2–3 fibrosis enrolled in a clinical trial and evaluated microbial shifts in those with and without clinical improvement in liver stiffness as assessed by magnetic resonance elastography. We also examined microbial shifts during the study period associated with secondary clinical outcomes including improvement in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)-estimated proton density fat fraction as well as histologic measures including fibrosis regression and improvement in hepatic collagen content. Finally, we performed microbiota profiling in a healthy reference cohort in order evaluate whether changes in taxonomic composition in adults with clinical improvement in NASH were reflective of a shift toward a healthy microbiome.

Patients included in this study were enrolled in a multicenter, open-label, phase-2 trial investigating the safety and efficacy of selonsertib (SEL), a selective inhibitor of apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1 (formerly GS-4997), in combination with simtuzumab (SIM), a humanized monoclonal antibody directed against lysl oxidase-like 2 (formerly GS-6624). 7 The trial was prospectively registered in Clinicaltrials.gov (NCT02466516). Study enrollment criteria and design have previously been described and are summarized in Supplemental Figure 1. 7 Briefly, adults (18–70 years of age) were enrolled at 23 sites in the United States and Canada from June 2015 to March 2016. To be eligible, patients were required to have a liver biopsy within 3 months of screening consistent with a diagnosis of NASH (defined by NAFLD Activity Score (NAS) ⩾ 5 with a score of at least 1 for each of three components including steatosis, hepatocellular ballooning, and lobular inflammation) and stage 2 or 3 fibrosis, according to the NASH Clinical Research Network (CRN) Histologic Scoring System. 8 In addition, all patients had at least three of the following features of the metabolic syndrome: abdominal obesity, hypertension, elevated fasting glucose, elevated levels of serum triglycerides, or low levels of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol. During the trial, patients were randomized 2:2:1 to receive treatment with low-dose SEL 6 mg ± SIM, high-dose SEL 18 mg ± SIM, or SIM alone. Selonsertib was administered orally once daily and simtuzumab was administered as weekly subcutaneous injections. Randomization was stratified by the presence or absence of type-2 diabetes mellitus. All patients underwent magnetic resonance imaging and elastography (MRI and MRE), liver biopsy, and fecal sample collection at baseline and 24 weeks.

To enable comparisons with the healthy gut microbiome, we included 32 fecal samples from healthy adults participating in the Human Microbiome Project. 9

Fecal samples collected from enrolled patients at baseline and week 24 (end of study) were placed in sterile collection containers and immediately stored at −70°C. DNA from fecal samples was extracted with a Mo BIO PowerMag DNA Isolation Kit (Mo Bio Laboratories, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and the variable region 4 of the 16 S rRNA gene was amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and sequenced in the MiSeq platform (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) via the 2 × 250-bp paired-end protocol and genus-level assignments were made from operational taxonomic unit (OTU) data.

16 S rRNA sequencing data were processed using qiime2 suite of tools. 10 Briefly, raw fastq data were first imported and de-multiplexed prior to removing primers with qiime2 modules. Sequences were further denoised with DADA2 and summary statistics – including base quality, sequencing depth per sample and feature frequency – were performed to assess sequencing quality. Closed reference mapping and subsequent clustering was performed using vsearch module. Phyloseq 11 and DESeq2 12 packages were used to manipulate microbiome data and perform differential abundance analysis for clinical parameters of interest.

Improvement in liver stiffness, as measured by two-dimensional MRE, was the primary outcome measure in our analyses and defined a priori. Secondary outcomes included improvement in proton density fat fraction (MRI-PDFF) and histologic outcomes of fibrosis regression and reduction in hepatic collagen content.

Liver biopsies performed at baseline and week 24 were read by a single reader blinded to treatment assignment but not biopsy sequence with fibrosis staging according to the NASH Clinical Research Network classification. 8 Fibrosis regression was defined by reduction in fibrosis score by at least 1 stage combined with a decrease in alanine aminotransferase (ALT) level and improvement in the NAFLD activity score (NAS) and its individual components. Computer-assisted morphometry was used to quantify hepatic collagen content using picrosirius red-stained liver sections. Improvement in hepatic collagen content was defined by a decrease of 30% or more from baseline to end of study.

Categorical parameters were compared using chi-square or Fisher’s exact tests. Tests of differential microbiome abundance were performed using DESeq2 package with p values linear models adjusted using the false discovery rate (FDR) correction. Differences between patient populations were analyzed using Kruskal–Wallis or Mann–Whitney U tests (two-sided). To explore whether any previously unrecognized properties impact patient population structure and our downstream analyses, we performed Multidimensional Scaling across all timepoints to evaluate patient clustering and potential drivers of these clusters. Correlation between continuous variables was examined with Spearman’s Rank test.

This study was approved by the University of California, San Diego Institutional Review Board and the relevant ethics committees of participating study centers, and all participants provided written informed consent for the randomized phase-2 trial (NCT02466516). All authors had access to the study data and reviewed and approved the final manuscript. The reporting of this study conforms to the STROBE statement. 15

Of the 72 patients with biopsy-proven NASH and stage 2 or 3 fibrosis who were randomized and treated during the clinical trial, 69 had fecal samples at baseline and end of study (week 24). Baseline demographic, clinical, and histologic parameters of the 69 adults who were included in this study are summarized in Table 1. The median age was 55 years (interquartile range (IQR) 47–61 years), and 70% of patients were female. The median body mass index (BMI) was 33.1 kg/m2 (IQR 29.4–38.0 kg/m2), and 71% of patients included in this study had type-2 diabetes mellitus. The baseline median liver stiffness by MRE was 3.7 kPa (IQR 3.1–4.7 kPa). Twenty-four (35%) and 45 (65%) patients had fibrosis stage 2 (F2) and 3 (F3), respectively. There was no significant change in weight, HOMA-IR, or hemoglobin A1c% in participants during the 24-week study period. 7

Values are either n(%) or median (interquartile range).

The mean age and BMI of healthy volunteers from the Human Microbiome Project were 26 years and 24 kg/m2, respectively.

Longitudinal samples from 69 NASH patients yielded on average 29,516 reads. We first examined differentially abundant taxa between baseline and week 24 in the NASH cohort based on treatment group. No taxa were found to be differentially abundant between baseline and end of treatment in the low dose (6 mg) SEL treatment arm. There were 20 differentially abundant taxa in the high-dose (18 mg) SEL treatment arm at end of study when compared to baseline, which included Haemophilus parainfluenzae and Streptophyta (FDR < 0.01) (Supplemental Figure 2). There were 10 and 8 differentially abundant taxa in the low-dose SEL and SIM and high-dose SEL and SIM treatment arms, respectively (Supplemental Figure 2). However, we found that there was no taxonomic overlap between differentially abundant taxa in those participants receiving high-dose SEL monotherapy and those receiving high-dose SEL and simtuzumab, indicating inconsistent bacterial taxonomic shifts across SEL treatment arms. (Supplemental Table 1).

Utilizing a multidimensional scaling method, we calculated the microbiome distance between each NASH patient at baseline and week 24 and the healthy reference cohort. We found a dosage-dependent trend toward a healthy equilibrium, but this was marginally non-significant (p = 0.07, one-sided Jonkheere-Terpstra, Supplemental Figure 3).

We subsequently focused our analysis on examining changes in microbiota composition during the 24-week study period based on whether participants experienced clinical improvement in NASH. Sixty participants had LSM with MRE at baseline and end of study. During the study period, 12 (12/60, 20%) participants had reduction in LSM ⩾ 15%, as measured by MRE. We identified significant shifts in abundance of 36 bacterial taxa (FDR < 0.05) that were associated with reduction in LSM over the 24-week period, as compared to baseline (Table 2). Pasteurellales (log2FC = 4.580, FDR < 0.001), Lactobacillus (log2FC = –4.511, FDR < 0.001), Enterococcus (log2FC = –6.720, FDR < 0.001), Megasphaera (log2FC = 7.738, FDR < 0.001), Bacteroides eggerthii (log2FC = 5.875, FDR < 0.001) were among the taxa that shifted significantly in abundance (end of study (24 weeks) versus baseline) in those participants with improvement in LSM during the study period (Figure 1).

Only differentially abundant taxa with adjusted p value < 0.05 are shown.

Finally, we evaluated whether microbial compositional shifts in patients with improvement in LSM represented an overall shift toward a healthy microbiome. We observed a striking pattern between the microbiome profile change and change in LSM by MRE. Patients experiencing improvement in LSM (>15% reduction in LSM by MRE) during the 24-week study period shifted their overall microbiome composition toward that of the healthy reference (p = 0.05, Figure 2). Intriguingly, persons with improvement in LSM during the study period had a higher distance from healthy reference at study baseline compared to LSM non-responders. On the contrary, patients experiencing ⩾ 15% increase in LSM by MRE displayed a shift away from the healthy reference, although this did not reach statistical significance, potentially related to the study’s small sample size. (p = 0.08)

A number of recent cross-sectional studies have expanded our current understanding of the gut microbiome in NAFLD, 16 but longitudinal data are limited and needed to better derive mechanistic insights. In this study, we prospectively examined longitudinal changes in the gut microbiota over a 24-week period in adults with biopsy-proven NASH and significant hepatic fibrosis enrolled in an international, multi-center trial. We compared shifts in the gut microbial composition between those with and without clinical improvement in NASH based on advanced MR imaging techniques and histology. In addition, our study incorporated characterization of the gut microbiota in a group of healthy adults for reference, allowing us to determine whether gut microbial dynamics in those with longitudinal improvement in NASH severity were reflective of a shift toward a healthy gut microbiome reference or not.

In summary, our study is novel in that we have integrated microbiome analyses into a multi-center clinical trial, permitting microbial profiling in adults with change in disease severity, yielding a number of observations that can be validated in future prospective studies. Knowledge of the impact of NASH therapeutics on the gut microbiota, and how this correlates with therapeutic response, is essential to gain new mechanistic insight into host-microbiota crosstalk in NAFLD.

Author contribution(s): Suzanne R. Sharpton: Conceptualization; Investigation; Methodology; Writing – original draft; Writing – review & editing.

Jen-Chieh Chuang: Formal analysis; Investigation; Project administration; Writing – review & editing.

Yevgeniy Gindin: Formal analysis; Writing – review & editing.

Robert P. Myers: Conceptualization; Data curation; Methodology; Resources; Writing – review & editing.

Rohit Loomba: Conceptualization; Funding acquisition; Investigation; Methodology; Resources; Supervision; Writing – review & editing.

ORCID iD: Suzanne R. Sharpton https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7722-5716

Funding: The authors disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: Clinical trial funding was supported by Gilead Sciences, Inc. SS is supported by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases (AASLD) Clinical, Translational and Outcomes Research Award. RL is supported by P30 DK120515/DK/NIDDK NIH HHS/United States.

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared the following potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: SS serves as a consultant or advisory board member for Ionis. OP is employed by and owns stock in Gilead. JC is employed by and owns stock in Gilead. YG is employed by and owns stock in Gilead. RM is employed by and owns stock in Gilead. RL serves as a consultant or advisory board member for Arrowhead Pharmaceuticals, AstraZeneca, Boehringer-Ingelheim, Bristol-Myer Squibb, Celgene, Cirius, CohBar, Galmed, Gemphire, Gilead, Glympse bio, GNI, GRI Bio, Intercept, Ionis, Merck, Metacrine, Inc., NGM Biopharmaceuticals, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, Pfizer, Siemens, and Viking Therapeutics. In addition, his institution has received grant support from Allergan, Boehringer-Ingelheim, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Cirius, Eli Lilly and Company, Galectin Therapeutics, Galmed Pharmaceuticals, GE, Genfit, Gilead, Intercept, Grail, Janssen, Madrigal Pharmaceuticals, NGM Biopharmaceuticals, Pfizer, pH Pharma, Prometheus, and Siemens. He is also co-founder of Liponexus, Inc.

Supplemental material: Supplemental material for this article is available online.

