Dietary manipulation of the gut microbiome in inflammatory bowel disease patients: Pilot study



Diet is a modifiable, noninvasive, inexpensive behavior that is crucial in shaping the intestinal microbiome. A microbiome “imbalance” or dysbiosis in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is linked to inflammation. Here, we aim to define the impact of specific foods on bacterial species commonly depleted in patients with IBD to better inform dietary treatment. We performed a single-arm, pre-post intervention trial. After a baseline period, a dietary intervention with the IBD-Anti-Inflammatory Diet (IBD-AID) was initiated. We collected stool and blood samples and assessed dietary intake throughout the study. We applied advanced computational approaches to define and model complex interactions between the foods reported and the microbiome. A dense dataset comprising 553 dietary records and 340 stool samples was obtained from 22 participants. Consumption of prebiotics, probiotics, and beneficial foods correlated with increased abundance of Clostridia and Bacteroides, commonly depleted in IBD cohorts. We further show that specific foods categorized as prebiotics or adverse foods are correlated to levels of cytokines in serum (i.e., GM-CSF, IL-6, IL-8, TNF-alpha) that play a central role in IBD pathogenesis. By using robust predictive analytics, this study represents the first steps to detangle diet-microbiome and diet-immune interactions to inform personalized nutrition for patients suffering from dysbiosis-related IBD.

The etiology of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is thought to be linked to an inappropriate immune response to an altered or dysbiotic gut microbiome in genetically susceptible individuals. Dysbiosis in IBD patients is characterized by depletion of Clostridia and Bacteroides.1–6 These bacterial species are known to maintain gut homeostasis via the production of short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs).7–11 Dietary interventions represent an ideal strategy to revert gut dysbiosis in IBD patients as diet change is often more embraced by individuals than medication.12 Also, diet is safe, does not require FDA approval 12 , and has been proven to rapidly change the microbiome.13

In this current work, our primary outcome is to rigorously establish whether the IBD-AID can revert dysbiosis by favoring SCFA-producing bacteria that are depleted in patients with IBD. To achieve this primary outcome we took into account the fact that there is highly interpersonal variability of microbiome,35 also individual-specific response to diet,36 and the fact that consuming a placebo diet is not an option for a control group.37 Thus, we conducted a prospective, single-arm, pre-post intervention trial, where participants were used as their own control, as previously done.13,38 We leveraged our robust and validated predictive analytic and mathematical modeling 39–41 to perform fine-scale analysis focused only on bacterial species favored by specific foods during an 8-week dietary intervention with the IBD-AID.

We enrolled 25 subjects with CD or UC to complete an 8-week IBD-AID dietary intervention (Figure 1). A total of 22 participants completed the baseline period (age average = 40.5 ± 12.8. Table 1). Nineteen subjects continued to complete the intervention period (12 CD and 7 UC). The average body mass index (BMI) for participants in the study was 27.9 ± 5.8 (overweight and obese), which is comparable to the average BMI among Americans.42 Only 1 UC participant was underweight (BMI = 17.9). Except for 2 CD participants reporting no IBD-related medications, participants were using biologics (31.8%), aminoacylates (27.2%), steroids (22.7%), and immunomodulators (13.60%).

At baseline, we obtained 134 and 89 unique 24-hour IBD-AID Food Querys from 14 CD and 7 UC participants, respectively. We observed that all the participants reported similar diets at baseline (Mann–Whitney test, p-value >0.5. Supplementary Table S2), except for intakes of lean animal protein (included in beneficial foods on the IBD-AID), which was higher in UC patients. As expected, participants reported a low intake of fruits and vegetables comparable to an average American (<2 servings).43

In sum, we observed that overall participants can rapidly adopt the IBD-AID.

We collected a total of 340 stool samples: 143 at baseline and 197 during the intervention. The average number of stool samples per participant was 6.5 ± 2.1 at baseline (n = 22) and 10.3 ± 5.1 at intervention (n = 19). At baseline, we observe high microbiome inter-personal variability among participants with no differences by disease phenotype (CD vs UC) in alpha and beta diversity (Supplementary Figure S1) nor in microbiota representation (BH p-value >0.05, data not shown).

Taken together, these findings show an overall shift of the microbiome during the intervention that differs by disease phenotype and is specie specific. The top bacteria favored by the IBD-AID intervention were two major butyrate producers Roseburia hominis and Faecalibacterium prautnizii 50 in CD and UC subjects, respectively (BH p-value >0.05). Two acetate producers species, Eubacterium eligens and Bacteroides dorei, 51 were enriched during intervention in both CD and UC (BH p-value >0.05); while Parabacteroides distasonis was consistently decreased in all participants regardless of disease phenotype during the intervention (BH p-value >0.05).

We next evaluated the functional capacity of the microbiome during the intervention. At baseline, we found that the metagenomic capacity varied greatly by participant, with most samples clustering by participant (data not shown). However, we observe that during the intervention the microbiome exhibited an increased genetic capacity for 1) biosynthesis of several key amino acids (i.e., histidine, lysine, threonine, methionine, serine, glycine, isoleucine, and arginine); 2) degradation of mannan (a dietary fiber); and 3) β-oxidation for fatty acid degradation (Figure 4). Roseburia sp. and Faecalibacterium sp. – both favored during the IBD-AID intervention are main degraders of dietary mannan ultimately producing SCFA.52,53 Mannans are found in the endospermic tissue of nuts (homopolymeric mannan), barley, oats (β-glucans or mannoproteins), coffee beans, coconut palm, tomato, and legume seeds (galactomannan).54 Similarly, increased microbiome gene capacity for oxidation of fatty acids during the intervention also suggests increased availability of SCFAs. Thus, we further investigated the impact of IBD-AID on the pool of microbial genes involved in SCFA production during the intervention.

In sum, the diet-dependent changes of the microbiome were accompanied by increased microbial genomic capacity for butyrate and acetate metabolism during the intervention.

We next sought to identify the foods reported on the 24-hour IBD-AID Food Querys that associate with specific bacteria abundances during the intervention. To do this, we first apply mixed effect random forest modeling to predict the abundance of each microbiome species as a function of the number of servings for each food category reported. To control for the effect of non-diet and other clinical covariates (i.e., age, gender, and BMI) we included them in the model as additional fixed effects. Similarly, to account for possible diagnosis-specific effects, we included in the model as additional fixed effects the interaction between every food category and the diagnosis. To determine the significance of the determined associations we run Permutated Importance (PIMP) analysis (see Methods). To determine the strength and direction of the association we then run Repeated Measure Correlations on the associations with a PIMP-associated p-value less than 0.05. We investigated the bacteria:food correlation of the top bacterial species enriched at either baseline or intervention in CD and UC participants. For these bacteria:food correlation analyses, we also included bacteria enriched in both CD and UC participants at intervention or baseline (i.e., B. dorei and P. distasonis, respectively. Figure 5). As expected, consumption of prebiotics, probiotics, and beneficial foods positively correlated with Clostridia and Bacteroides species both enriched during the intervention but negatively correlated with species enriched at baseline. Opposite correlations were observed with the consumption of adverse foods. A list with all the significant bacteria:food correlations are shown in Supplementary Table S6. Of interest, increased consumption of lean animal proteins (included in beneficial foods) during the intervention has a negative correlation with Roseburia hominis in UC but not in CD participants.

Overall, our results show that increased consumption of prebiotics, probiotics, and beneficial foods during the intervention do favor Clostridia and Bacteroides species depleted in IBD patients. We observed that the effect of some foods on bacteria abundance is dependent on disease phenotype.

We obtained blood samples from nine patients before and after the intervention to measure circulating cytokines relevant to inflammation. Similar to previous report demonstrating correlation of specific foods with cytokine levels,38 we hypothesized that certain food categories encouraged (i.e., fruits) or discouraged (i.e., foods and beverages high in sugar) during the IBD-AID intervention could associate with levels of the serum cytokines regardless of study period. Thus, we determined the correlation of the reported food intakes during the study with the levels of cytokines (Supplementary Figure S3). Consistently, we observed that participants reporting high consumption of prebiotics and beneficial foods exhibit lower levels of inflammatory cytokines (i.e., IL-6 and IL-8) while higher levels of GM-CSF (Figure 6 A-E). Conversely, participants reporting high consumption of adverse foods exhibit higher levels of IL-8 and TNF-alpha (Figure 6F-J). In this subgroup of participants (n = 9), none of the 14 cytokines assessed changed from baseline to post-intervention (Supplementary Figure S3).

In sum, we observed that higher consumption of foods encouraged on the IBD-AID (regardless of study period) do negatively correlate with pro-inflammatory cytokines and positively correlate with levels of colitis protective GM-CSF. Independent of study period, high consumption of foods discouraged on the IBD-AID consistently relates to higher levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines. We did not see an overall shift on circulatory cytokines after the IBD-AID intervention in the sub-group of participants included in this analysis.

Here, we demonstrate that IBD patients can rapidly and dramatically change their diet and in doing so revert dysbiosis and modulate important cytokines driving IBD pathogenesis. Specifically, our results demonstrate that increased consumption of prebiotics (fiber-rich foods such as fruits, vegetables, oats, and honey), probiotics (fermented dairy products), and beneficial foods (lean animal protein and omega 3 fatty acids) can favor potent SCFA-producing Clostridia and Bacteroides species with known anti-inflammatory activity 9,11,39,50,56–64 and which are known to be reduced in numerous cohorts of IBD patients across the world.5,6,10,65–73

In conclusion, we demonstrate that the IBD-AID can favor bacteria commonly depleted in IBD patients which are key for maintaining immune tolerance and homeostasis in the gut via SCFA production. We demonstrated that foods encouraged/discouraged by the IBD-AID are linked to modulation of the immune tone. Moreover, the results provide evidence for further adjustments of the foods allowed on the IBD-AID according to the disease phenotype and immune target.

The primary outcome is to evaluate the effect of the IBD-AID in the increased abundance of SCFA-producing bacteria. Using Monte-Carlo simulations of empirical power and type-I-error for a Wilcoxon-signed rank test (paired; R package MKpower 119) we determined that 10 independent subjects (pre-post) will detect 0.005 ± 0.005 changes in the relative abundance of bacteria, with a power of 0.80. Our secondary outcome was associations between IBD-AID food categories and the microbiome. An unweighted Spearman correlation power analysis (R package genefu 120) determined that 14 independent samples will be sufficient to achieve a significance of 0.05 and a correlation coefficient of 0.1.

We recruited 25 subjects with an IBD diagnosis of either Crohn’s disease (CD) or ulcerative colitis (UC, Figure 1). Of the 19 subjects who completed the study, 7 CD and 2 UC subjects were in remission at enrollment. The remaining 10 subjects exhibited either mild, moderate, or active disease. Exclusion criteria included: use of the antibiotic within 3 months at the time of recruitment, presence of infection precipitating colitis (i.e., C. difficile), and pregnancy. For more inclusion and exclusion criteria see Supplementary Table S1. None of the participants reported antibiotic treatment during the study. The study was approved by the IRB at UMASS (Docket Number H00008033). ClinicalTrial.gov registry website: https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04757181

Trial number: NCT04757181.

As published elsewhere,25 the IBD-AID supports the avoidance of certain carbohydrates (sucrose and starches) from the original SCD.121 Before the mSCD, the IBD-AID was the first IBD diet to include oats as a source of fiber. The IBD-AID encourage the increased intakes of monounsaturated and polyunsaturated omega-3 and fatty acids while decreasing other saturated fats and eliminating trans-fatty acids.77,89,122–128 Moreover, the IBD-AID eliminates the consumption of processed and ultra-processed foods which have been associated with IBD risk.129 The IBD-AID includes prebiotics: foods rich in non-digestible fiber that serve as food for beneficial bacteria colonizing the colon.130,131 Epidemiological evidence 132–135 and results from a recent clinical trial study 38 support the role of fermented foods containing live active bacteria (probiotics) in health, microbiome diversity, and an anti-inflammatory immune status.38 Thus, the IBD-AID also encourages the consumption of probiotics. Finally, to avoid nutrient deficiencies that could be caused by restrictive diets, the IBD-AID also encourages the intake of nutritious foods recommended by the Dietary Guidelines for Americans;136 which includes a variety of foods rich in essential vitamins and minerals. The diet can be prepared at home and is designed to be healthful long term for the entire family.

Due to the high interpersonal variability of the microbiome,35 the individual-specific response to diet,36 and the fact that consuming an ‘inert’ placebo diet is not an option for a control group,37 we conducted a prospective, single-arm, pre-post intervention trial, where participants were used as their own control, as previously done.13,38 After a baseline period of 6 weeks, the dietary intervention was initiated and continued for 8 weeks (Figure 1). To receive dietary instructions, subjects met in person with trained registered nutritionists at the beginning of the intervention and completed at least one counseling session per week throughout the 8-weeks intervention period.

Dietary intake is difficult to measure, and any single method cannot assess dietary exposure perfectly. We developed the 24-hour IBD-AID Food Query to address the main challenges of recording dietary intake by: collecting actual intake on specific days; reducing the burden of memory to only recall foods consumed in the past 24 hr, and we obtained repeated recordings per week to better estimate usual intake. The data obtained from this instrument was used to achieve our secondary outcome to determine associations between IBD-AID food categories and the microbiome. The 24-hour IBD-AID Food Query was programmed in REDCap and consists of 240 food items grouped in four main food categories: 1) prebiotic foods, including fruits, vegetables, legumes, oats, and honey; 2) probiotic foods: fermented dairy products, and fermented nondairy foods; 3) beneficial foods: fatty acids rich in monounsaturated and omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids, vegetable and lean animal proteins; and 4) adverse foods: wheat, corn, lactose, high fat animal and vegetable proteins, processed fried foods, artificial sweeteners, foods, and beverages high in sugar, high-fat processed foods, selected starchy vegetables, selected gluten-free grains, and certain condiments (i.e., wheat-based soy sauce, condiments high in fructose corn sugar, containing carrageenan, maltodextrin or/and emulsifiers, known to trigger gastrointestinal symptoms).[44–47] Alcohol consumption was accounted for in a separate category. A link to the electronic 24-hour IBD-AID Food Query was sent to the participants to be filled out 3 times per week (see Supplementary material for details on the 24-hour IBD-AID Food Query). The serving sizes recorded on each 24-hour IBD-AID Food Query were assigned to the individual food categories mentioned above and the serving sizes reported were averaged per week for analysis.

Subjects were provided materials and instructions for at-home self-collection using OMNIgene•GUT collection kits (#OM-200, DNA Genotek Inc., Ottawa, Canada). We also obtained blood samples at baseline and the end of the intervention. Once in the laboratory, samples were aliquoted and then stored at −80°C until processed.

DNA isolation was performed using the MagAttract PowerSoil DNA Kit (#27,100-4-EP, Qiagen, Germantown, MD, USA) on Eppendorf epMotion 5075 liquid handlers following the manufacturer’s instructions. Libraries for DNA sequencing were prepared using the Nextera XT DNA Library Preparation Kit (#FC-131-1096, Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) and were sequenced on the Illumina NextSeq 500 platform using 150-nt paired-end reads. We obtained an average of 4,926,661 reads per sample. Read data were quality trimmed and filtered of host DNA using KneadData (version 0.7.2; https://bitbucket.org/biobakery/kneaddata/wiki/Home) against a prebuilt bowtie2 index for the human genome, hg19. All the filtered sequences generated were deposited in NCBI, BioProject: PRJNA642308.

We performed shotgun metagenomic sequencing of stool samples as previously described by us and others.55,137–139 Community composition was profiled using MetaPhlan2 (version 2.9.14; database mpa_v292_CHOCOPhlAn_201901).140 To assess the abundance of microbiota-encoded metabolic pathways we used HUMAnN2 (version 2.8).141 We used ShortBRED142 to profile metagenomics reads for the abundance of proteins involved in the production of SCFAs (e.g., butyrate, acetate, propionate) as we have previously described.55,143

We used the Discovery Assay® Human High Sensitivity T-Cell Discovery Array 14-Plex (#HDHSTC14, Eve Technologies Corp, Calgary, Canada) to simultaneously quantified 14 cytokine/chemokine/growth involved in inflammation.

Microbiome associations with study periods: To determine the bacterial species impacted by the IBD-AID we applied mixed-effect random forest classification by adapting the MERF R engine.144 This framework enables to account for the repeated sampling nature of the dataset and is appropriately suited for this type of “large p, small n” multi-omics dataset common in clinical research.145 We classify a sample i from patient s as Intervention vs. Baseline (Yis = 1,0) as a function of microbiome abundance in that sample as a fixed effect (Xis) and controlling for the individual patient as a random effect (Z):
Y
ij
=f(
X
i
)+
b
j
Z+∈
. Compared to traditional linear mixed-effect modeling regression here f is a general function that is learned using a random forest model. The expectation-maximization algorithm runs via alternative optimization, in which, at the turn, one parameter is fitted while the other ones are fixed with the process running until convergence.144 This analysis was repeated using as predictors species abundances, metabolic pathways abundances, and SCFAs pathways, independently. Permutated importance (PIMP) analysis was used to estimate the significance of each microbiome feature in the classification analyses.137,146

Microbiome associations with food categories: We determined the effect of food categories on the microbiome by first applying mixed-effect random forest regression modeling while also controlling for other clinical and not-diet related covariates (i.e., age, gender, and BMI).144 To account for diagnosis (UC, CD)-dependent effects of food categories on the microbiome, we also consider the interactions between food-category (as number of servings, numerical) and the diagnosis (categorical) in the modeling. As above, PIMP analysis was used to estimate the significance of each model covariate in predicting the abundance of every modeled microbial feature 145,136. For the food covariates displaying a PIMP-associated p-value <0.05, we run repeated measure correlation for UC and CD individuals independently to determine the direction and significance of the identified association.

We used Prism 9 to perform the statistical analyses. We used the Mann–Whitney test with individual ranks computed per comparison of food intakes by study phase using the two-stage linear step-up procedure of Benjamini, Krieger, and Yekutieli correction. Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed-rank was used to evaluate differences in cytokine concentration in serum before and after the diet intervention; due to the low sample size (n = 9), p values of 0.1 are reported as trends. Simple linear regressions were calculated between the average of intakes of each food category and the levels of cytokines at each study period. We used the R package Phyloseq v1.19.1 147 to calculate the Shannon diversity index 148,149 and Bray-Curtis dissimilarity. Statistical significance of Bray-Curtis distances was assessed using PERMANOVA in R.150

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD); Crohn’s disease (CD); Ulcerative colitis (UC); Inflammatory bowel disease Anti-Inflammatory Diet (IBD-AID); Short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs); Mediterranean diet (MD); Specific Carbohydrate Diet (SCD).

Beth A. McCormick (BAM) is a coinventor on a patent application (PGT/US 18/42116). She, along with her academic institution, stands to gain financially through potential commercialization outcomes resulting from activities associated with the licensing of that intellectual property. The remaining authors do not have any conflict of interest to disclose.

BO, EO, DW, RP, BMC, and AMC – study conceptualization and methodology. BO, CC, RM, MMM, CM, DC, RP – investigation and data curation. BO, VB, EO, DW, DC, CF, SB, and AMC – formal analysis of data. BO, VB, DW, BMC, and AMC – writing – original draft, review & editing. AMC – funding acquisition. BO and AMC –supervision.

The data that support the findings of this study are openly available in NCBI, BioProject: PRJNA642308 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/?term=PRJNA642308)

Supplemental data for this article can be accessed on the publisher’s website.

