The Interaction Between the Microbiome and Tumors

Cancer is a significant global health problem and is characterized by a consistent increase in incidence and mortality rate. Deciphering the etiology and risk factors are essential parts of cancer research. Recently, the altered microbiome has been identified within the tumor microenvironment, tumor tissue, and even nonadjacent environments, which indicates a strong correlation between the microbiome and tumor development. However, the causation and mechanisms of this correlation remain unclear. Herein, we summarized and discussed the interaction between the microbiome and tumor progression. Firstly, the microbiome, which can be located in the tumor microenvironment, inside tumor tissues and in the nonadjacent environment, is different between cancer patients and healthy individuals. Secondly, the tumor can remodel microbial profiles by creating a more beneficial condition for the shifted microbiome. Third, the microbiome can promote tumorigenesis through a direct pathogenic process, including the establishment of an inflammatory environment and its effect on host immunity. The interactions between the microbiome and tumors can promote an understanding of the carcinogenesis and provide novel therapeutic strategies for cancers.

Cancer is one of the most common fatal diseases. In 2018, there were 18.1 million new cases and 9.6 million cancer-related deaths worldwide (Bray et al., 2018). The economic burden from the healthcare of cancer patients was $125 billion per year in the USA and occupied a giant proportion of public health expenditure (Mariotto et al., 2011). Understanding cancer causation and risk factors is an essential part of public health missions. Genetic mutations, infection, tobacco, diet, and radiation, are considered to be common risk factors that promote the development of cancer (Willett, 2000; Anand et al., 2008; Ashford et al., 2015).

In order to better understand the relationship between the microbiome and tumors, we summarized and discussed the relationship between the microbiome and some human cancers, according to their distinct colonization sites. Cancer patients possess a distinct composition of microbiomes located in the tumor microenvironment (TME), inside tumor tissues and in a nonadjacent environment, compared to healthy individuals. Tumor progression can remodel the microbial community, while the human microbiome plays diverse roles in tumorigenesis. The interaction between the microbiome and tumors also highlights novel therapeutic strategies against cancers as the microbiome and some probiotics can affect current cancer treatments in some cases (Khan et al., 2021; Kim and Lim, 2021; Yoon et al., 2021).

In the late 19th century, Robert Koch and Louis Pasteur discovered bacteria inside tumor tissues (Compare and Nardone, 2014). However, the source of where these bacteria emerge remains unclear. In recent years, the microbiome has been proven to be tumor type-specific and plays important roles in tumor development (Banerjee et al., 2018; Ma et al., 2019; Nejman et al., 2020). Currently, the tumor related microbiome research is mainly focused on the microbiota located in the TME, inside the tumor tissue and in the nonadjacent environment.

TME refers to a complex and dynamic entity containing organs, tissues, their function and metabolism. The TME is highly related to tumor occurrence, growth, and metastasis (Khalaf et al., 2021). The microbiome in TME of colorectal cancer (CRC) has been well-characterized (Rowland, 2009; Ahn et al., 2013; Sears and Garrett, 2014; Cheng et al., 2020). Shah et al. (2018) found an overlap of microbial composition in a tumor biopsy and the paired fecal sample from CRC patients by comparing the microbiome from the tumor biopsies, paired fecal samples, and adjacent tissues. This finding suggests that the fecal microbiome can be an excellent noninvasive biomarker for the CRC. The abundance of some species, including Peptostreptococcus stomatis and Parvimonas micra, were significantly increased in the feces collected from CRC patients (Zhang et al., 2018b). Zeller et al. (2014) revealed that the CRC-associated fecal microbiota shifted the function from fiber degradation to the utilization of host carbohydrates and amino acids. The CRC-associated imbalance of fecal microbiota also contributed to an enrichment of metabolites (i.e. polyamines) (Yang et al., 2019). The mycobiome refers to the fungal community of the microbiome. (Huffnagle and Noverr, 2013; Seed, 2014; Chin et al., 2020). The mycobiomes were found to be different between the early-stage and late-stage CRCs (Coker et al., 2019). Additionally, the radio from the fungal phylme Basidiomycota/Ascomycota was increased among patients with CRC compared to healthy individuals (Gao et al., 2017; Coker et al., 2019; Qin et al., 2021). Except for fungi and bacteria, the virome, composed of endogenous retroviruses, eukaryotic viruses, and bacteriophages (Santiago-Rodriguez and Hollister, 2019), is also related to CRC. Nakatsu et al. (2018) found that Orthobunyavirus, Tunavirus, Phikzvirus, Betabaculovirus and Zindervirus were represent Eukaryotic viruses in subjects with CRC, while Fromanvirus seemed to be represented only in the healthy cohort. Interestingly, there was an significant increase of the diversity of the gut bacteriophage community compared with controls, especially Streptococcus phage SpSL1, Streptococcus phage 5093, Streptococcus phage K13, Vibrio phage pYD38-A and Enterobacteria phage HK544 (Nakatsu et al., 2018).

Some tumor engraftment areas are not traditional microbiota-enriched environments. The prostatic fluid lacks prostate cancer-specific microbial species. However, the microbial diversity in patients with high prostate-specific antigen levels is low (Ma et al., 2019), which indicates that the shifted microbiota may break stability of the prostate microenvironment and provide a novel biomarker for patients with high prostate-specific antigen levels.

Recently, Nejman et al. (2020) performed a comprehensive analysis of the tumor microbiome from 1526 tumor tissues, as well as adjacent normal tissues across several common cancer types, including breast, lung, ovary, pancreas, melanoma, bone, and brain tumors. They demonstrated that tumors contained different bacteria and bacterial contents inside their tumor cells. Notably, the intra-tumoral microbiome represents type- or subtype-specific characteristics, and the highest enrichment appeared in the breast cancer (BC). Previously, Urbaniak et al. (2016) also isolated special bacterial species (Bacillus, Enterobacteriaceae, Staphylococcus Escherichia coli, and Staphylococcus epidermidis) with a relatively high abundance from BC and identified their DNA-damaging ability in HeLa cells. The malignancy and subtype classifications also represented a strong correlation with the tumor microbiome. Meng et al. (2018) demonstrated that a decrease in the relative abundance of the family Bacteroidaceae, while the genus Agrococcus increased during BC malignancy. Microbial function predicted by the PICRUS indicated that these bacterial species influenced biotin and glycerophospholipid metabolism, as well as flavonoid biosynthesis. There are four main types of BC, including endocrine receptor (ER)-positive, triple-positive, human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (Her2)-positive and triple-negative. Banerjee et al. (2018) demonstrated that the triple-positive and triple-negative samples have distinct microbial patterns, while ER-positive and Her2-positive samples share similar microbial signatures by using hierarchical clustering analysis. Microbial diversity is also different between different racial groups. Black women with the higher BC morbidity have an increased abundance of the genus Ralstonia in breast tissue compared to white women (Smith et al., 2019). Meanwhile, prostate tissue samples from African men demonstrated an increase of the predominant genera, including Streptococcus, Alicycliphilus, Acidovorax, Escherichia, Bacteroides, Eubacterium, Parabacteroides, and Odoribacter, in prostate cancer compared to non-African men (Feng et al., 2019).

In OSCC, microbial diversity was found to be significantly reduced in tumor tissues, compared to the adjacent normal tissues, saliva, and mouthwash samples (Mukherjee et al., 2017; Zhang Z. et al., 2019). Chng et al. (2016) found that cholangiocarcinoma tumors colonized much more opportunistic pathogens from the genus Stenotrophomonas, compared to normal tissues. For other microbes, Carey et al. (2020) discovered that the family double-stranded DNA viruses, specifically Papillomaviridae, owned the most viral copies in the primary oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma tissues and positive lymph node samples. In most cancer specimens, the viruses, including Baculoviridae, Reoviridae, Siphoviridae, Myoviridae, and Polydnaviridae, were detected at high levels. Peters et al. (2019) found that lung cancer (LC) tissues had lower microbial richness and diversity, compared to paired normal tissues. There was a negative correlation between microbial diversity of LC-paired normal tissues and cancer survival. In gastric cancer (GC), Yu et al. (2017) found that Helicobacter pylori was a dominant species from the microbiota, even in nonmalignant gastric tissue of some GC patients, indicating that H. pylori was the primary cause of GC in early stages of neoplastic transformation.

The colonization niche of some bacteria has not yet been fully elucidated. It has been proven that the gram-negative bacteria from advanced CRC tumor microbiome are similar to the oral microbiome (Warren et al., 2013). The microbial composition in lungs is also more similar to that of the OC (Yu et al., 2017). Nakatsu et al. (2018) found that the interactions between bacteriophages in fecal samples and oral commensal bacteria from CRC patients performed altered characteristic compared with controls indicating the important roles of virus in CRC. These ectopic microbiomes from the nonadjacent environment have been shown to play important roles in tumor progression.

In summary, cancer patients at different clinical stages and malignancy tend to have specific characteristics of the microbiomes (structure, function, and metabolism) from the microenvironment, tumor tissues, or nonadjacent microbial locations (Figure 1).

Tumor-specific microbiome highlights whether the tumor progression can reshape the tumor-related microbiome in TME, tumor tissues or the nonadjacent environment (Walther-Antonio et al., 2016; Meng et al., 2018; Shrestha et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2018b; Dong et al., 2019; Shi et al., 2019). Genetic mutations from tumor cells are considered to be important characteristics for the identification of tumor biomarkers. There are specific genetic mutations across several tumors, including ER and Her2 genes in BC, genes involved in DNA mismatch repair and Sirtuin-3, loss of free fatty acid receptor 2 in CRC, cytokeratin 19 fragment, neuron-specific enolase, carcinoembryonic antigen and Tumor Protein P53 mutations in LC. These mutations were found to be highly correlated with tumor-specific microbiomes (Banerjee et al., 2018; Greathouse et al., 2018; Hale et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2018a; Liu et al., 2019; Lavoie et al., 2020; Sheng et al., 2020). Burns et al. (2018) validated that loss-of-function mutations, particularly pathway-level mutations, were able to change the predicted interactions in the microbiome. Tumor mutations can have an effect on the whole microbial network, rather than individual microbes (Burns et al., 2018; Burns and Blekhman, 2019).

Overall, tumor progression is able to reshape the microbial community. Genetic mutations in tumorigenesis can have an effect on tumor-related microbiome. The tumor microenvironment, including the metabolite enrichment and permeability alterations in the physiological barrier, can provide a niche for the shifted microbiome (Figure 2).

The microbiome has been considered to be a tumorigenic factor since Robert Koch and Louis Pasteur discovered bacteria inside tumor tissues in the late 19th century (Compare and Nardone, 2014). Currently, several microbes have been proven to be important risk factors in tumorigenesis, such as H. pylori in GC; Streptococcus bovis, F. nucleatum and Porphyromonas gingivalis in CRC, and human papilloma virus in cervical cancer and OSCC (Ellmerich et al., 2000; Humans, I.W.G.o.t.E.o.C.R.t, 2012; Chi et al., 2015; Yamamura et al., 2017; Diaz et al., 2018; de Carvalho et al., 2019; Laniewski et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2021). The tumorigenic effects of the microbiome have been widely investigated over recent years and have suggested that a specific microbial profile (rather than a certain microbe) from the TME, inside tumor tissue or nonadjacent environments can also drive tumorigenesis.

Several studies have reported that antibiotic treatment can help decrease the number and volume of tumors in mice, including CRC, prostate cancer, pancreatic cancer and melanoma (Zackular et al., 2013; Pushalkar et al., 2018; Sethi et al., 2018; Aykut et al., 2019; Stashenko et al., 2019). The transplantation of the microbiome from tumor-bearing mice or patients into germ-free mice is a practical way of confirming whether the microbiome can drive tumorigenesis. The mice transplanted with a CRC-related microbiome obtained a doubled-tumor burden (Zackular et al., 2013). Baxter et al. (2014) transplanted fecal microbiota from three CRC patients and three healthy individuals into germ-free mice and found that tumor accounts of the mice were strongly related to the microbiota colonized in the mice prior to CRC-induction treatment. Ericsson et al. (2015) validated that different microbiomes can regulate the host burden of CRC. They also observed that there was less butyrate production, but more host glycan degradation from the metabolic pathways of the microbiota in the TME of CRC-susceptible mice, compared to non-susceptible ones. A high concentration of microbial virulence genes was also identified from the CRC intestinal microbiome (Burns et al., 2015). Notably, Stashenko et al. (2019) found the OSCC-related metabolic activities of the oral microbiome were similar, which suggests that the carcinogenic microbial metabolites were non-specific in OSCC.

In addition, the microbiome can affect host immunity. The combination of TGF-β deficiency and Helicobacter infection contributes to an inflammatory environment in the intestine by increasing proliferation of epithelial cells, cyclooxygenase-2-positive CD4+ T cells and macrophages (Maggio-Price et al., 2006). A depletion of the gut microbiome reduced CRC burden in mice, along with increased mature T and B cells (Sethi et al., 2018). The gut microbiome also modulated host immunity by reducing the numbers of interferon gamma-producing (IFN-γ+) T cells and inducing interleukin 17A (IL-17A+) and interleukin 10-producing (IL-10+) T cells to drive tumorigenesis (Sethi et al., 2018). Helicobacter hepaticus co-infected with Hepatitis B virus recruited innate lymphoid cells and promoted hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tumorigenesis through an IFN-γ/p-STAT1 axis (Han et al., 2019). In pancreatic cancer, Pushalkar et al. (2018) found that the pancreatic microbiome induced a reduction of myeloid-derived suppressor cells, an increase in M1 macrophages, and a promotion of TH1 differentiation into CD4(+) T cells and CD8(+) T-cell activation in order to tolerate the host immunity.

The microbiome inside tumor tissues also plays a role in tumorigenesis. Accumulation of the microbiome inside BC tissues can disturb the proliferation of tumor cells by interfering with hormonal production (Abed et al., 2016). The quorum-sensing molecule from Pseudomonas aeruginosa, a pathogen inside the breast, led to a reduction in the survival of BC cells (Allali et al., 2015). The bacterial stress response also depends on cellular malignancy and TME, including oxidative stress. Proal and VanElzakker (Proal and VanElzakker, 2021) explained that bacteria, fungi, and viruses can induce or promote a Warburg-like metabolism in infected host cells in order to meet their own replication and nutritional needs. Nejman et al. (2020) detected tumor type-specific microbiomes in melanoma and breast, lung, ovarian, pancreatic, bone, and brain tumors. Notably, some intra-tumoral bacteria were identified as being intracellular, and were located both in cancer and immune cells, particularly in CD45+ T cells and macrophages. This indicates that the intra-tumoral bacteria can gather immune cells in order to regulate tumor growth. In particular, Gram-positive bacteria were detected only in macrophages, while gram-negative bacteria were rarely detected in cancer cells or in CD45+/CD68− immune cells (Nejman et al., 2020). The distinct locations indicated that immune cells may play microbial type-specific roles in response to intra-tumoral bacteria. However, the detailed mechanisms remain unclear.

Intra-tumoral mycobiome is also correlated to tumorigenesis. Aykut et al. (2019) demonstrated that fungi can be enriched in the tumor environment and are able to induce a carcinogenic effect in the pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. Researchers identified a 3000-fold increase in fungal abundance from a tumor compared to normal pancreatic tissue. Their work also demonstrated that pathogenic fungi activated the complement cascade when promoting pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.

The microbiome in a nonadjacent environment can affect tumor development. Yu et al. (2010) validated that there was an accumulation of gut-derived LPS in the circulation of rats with HCC. Knockout of the Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) gene, a receptor of LPS, limited excessive tumor growth, while the reconstitution of TLR4 restored hepatic inflammation and tumor cell proliferation. Dapito et al. (2012) found that TLR4 and intestinal microbiota were required for HCC progression by regulating increased proliferation, expression of the hepatomitogen epiregulin and prevention of cell apoptosis. Deoxycholic acid, a gut metabolite produced by the obesity-induced microbiome, induced senescence-associated secretion in hepatic stellate cells and promoted the development of HCC (Yoshimoto et al., 2013). In BC, Kovacs et al. (2019) noted the oxidative stress induced by lithocholic acid, a metabolite from the gut microbiome, was reduced during oncogenesis, which led to a decrease in the diversity of the intra-tumoral microbiome. These results demonstrated that the nonadjacent microbiome, especially their metabolites, played important roles in establishing an inflammatory or oxidative environment to affect tumorigenesis.

In conclusion, the microbiome has distinct functions in tumorigenesis that are, to some extent, dependent on its locations. The microbial metabolites and virulence in TME established beneficial conditions for tumor proliferation. The intra-tumoral microbiota affected metabolism, oxidation activity and host immunity to promote tumorigenesis. Furthermore, the microbiota in a nonadjacent environment can induce an inflammatory or oxidative environment through metabolites and affects immune cells in tumor progression (Figure 3).

The microbiomes within TME, tumor tissue and even the nonadjacent environment, are specific and play essential roles in tumor development (Figure 1). Tumor progression contributes to different architectures of microbial profiles (Figure 2), while the shifted microbiome in distinct locations can drive tumorigenesis through direct and indirect effects (Figure 3).

The efficacy of current cancer therapies, including chemotherapy, radiotherapy and surgery, are highly correlated to the microbial phenotype (Muls et al., 2017; Paul et al., 2017; Nakatsuji et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2018; Lauka et al., 2019; McGee et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2020a). The microbiome can also influence effectiveness of the immunotherapy (Matson et al., 2018; Uribe-Herranz et al., 2018; Strouse et al., 2019; Wojas-Krawczyk et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2020b). Metabolites of the microbiome also affect treatment outcomes (Hatae et al., 2020; Nomura et al., 2020). Therefore, the microbiome can serve as a potential biomarker or target to distinguish the precision therapeutic strategies for different cancer patients (Hargadon, 2017; Shaikh et al., 2019; Liss et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020). Meanwhile, the human commensal bacteria, such as Lactobacilli and Bifidobacteria have also been suggested to play important roles in preventing and treating various tumor malignancies, indicating that the microbiome can be a source of potential therapeutics, as well as a therapeutic target (Motevaseli et al., 2017; Wei et al., 2018; Legesse Bedada et al., 2020; Zuo et al., 2020).

XZ, LC, and BR conceptualized the study. YWZ, YJZ, BL, ML, YS, YW, and YH prepared the original draft. XZ, LC, and BR wrote, reviewed, and edited. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.

This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China grant, grant number 81870778 (BR), 81600858 (BR), 82071106 (LC); Applied Basic Research Programs of Sichuan Province (2020YJ0227).

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

