Review of the Current State of Freely Accessible Web Tools for the Analysis of 16S rRNA Sequencing of the Gut Microbiome

Owing to the emergence and improvement of high-throughput technology and the associated reduction in costs, next-generation sequencing (NGS) technology has made large-scale sampling and sequencing possible. With the large volume of data produced, the processing and downstream analysis of data are important for ensuring meaningful results and interpretation. Problems in data analysis may be encountered if researchers have little experience in using programming languages, especially if they are clinicians and beginners in the field. A strategy for solving this problem involves ensuring easy access to commercial software and tools. Here, we observed the current status of free web-based tools for microbiome analysis that can help users analyze and handle microbiome data effortlessly. We limited our search to freely available web-based tools and identified MicrobiomeAnalyst, Mian, gcMeta, VAMPS, and Microbiome Toolbox. We also highlighted the various analyses that each web tool offers, how users can analyze their data using each web tool, and noted some of their limitations. From the abovementioned list, gcMeta, VAMPS, and Microbiome Toolbox had several issues that made the analysis more difficult. Over time, as more data are generated and accessed, more users will analyze microbiome data. Thus, the availability of free and easily accessible web tools can enable the easy use and analysis of microbiome data, especially for those users with less experience in using command-line interfaces.

During the past decade, much attention has been focused on archaea, bacteria, and fungi that form the microbiome owing to the effect they have on health and the environment [1]. A microbiome denotes a set of microorganisms residing in a specific biological niche and includes their genomic content and metabolic products [2,3]. Microbiomes are either host-associated (microorganisms living in organisms, such as humans, other animals, and plants), or free-living (microbial groups found in water and soil) [3]. There has been a sudden shift in our understanding of the crucial role of microbes; from the environment to the human body, it is now widely accepted that microbial communities are the critical components of their ecosystems, aside from the classical view of these entities as mainly infectious pathogens; therefore, the disruption of these communities can be detrimental [4].

In recent years, the emergence and development of web-based tools have enabled researchers investigating the microbiome to easily perform comprehensive meta-analyses, statistical analyses, and the interactive visualization of microbiome data without any need for previous coding experience [26]. Here, we reviewed and tried to compare a variety of the available open-access web tools and select those that are practical and easy to use when analyzing the human gut microbiome datasets.

Visualization and Analysis of Microbial Population Structure (VAMPS, http://vamps2.mbl.edu, accessed on 10 September 2022), which was developed in 2014, is a free web-based service that offers a range of visualizations and analyses for the interactive and iterative exploration of microbial communities through a comparison of marker gene data. This method uses PHP (v5.2.11) and JavaScript to create the visual front-end and uses Apache (v2.2.25) as its webserver. Additionally, MySQL databases are used for the storage of sequences, taxonomy, and user data.

This service can be used with a public account; however, those users who upload their own data are required to have a personal account. Visualization datasets include the most common alpha and beta diversity metrics, and they also contain heatmaps, dendrograms, principal coordinate analysis, bar and pie charts, taxonomy, and operational taxonomic unit (OTU) tables; OTU is the unit used in numerical taxonomy including their unique underlying sequences. These sequences are links to sequence distributions underlying the microbial community, which can be used to cross-check the taxonomy or query the external databases. Another unique feature of VAMPS is its flexibility in taxonomy selection, as users can combine multiple taxonomic levels using taxa-based abundance thresholds for analysis [27].

MicrobiomeAnalyst (https://www.microbiomeanalyst.ca/, accessed on 10 September 2022) is a web-based program that allows the clinical and scientists who run wet-lab analysis to easily perform exploratory analysis on abundance profiles and taxonomic signatures based on microbiome studies. This program is based on Java, R, and JavaScript. The R phyloseq package [24], in particular, is used for statistical analysis and visualization and for improving computation efficiencies. The system is organized on a Google Cloud server with 32 GB RAM and 8 CPUs (2.6 GHz each).

Four modules are involved in MicrobiomeAnalyst. First is the Marker Data Profiling (MDP) module, which is designed for the 16S rRNA marker gene survey data. The second is the Shotgun Data Profiling (SDP) module, which includes the functions for analyzing the metagenomic or metatranscriptomic data. The third is the Taxon Set Enrichment Analysis (TSEA) module, which is designed to identify the biologically or ecologically meaningful patterns in a given list of important taxa. The last one is the Projection with Public Data (PPD) module that allows users to visually compare their data with MicrobiomeAnalyst’s own collection of datasets—in a manner similar to that available with VAMPS—for identifying patterns and new biological insights. MicrobiomeAnalyst uses the outputs from both mothur and QIIME, making use of the OTU table file and the more recently used Biological Observation Matrix (BIOM) file, which stores information on OTUs, taxa, or genes. Chong et al. [26] provide a detailed protocol for the use of the MicrobiomeAnalyst for microbiome analysis. After uploading the required files, the users can choose to filter and normalize their data. Similar to VAMPS, MicrobiomeAnalyst also includes the most common alpha and beta diversity metrics and taxonomic diversity profiling using heatmaps, dendrograms, principal coordinate analysis, and bar and pie charts. In addition, it also allows for the prediction of metabolic potentials and profiling of the functional diversity using the Phylogenetic Investigation of Communities by Reconstruction of Unobserved States (PICRUSt) [28] and Tax4fun [29]. Moreover, a comparative analysis may be performed using MicrobiomeAnalyst, such as differential abundance analysis, which allows users to perform statistical comparisons to identify the significantly different features in OTUs using edgeR [30] and DESeq2 [31]. Biomarker identification and classification may also be achieved using two well-known methods, namely the linear discriminant analysis of size effect (LEfSe), which was developed to help identify robust and biologically significant features for biomarker discovery, and random forest, a non-parametric machine learning algorithm that has performed well in many recent microbiome data analyses and classifications [2,26]. In addition, MicrobiomeAnalyst also provides example datasets using the data from Human Moving Picture, which uses a biom file with a tree [32], Mammalian Gut, which uses the plain text file [33], Mothur output file using Human stool [34], biom file with an aging mouse gut dataset [35], and a plain text file with a tree file using the Pediatric IBD dataset from the Integrative Human Microbiome Project Consortium (iHMP).

Mian (https://miandata.org/, accessed on 11 September 2022) is an interactive web-based data discovery platform containing a rich set of visualization and machine learning tools to help users examine the microbial community in the context of categorical and numerical sample metadata. The front end of Mian is implemented using HTML5, CSS, and JavaScript/jQuery. Visualizations are rendered using the D3.js and Chart.js libraries. Meanwhile, the backend is implemented using Python 3.6.7, which includes the use of the Flask web framework. Tools such as the beta diversity include R scripts, which have an R 3.6.1 runtime and are integrated with Python using the rpy2 library. The SciPy library is mainly used for statistical testing and NumPy for matrix manipulations. Machine learning tools use either scikit-learn or TensorFlow. The Mian web server is deployed on an AWS Elastic Computing (EC2) m5a.large instance, which has 8GB of RAM and AMD EPYC 7000 series processors clocked at 2.5 GHz, running Ubuntu 16.04. The Amazon Elastic Block Store (EBS) storage is employed for durability and scalability. However, the Mian web server can be successfully deployed in any environment that supports Python and R and has been tested running in both the OSX and SUSE Linux operation systems. It is built at the University of British Columbia and is supported by the Providence Health Care Research Institute and Centre for Heart Lung Innovation at St. Paul’s Hospital, with the latest update from 2021.

Possibly the most unique feature of Mian is its feature selection tools and machine learning algorithms. Unlike MicrobiomeAnalyst, which uses LEfSe for feature selection, Mian uses recursive feature elimination, Fisher’s exact test, and Boruta, which selects the OTUs/ASVs or taxonomic groups that are applied on a random forest classifier and are ideal for selecting all of the groups that are relevant for discriminating between populations, in contrast to finding the non-redundant ones. Moreover, Mian offers the use of machine learning tools to assess the discriminative performance of the taxonomic groups selected through a feature selection tool. Mian uses linear regressor, random forest classifier, and deep learning, which trains a multi-layer perception network on the taxonomic data to predict a numerical or categorical variable. The network can be customized with a different number of fully connected and drop-out layers and a different number of units within each layer [1].

Global Catalogue of Metagenomics (gcMeta) is a part of the Chinese Academy of Sciences Initiative of Microbiome (CAS-MI) and has two main features: first design and implementation as a standardized and state-of-the-art database management tool for support, long-term preservation, and integrating microbiome projects worldwide, and second, to provide web tools and workflows for massive data analysis (https://gcMeta.wdcm.org/, accessed on 11 September 2022). The system is based on centralized computing and storage resources. Its database management system is separated into metadata, sequence raw data, and user information management. The updated version of gcMeta is constructed on the basis of PostgreSQL for both the metadata and user information and makes use of MongoDB for sequencing the raw data index information. The system is operated on Linux servers, and the web interface was developed through Python.

The platform provides management, analysis, and publication services for microbiome-related data. The analysis tools in gcMeta are installed based on a Docker container which allows users to perform analyses. The users can upload the raw data and metadata to gcMeta’s system through a web submission interface. After checking the quality, the data can be browsed on the system under the user’s account. Although gcMeta provides five main frameworks, we focused only on the use of 16S rRNA analysis. Using the Docker container, the 16S rRNA sequence can be processed using the widely known QIIME2 to produce a feature table and taxonomy. They also make use of QIIME2 for diversity analysis and PICRUSt and biomarker discovery using LEfSe [10].

Microbiome Toolbox allows for the exploration and understanding of the identification of key microbiome features to depict an appropriate microbiome. This platform also focuses on analyses of the microbiome, especially for the human gut. Besides visualization and exploration, microbiome trajectories are also implemented using machine learning algorithms, which can help determine the key features for microbiome analysis. The interactive dashboard can be found at https://microbiome-toolbox.herokuapp.com/, accessed 10 September 2022.

The different types of microbiome data, such as the compositional and functional data tables generated from different technologies such as 16S rRNA or shotgun metagenomics, can be used as inputs on the platform. From our list of web tools, perhaps Microbiome Toolbox is the only one dedicated to analyzing the microbiome data that change with time or the data tables that essentially follow the same longitudinal structure of features changing over time, and the toolbox is oriented more toward the analysis of the Early Life Microbiome in infants [36]. Similar to MicrobiomeAnalyst, Microbiome Toolbox also provides an already modified example dataset from both the mouse [37] and the gut microbiome from breastfed infants [38].

In recent years, interest in studying the gut microbiome has increased and incredibly large volumes of data are being produced and analyzed. NGS sequencing has revolutionized the field of microbiology. It has provided researchers with a cost-effective technology to sequence millions of base pairs and replaces the conventional characterization of bacteria or pathogens through morphology or cultivation-based approaches. It can also be used to interrogate full genomes or exomes to discover novel mutations and disease-causing genes. In the context of microbiome research, it provides a comparative insight into the phylogenetic structure of microbial communities and their potential interactions with the host [39]. In this review, we specifically used those datasets corresponding to the gut microbiome to compare different free web tools for analyzing 16S rRNA gene sequences. We looked at common and basic analyses, such as the alpha and beta diversities, in addition to comparing the unique features that the web tools offer with respect to their usefulness for carrying out gut microbiome analysis. We used two datasets: (1) a clinical dataset, wherein the gut microbiome was analyzed to check the efficacy of fecal microbial transplant (FMT) for people infected with Clostridioides difficile [40], and (2) a dataset that uses an ecological analysis approach, wherein the lifestyle factors affecting the gut microbiome of Korean navy trainees [41] are included, for testing these web tools. During the writing of this review, we encountered challenges in using gcMeta, VAMPS, and Microbiome Toolbox due to file format issues and unresponsive web pages and thus proceeded to only use MicrobiomeAnalyst and Mian. As regards gcMeta, an unresponsive page was encountered when trying to create an account or log in, which ultimately resulted in the failure of data upload and analysis. Meanwhile, in terms of VAMPS, the fastq files first need to be formatted in accordance with their algorithm. However, this poses a problem to those users who have a large number of datasets in which time is needed to correct the format of the abovementioned file. The same issue is seen when using Microbiome Toolbox. We believe that the file format issues will result in limited use for the new users who are not familiar with editing the output from the preprocessed data. First, the datasets were processed using QIIME2, and then, the original methods for producing the biome file were used. The files were then inputted into the abovementioned web tools using the default parameters to check the taxa (class level) and alpha and beta diversities (Bray–Curtis dissimilarity); Figure 2 and Figure 3 show the output figures for MicrobiomeAnalyst and Mian, respectively. We also proceeded to use MicrobiomeAnalyst and Mian’s “unique tools”. Although the analysis performed in this review is outside the scope of the original studies, we still explored the different analysis types that the two web tools offer, and the corresponding results are summarized in Table 1.

O signifies the analysis method is available in the web tool; X signifies the analysis method is not available in the web tool; NA signifies that databases are not provided for phylogenetic analysis; Tools that were currently not accessible were left blank.

As there were issues with the file format and data curation on VAMPS and Microbiome Toolbox, we opted to use the data that were available within their servers to show what these web tools offer. In the case of VAMPS—using its search engine with the human–gut environment as the source—we found and used the human data HMP_200 (V4–V5 region), which were uploaded to the system between 2010 and 2011. In Figure 4, we show how the taxa and alpha and beta diversities are visualized on VAMPS. In a similar fashion, we also used the sample data corresponding to the human gut microbiome that are readily available in the Microbiome Toolbox’s system (Figure 5), where machine learning algorithms are used to predict the microbiome maturation index through time, in addition to identifying outliers and selecting the key bacteria that are important within the given time trajectory.

In data analysis using web-based tools, two factors are recognized as important. First is the accessibility of web-based tools. Therefore, we checked the accessibilities of all the web-based tools in this study using a microbiome dataset and found that Mian and MicrobiomeAnalyst, and VAMPS were easily accessible. Conversely, gcMeta and Microbiome Toolbox showed a non-responsive page when logging in, and slow response when uploading the data, respectively. Moreover, an easily input file format for the web-based tool is also important. The methods of the input file format change for Mian and MicrobiomeAnalyst are demonstrated clearly. However, the information regarding an input file format for Microbiome Toolbox and VAMPS is not described in detail. Although those with the knowledge of manipulating input files can access both freely, those with little experience might encounter difficulties when using VAMPS and Microbiome Toolbox.

Taken together, the analysis tools that are included in VAMPS, Microbiome Toolbox, Mian, and MicrobiomeAnalyst offer users a variety of options for easily managing their microbiome data for further downstream analysis.

In this study, we explored different freely available web-based tools for microbiome analysis using the gut microbiome datasets. Though there is software for analyzing the microbiome data such as CLC Genomics Workbench (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany), we specifically focused on those tools that are freely accessible. Multiple tools are available for microbiome analysis, such as the R-based Genepiper [57], MANTA [58], and Microbiome Modeling Toolbox [59]—to name a few—but we only focused on web-based tools. In our search, we found VAMPS, MicrobiomeAnalyst, Mian, gcMeta, and Microbiome Toolbox. The abovementioned web tools are all freely accessible; however, there are log-in problems with gcMeta. Similarly, VAMPS and Microbiome Toolbox require an extension for processing the data on their site. Thus, we were left with MicrobiomeAnalyst and Mian, and we compared the analysis tools they offer by evaluating the gut microbiome datasets corresponding to clinical and ecological approaches using the basic analysis employed for the microbiome data (alpha and beta diversities). In the case of MicrobiomeAnalyst and Mian, we also tried to search for other analysis tools that can be used for further downstream analysis. The ability of both web tools to perform different statistical analyses greatly helps in discerning meaningful differences in user data. Moreover, the availability of PICRUSt in MicrobiomeAnalyst provides users with the freedom to analyze the functional genes in their dataset. While the two web-based tools also include LEfSe and random forest models for the selection of biomarkers, Mian provides users with access to deep learning, i.e., using the deep neural network to build a sophisticated model, which can also be used for classification. Collectively, we believe that free web-based tools will allow users, especially clinicians and those new in the field, to make an easier and more practical and refined analysis of the human gut microbiome data.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

