The mechanism of berberine alleviating metabolic disorder based on gut microbiome

With socioeconomic advances and improved living standards, metabolic syndrome has increasingly come into the attention. In recent decades, a growing number of studies have shown that the gut microbiome and its metabolites are closely related to the occurrence and development of many metabolic diseases, and play an important role that cannot be ignored, for instance, obesity, type 2 diabetes (T2DM), non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), cardiovascular disease and others. The correlation between gut microbiota and metabolic disorder has been widely recognized. Metabolic disorder could cause imbalance in gut microbiota, and disturbance of gut microbiota could aggravate metabolic disorder as well. Berberine (BBR), as a natural ingredient, plays an important role in the treatment of metabolic disorder. Studies have shown that BBR can alleviate the pathological conditions of metabolic disorders, and the mechanism is related to the regulation of gut microbiota: gut microbiota could regulate the absorption and utilization of berberine in the body; meanwhile, the structure and function of gut microbiota also changed after intervention by berberine. Therefore, we summarize relevant mechanism research, including the expressions of nitroreductases-producing bacteria to promote the absorption and utilization of berberine, strengthening intestinal barrier function, ameliorating inflammation regulating bile acid signal pathway and axis of bacteria-gut-brain. The aim of our study is to clarify the therapeutic characteristics of berberine further and provide the theoretical basis for the regulation of metabolic disorder from the perspective of gut microbiota.

Metabolic disorders are a complex group of multifactorial disorders formed by one or more causes of glucose metabolism, lipid metabolism, purine metabolism and so on, including central obesity, insulin resistance, abnormal glucose metabolism, lipid metabolism disorders, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease(NFLD), and metabolic hypertension, among others (Kassi et al., 2011). With the improvement of living standards, the incidence of metabolic disorder is also increasing. The existence of multiple metabolic disorders not only increases the incidence rate of diabetes directly, but also greatly increases the risk of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, brings enormous burden to the global medical and health field (2001). Insulin resistance is the core factor of metabolic syndrome, it is also a common pathological manifestation of metabolic disorders such as diabetes and obesity (Balkau and Charles, 1999; Huang, 2009). The current situation shows that a large proportion of metabolic syndrome patients suffer from impaired glucose tolerance or diabetes (Shinkov et al., 2018).

Consistently, as a natural medicine, berberine plays an important role in the treatment of metabolic disorders. Its mechanism of utility has also been extensively and intensively studied (Caliceti et al., 2016), a large number of experimental studies have shown that berberine alleviates body metabolism and insulin resistance through a variety of mechanisms, such as amelioration of oxidative stress, inhibition of macrophage inflammatory response, adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinas (AMPK) activation and Phosphorylation of acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC), regulating mitochondria-related pathways (Zhang et al., 2018), inducing peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) increase6Modulating transcriptional programs of transcription factors, among others (Wang et al., 2020). In recent years, the mechanism of berberine in treating metabolic disorders by modulating gut microbiota has been increasingly discovered and recognized. In this paper, the author focuses on the mechanism of BBR ameliorate metabolic disorder, so as to further clarify the therapeutic characteristics of BBR, providing a theoretical basis for regulating and alleviating metabolic disorder from the perspective of gut microbiome.

Berberine (BBR) is a quaternary ammonium salt from the group of bioactive isoquinoline alkaloids (Imenshahidi and Hosseinzadeh, 2016), which is the major active component of traditional Chinese herb Coptis chinensis (Tabeshpour et al., 2017). In addition, BBR also exist in various medicinal plants such as Berberis aristata, B. petiolaris, B. aquifolium, B. vulgaris, B. thunbergia and many others (Cicero and Baggioni, 2016; Liu et al., 2019). Its chemical structure is represented in Figure 1 . In recent years, a large number of research confirmed that BBR has extensive pharmacological properties, such as anti-inflammatory (Kuo et al., 2004), pain‐relieving (Hashemzaei and Rezaee, 2021), anti-infective (Aswathanarayan and Vittal, 2018), antitumor (Liu et al., 2019),neuroprotective (Luo et al., 2012) and modulate energy metabolism, which can be used to treat cancer (Zhang et al., 2020), digestive (Zou et al., 2017), metabolic (Xu et al., 2021), cardiovascular (Martini et al., 2020), and neurological diseases (Kulkarni and Dhir, 2010). Formulas containing traditional herbal Coptis chinensis, has been used for thousands of years in traditional Chinese Medicine. Most of these formulas possess the efficacy of clearing heat, eliminating dampness, dissipating fire and detoxifying (Wang et al., 2017), similar to what we now considered as anti-infective and anti-inflammatory functions.

In addition to clinical studies, berberine has been extensively explored in the treatment of metabolic syndrome in terms of mechanisms. Berberine has many extensive and intensive studies in the field of metabolic diseases. It can regulate and ameliorate glycolipid metabolism (Ma et al., 2018; Yu et al., 2019; Bertuccioli et al., 2020), lose weight (Neyrinck et al., 2021) and alleviation of insulin resistance (Memon et al., 2018), especially in the treatment of combined multiple metabolic disorders, the efficacy of BBR is outstanding (Yu-Guang et al., 2017). Meanwhile, numerous experimental studies have shown that BBR ameliorate body metabolic dysfunction through multiple mechanisms (Yin et al., 2012; Ilyas et al., 2020). In terms of glucose metabolism, BBR strengthened autophagy and protected from high glucose-related injury in podocytes by promoting the AMPK activation, at the same time, the bidirectional regulation of AMPK activity can reduce the risk of hypoglycemia caused by berberine (Xiao et al., 2018). BBR also through TLR4/MyD88/NF-κB signaling pathway improves gut-derived hormones (Gong et al., 2017a), alleviate inflammation by reducing the exogenous antigen load in the host (Zhang et al., 2012). In the regulation of blood lipids, BBR can decrease triglyceride expression in HepG2 cell lines (Cao et al., 2018), modulation of bile acids (He et al., 2016a) and upregulation of Trib1 mRNA levels to reduce lipid levels (Singh and Liu, 2019). With further in-depth studies scholars have found that modulation of gut microbiome may be another novel mechanism of action for berberine to ameliorate metabolic disorders (Hvistendahl, 2012; Feng et al., 2015).

Earlier studies have shown that alterations in the gut microbiota are environmental factors that influence host susceptibility to obesity and increase adiposity (Backhed et al., 2004). When feces from obese and lean pairs of twins were transplanted separately into germ free mice, mice transplanted with feces from obese recipients gained weight and exhibited an obesity associated metabolic phenotype, whereas mice transplanted with feces from lean recipients showed no significant metabolic phenotype (Ridaura et al., 2013). Therefore, gut microbiota is strongly associated with the occurrence of metabolic disorders.

In recent years, a large number of studies have focused on the relationship between berberine and gut microbiota. Research shows can ameliorate metabolic abnormalities by modulating the flora to enhance bioavailability (Liu et al., 2016), regulating the bacteria-brain-gut axis (Sun et al., 2016; Sun et al., 2017), strengthening intestinal barrier function (Zhang et al., 2012; Gong et al., 2017a), alleviating metabolic endotoxemia (Gao et al., 2017), increasing of short-chain fatty acid (SCFA)-producing bacteria (Mcnabney and Henagan, 2017) and other ways. Now, these mechanisms will be systematically summarized and elaborated in this review.

Berberine can induce cell death of harmful intestinal bacteria and increase the number and species of beneficial bacteria (Habtemariam, 2020). From administration to absorption, BBR can be metabolized by gut microbiota to improve its therapeutic effects on metabolism related diseases such as diabetes, hyperlipidemia, or directly affect gut microbiota to regulate and ameliorate metabolic disorders (Cui et al., 2018). The gut microbiota cuts down BBR to the absorbable form of DhBBR, which converts to BBR and enters the blood after absorption in intestinal tissue, so as to improve the bioavailability of BBR (Feng et al., 2015). Studies have shown that BBR can increase its oral availability and relieve metabolic disorder by reversing the changes in the quantity, structure and composition of gut microbiota under the pathological conditions ( Table 1 ). At the same time, BBR improves intestinal barrier function and reduces the inflammation of metabolism related diseases by regulating gut microbiota. In addition, BBR achieves energy balance by regulating gut microbiota dependent metabolites (such as LPS, SCFAs, BAs) and related downstream pathways. What’s more, it can improve gastrointestinal hormones and metabolic disorders by regulating bacterial-brain-gut axis ( Figure 2 ).

This table lists the effects of BBR on laboratory indicators and gut microbiota with different doses in metabolic diseases, and the main potential mechanisms of BBR.

The oral bioavailability of Berberine is low (< 1%) as a result of poor aqueous solubility, the molecular structure of berberine prevents its rapid absorption from the intestine (Habtemariam, 2020). The extremely low plasma concentrations following oral administration of BBR in experimental or clinical settings are not sufficient to achieve the effects observed in in vitro experiments, which presents challenges in explaining its excellent and diverse pharmacological effects in clinical trials (Tan et al., 2013; Liu et al., 2016). Consequently, the investigators try to find out solutions in order to solve the problem of poor bioavailability (Liu et al., 2010). Previous researches have shown that gut microbiota participates in the metabolism of most oral drugs in vivo both directly and indirectly (Zhang et al., 2020). Some chemical components have been metabolized before the first-pass effect of liver, and the activity or toxicity of drugs can be significantly changed, affecting the exertion of drug efficacy (Sousa et al., 2008; Possemiers et al., 2011). Efficacy of intestinal microbiota in drug action remains underappreciated as before. There is increasing evidence that gut microbiota plays an important role in treatment through interaction with drugs. It contains a variety of metabolic enzymes, which can trigger a series of drug metabolic reactions and embodied the important role of gut bacteria for oral absorption of BBR (Xu et al., 2017).

Increasing of NR-producing bacteria was speculated to be one of the mechanisms of BBR improving metabolism. Nitroreductase activity is not only a biomarker to predict the therapeutic effect of BBR, but also an important target to improve the efficacy of BBR.

Intestinal barrier function is closely related to the occurrence and development of metabolic diseases (Scheithauer et al., 2020). T2DM is well known as a metabolic disease with low level chronic inflammation. Mucin-2 is a large glycoprotein that maintains intestinal balance by forming a physical barrier between the intestinal contents and the epithelium which is a very important glycoprotein (Paone and Cani, 2020). Thass CA (Thaiss et al., 2018) firmly believed glucose as an orchestrator of intestinal barrier function. Hyperglycemia destroys the integrity and balance of intestinal epithelial cells, interferes with the function of tight junction protein and adhesion protein between intestinal epithelial cells, leads to intestinal barrier dysfunction, increases the spread of intestinal infection, and then aggravates metabolic disorder. BBR can ameliorate endoplasmic‐reticulum stress and reduce apoptosis of goblet cells by reducing the expression of mucin‐2. Therefore, BBR has the effect of strengthening intestinal barrier.

Interestingly, Gavage of BBR multiplied the abundance of A.muciniphila in rats. However, it did not stimulate A.muciniphila growth in direct incubation, which can be seen that BBR may promote A.muciniphila in a host-dependent way (Dong et al., 2021). How BBR stimulates A.muciniphila remains further research. But it can be confirmed that BBR may regulate tight junction protein and protect the integrity of intestinal barrier by increasing mucin degrading bacteria.

Studies (Cani et al., 2007a; Cani et al., 2008) proved that metabolic endotoxemia leads to inflammatory reaction which can causes weight gain and diabetes. Endotoxin plasma lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is one of the strong virulence factors of Gram-negative bacterial species, released upon lysis by LPS producing bacteria. It plays an important role in both acute infections and chronic infections (Kallio et al., 2008). It is a major active component in the generation of toxic effects from endotoxin and an initiating factor in metabolic endotoxemia. This “metabolic endotoxemia” has been widely recognized as an important reason for triggering or promoting obesity, insulin resistance, metabolic syndrome, and ultimately leading to diabetes (Cani et al., 2007b). A high-fat diet leads to an increase in the abundance of intestinal Gram-negative bacteria, such as Proteus. A large amount of LPS produced by Proteus enters the blood because of the increase of intestinal permeability. Binding of lipopolysaccharide to the complex of CD14 and toll-like receptor 4 on the surface of innate immune cells, LPS can induce systemic inflammation, which ultimately impairs insulin sensitivity and induces insulin resistance-related metabolic disorders (Pussinen et al., 2011).

In conclusion, BBR can significantly reduce the abundance of Proteobacteria, such as Desulfovibrio, Enterobacter cloacae, and inhibit LPS production, effectively prevent serum LBP elevation (Zhang et al., 2012), regulating intestinal permeability, attenuating insulin resistance and improve metabolic endotoxemia.

To a certain extent, the occurrence and development of metabolic disorders are closely related to changes in the composition of the gut microbiota and its metabolites, such as short chain fatty acids (SCFA), can significantly affect glycolipid and energy metabolism. SCFAs, mainly produced by gut bacteria ferment carbohydrates and degrade aromatic compounds, including acetic, propionic, butyric among others, have the functions of promoting regeneration of epithelial cells (Mcnabney and Henagan, 2017), strengthening intestinal barrier function, suppressing part of the inflammatory response induced by LPS, and regulating of cells in skeletal muscle, liver, and fat to Alleviating glycemic homeostasis and insulin sensitivity (Park et al., 2015). Both animal and human researches have shown that the increase of SCFAs concentration in feces is related to weight gain, fat accumulation and insulin resistance, which may be due to the increase of SCFAs production and the decrease of SCFAs absorption (Sircana et al., 2018). SCFAs work as a mediator between gut microbiota, they have the potential to improve glucose homeostasis and insulin sensitivity in patients with T2DM, and in the setting of pancreatic dysfunction, they can regulate pancreatic insulin and glucagon secretion through GLP1 augmentation in pancreatic dysfunction (Mandaliya and Seshadri, 2019). Among these, the main energy of colon cells comes from butyric acid, increasing satiety and reducing food intake (Archer et al., 2004), and is also a regulator of inflammation, modulating chronic inflammation by activating anti-inflammatory Treg cells and inhibiting pro-inflammatory cytokine and chemokine response pathways, while modulating tight junction protein expression to adjust epithelial barrier function and intestinal permeability (Wei et al., 2018).However, a high-fat diet caused dysregulation of SCFAs producing bacteria structure and decreased abundance of SCFAs producing bacteria, reducing the distribution of SCFAs in the intestine and inhibiting them from exerting normal physiological functions, result in the body occurrence a series of metabolic related diseases (Zhang et al., 2015).

Reports indicated that BBR was provided with an effect on anti-diabetic by regulating short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs). BBR intervention changed the intestinal microflora of db/db mice, increased the number of SCFA producing bacteria (such as Butyricimonas, Coprococcus, Ruminococcus), reduced body weight, blood sugar level and intestinal inflammation in db/db mice (Zhang et al., 2019).Regarding the way BBR works in the body, current research believes that there are two aspects: one is the direct effect of circulating BBR, and the other is the indirect effect of butyrate through the intestinal microorganism, increased abundance of Escherichia-Shigella, Clostridium sensu stricto 1, and Bacteroides may be one of the reasons for the increase of butyrate production (Wang et al., 2017b). The anti-atherosclerotic effect of BBR is also related to changes in composition and functions of gut microbiota. Wu, M et al. (Wu et al., 2020) studied the effects of berberine on atherosclerosis and gut microbiota regulation in ApoE (-/-) mice fed a high-fat diet, after treatment with BBR, atherosclerotic lesions was decreased and it significantly reduces total cholesterol, and very low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels. In detail, BBR enriched the abundance of Turicibacter, Alistipes, Roseburia, Allobaculum, and Blautia, and changed the abundance of Bilophila. These microbiota showed good anti-inflammatory effects, which are related to the production of SCFAs and significantly reduce pro-inflammatory cytokines (including TNF)- α6 IL-1 β And IL-6), they believe that reducing inflammation may be an important mechanism for the reduction of atherosclerosis in HFD-fed mice treated with BBR. After treated with BBR, Xu, X., et al (Xu et al., 2020) found Clostridium XIVa, Faecalibacterium, Ruminococcus2, Coprococcus, Dorea, Butyricicoccus, and Roseburia were markedly enriched in the gut microbiota. These bacteria are butyric acid producing bacteria and play a beneficial role in the host (Koh et al., 2016). In addition, increased production of fecal SCFAs was also detected in Xu’s study. Butyricoccus, Allobaculum, Phascolarctobacterium, Blautia and Bacteriodes were markedly increased by BBR in the high-fat diet-induced rats as bacteria that can produce SCFAs (Zhang et al., 2015). The efficacy was evaluated after 7 days of BBR treatment in beagle dogs, Feng, R et al. (Feng et al., 2018) found that the abundance of seven butyrate-producing genera increased than before. Escherichia-Shigella, Clostridium sensu stricto 1, Megamonas, Bacteroides, Ruminococcus and Blautia could produce butyate. That is to say BBR regulates metabolism by increasing the abundance of butyric acid producing bacteria. However, experiments in humans have also shown that BBR reduces acetate and propionate production but has no effect on butyrate levels, and that, at the same time, the use of BBR increases the abundance of Faecalibacterium and decreases the abundance of Bifidobacterium, Streptococcus and Enterococcus ( Fu et al., 2022).Treatment with berberine in combination with Bifidobacterium could increase the abundance of beneficial bacteria in the intestine of diabetic patients and achieve better glucose lowering effect because of the inhibitory effect of berberine on Bifidobacterium ( Ming et al., 2021).

Bile acids (BAs) are well known to be important metabolic and inflammatory signaling molecules that modulate lipid and energy-related nuclear hormone receptors, including farnesoid X receptor (FXR) and transmembrane G protein-coupled receptor 5 (TGR5 or GPBAR1) (Fiorucci et al., 2010). Bile acid synthesis is the main pathway of cholesterol excretion in vivo. Bile acids can activate TGR5 and FXR receptors, regulate blood glucose, increase glycogen synthesis, inhibit liver glycogen synthesis, protect islet cell function and maintain blood glucose homeostasis (Li and Chiang, 2014). BBR can increase the abundance of bacteria that promote the decomposition of bound bile acids and enhance the expression of bile acid receptors FXR and TGR5. BBR is considered to be an agonist of FXR and TGR5 and regulate bile acid signal and function (Han et al., 2017). In addition, bile acids have antibacterial properties, inhibit the growth of bacteria in the intestine and form a strong selective pressure on the intestinal flora. At the same time, bile acids are modified and regulated by microorganisms in the intestine (Fiorucci and Distrutti, 2015).

The phylum Firmicutes have higher bile salt hydrolase (BSH) activity than the phylum Bacteroidetes in the intestinal microbiota, and the latter is only active against taurine-conjugated bile acids. The study distinctly shows that BBR remarkably increased the Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio and suggests that this is one of the mechanisms of its induced serum free bile acid increase and lipid lowering effect (Gu et al., 2015).. Furthermore, there are other studies showing that bile acids induce transcriptional changes in low-abundance bile acid metabolizing bacteria, including C. scindens ( Devendran et al., 2019), C. hylemonae, and C. hiranonis that are capable of turning taurine-conjugated bile acids into unconjugated bile acids and secondary bile acids such as ursodeoxycholic acid and lithocholic acid (Ridlon et al., 2020). BBR significantly alter gut microbial-bile acid metabolite interactions. Wolf, P.G., et al. (Wolf et al., 2021) found that sulfated bile acids were strongly associated with C. hiranonis, C. hylemonae and Bacteroidetes spp, which is positively correlated with the first two and negatively correlated with the last one. Also, BBR treatment increased cecal bile acid concentrations and up-regulated Na+/H+ antiporter, cell wall synthesis/repair, promote carbohydrate and amino acid metabolism. Studies have shown that the level of circulating bile acids in patients with metabolic disorders increases. BBR can increase some beneficial bacteria with benzene sulfonyl hydrazine activity, for instance Bacteroides, Bifidobacterium, Lactobacillus and Clostridium, promote the decomposition of bound bile acids and strengthen their excretion through the intestine. Lactobacillus converts primary bile acids into secondary bile acids through decarboxylation (Vincent et al., 2013). Overall, the mechanisms by which BBR alters the gut microbiome are related to its choleretic effects and are dose related.

The complex interaction between the brain and the gut is called the brain-gut axis, reflects the bidirectional interaction between the brain and the gut. And it is regulated by the gut microbiota, as well as mediated by brain-derived and gut derived hormones and peptides. microbiota-gut-brain axis involving many important factors such as hormones, nutrients and afferent/efferent regulatory autonomous neural pathways. A variety of physiological processes are involved at the same time, including satiety, regulation of metabolism, hormone secretion and sensitivity (especially insulin sensitivity), and bone metabolism (Romijn et al., 2008).. Recently, researchers have found that the disturbance of the gut-brain axis is closely related to the occurrence and development of metabolic diseases and exerts its effects through the hormone signaling pathway (Burokas et al., 2015). Studies have demonstrated that gastrointestinal hormones, such as ghrelin, orexin, glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1), and leptin, can regulate feeding behavior, energy homeostasis, etc. (Cameron and Doucet, 2007; De Silva and Bloom, 2012).Numerous studies have shown that GLP-1 receptor agonists have good clinical efficacy in the treatment of diabetes and obesity (Han et al., 2017). Studies have shown that GLP-1 promotes beta-cell neogenesis and satiety, reduces glucagon secretion, delays gastric emptying, and increases peripheral glucose disposal (Donnelly, 2012). Drugs activating the GLP-1 receptor are also beneficial in the management of another current epidemic, namely nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) (Paternoster et al., 2019). Changes in gut hormones, containing increases in GLP-1 might have a role in induction and long-term maintenance of weight loss (Finelli et al., 2014). Consequently, the microbiota-gut-brain axis is a potential target for metabolic disease treatment and one of the hotspots for future research.

Studies have shown that BBR decreases the variousness of intestinal flora, increases the proportion of Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes, further increases the expression of serum GLP-1, GLP-2 (Wang et al., 2021), PYY, GIP and ghrelin (Sun et al., 2016), provides evidence that BBR treatment can inhibit microbiota diversity, elevate plasma GLP-1 and orexin-a, and upregulate hypothalamic GLP-1 receptor expression, which has beneficial effects on various metabolic disorders such as insulin resistance, obesity and obesity, thereby Induces regulation of the gut-brain axis of the microbiota (Sun et al., 2016). Previous studies (Lu et al., 2009; Yu et al., 2010) showed that that BBR increased the number of L-cells and the mRNA expression levels of proglucagon in the ileum, while promoting GLP-1 secretion in normal and diabetic rats. Other studies have also shown (Xu et al., 2017) BBR significantly increased the levels of plasma GLP-1 and GLP-2 in portal vein, as well as the number of L-cells in proximal colon and the mRNA expression level of preluganin. Some studies have linked the intestinal microbiota to the intestinal endocrine system (Cani et al., 2013). Butyrate may improve metabolism via gut-brain axis signaling (De Vadder et al., 2014). The results showed that after BBR intervention, the number of L-cells was positively correlated with the abundance of acteria, anaerobes, cholephila and oscillibacter. Studies indicated that Akkermansia muciniphila could significantly increase GLP-1 release from colonic L cells (Everard et al., 2011; Hansen et al., 2011), this study confirmed that BBR increased the abundance of akman bacteria and decreased the abundance of Lactobacillus, which seems to be related to the increase of the number of L cells and the intestinal endocrine peptides secreted by L cells. In summary, regulation of glucose and gut hormone levels by BBR has a lot to do with modulating the composition of the gut microbiome. There are few studies on BBR in the treatment of metabolic diseases by regulating microbiota-gut-brain axis, for its potential effectiveness, this mechanism is worthy of further study.

Previous studies have shown that metabolic disorders significantly affect the structure and function of gut microbiome. In addition, gut microbiome can affect body metabolism by producing metabolites such as short chain fatty acids and succinic acid, which increases the abundance of beneficial bacteria and decreases the abundance of pathogenic bacteria. Therefore, this study focused on the abundance of beneficial and pathogenic bacteria after BBR intervention, and summarized the mechanism of BBR on metabolic diseases. In recent years, with the continuous unraveling of the interactions between gut microbiome and organismal metabolism, relevant intervention mechanisms including the regulation of short chain fatty acids, bile acid metabolic pathways, LPS/TLR4 signaling have been gradually studied (Harsch and Konturek, 2018). However, based on fecal microbiota transplant (FMT), metagene Association, and other techniques, it remains to be explored from dissecting the overall structural changes in gut microbiome to the specific effects of a single genus on organism metabolism. In addition, because the complexity of the interaction mechanism between gut microbiome and body metabolism leads to a causality still not fully clear and needs to be elucidated in more rational experimental designs and research approaches (Fischbach, 2018), it is hoped that gut microbiome will become more widely used in clinical practice as a therapeutic target for metabolic diseases.

This review summarizes the mechanism of berberine improving metabolic disorder based on gut microbiome through a combing of literatures. It was found that BBR had a clear effect on altering the abundance of specific bacteria in the gut and modulating the structural function of the gut microbiome as a whole. Through strengthening intestinal barrier function, attenuating metabolic endotoxemia, modulating systemic inflammatory responses, bile acid signaling, and the Microbiota-Gut-Brain axis, among other pathways, in order to exert its effect of improving metabolic disorders. As more studies clarified the mechanisms and characteristics of BBR in ameliorating metabolic disorders by regulating gut microbiome, it provided a new target and research direction for the diagnosis and treatment practice of metabolic diseases in the future clinic. It is worth mentioning that BBR, as a widely used compound in clinic, both in animal experiments and clinical studies, more and more studies have focused on the effects of different doses of BBR on the gut microbiome, and on the basis of confirming its efficacy, dose studies will provide guidance for further exploring the mechanism of action of BBR.

HW and QZ designed and drafted the manuscript. HZ and ZG conceived the manuscript. CG edited and added valuable insights into the manuscript. All authors approved the final manuscript and agreed to be accountable for all aspects of the work.

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 81973837, 81704067 and 81430097), China. And the Strategic Priority Research Program of Chinese Academy of Sciences (Grant No. XDB29020000), China.

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

