Under control: how a dietary additive can restore the gut microbiome and proteomic profile, and improve disease resilience in a marine teleostean fish fed vegetable diets



The constant increase of aquaculture production and wealthy seafood consumption has forced the industry to explore alternative and more sustainable raw aquafeed materials, and plant ingredients have been used to replace marine feedstuffs in many farmed fish. The objective of the present study was to assess whether plant-based diets can induce changes in the intestinal mucus proteome, gut autochthonous microbiota and disease susceptibility of fish, and whether these changes could be reversed by the addition of sodium butyrate to the diets. Three different trials were performed using the teleostean gilthead sea bream (Sparus aurata) as model. In a first preliminary short-term trial, fish were fed with the additive (0.8%) supplementing a basal diet with low vegetable inclusion (D1) and then challenged with a bacteria to detect possible effects on survival. In a second trial, fish were fed with diets with greater vegetable inclusion levels (D2, D3) and the long-term effect of sodium butyrate at a lower dose (0.4%) added to D3 (D4 diet) was tested on the intestinal proteome and microbiome. In a third trial, the long-term effectiveness of sodium butyrate (D4) to prevent disease outcome after an intestinal parasite (Enteromyxum leei) challenge was tested.

The results showed that opposed forces were driven by dietary plant ingredients and sodium butyrate supplementation in fish diet. On the one hand, vegetable diets induced high parasite infection levels that provoked drops in growth performance, decreased intestinal microbiota diversity, induced the dominance of the Photobacterium genus, as well as altered the gut mucosal proteome suggesting detrimental effects on intestinal function. On the other hand, butyrate addition slightly decreased cumulative mortality after bacterial challenge, avoided growth retardation in parasitized fish, increased intestinal microbiota diversity with a higher representation of butyrate-producing bacteria and reversed most vegetable diet-induced changes in the gut proteome.

This integrative work gives insights on the pleiotropic effects of a dietary additive on the restoration of intestinal homeostasis and disease resilience, using a multifaceted approach.

The online version of this article (10.1186/s40168-017-0390-3) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

Aquaculture is one of the fastest growing food production industries and plays a significant role in meeting global protein needs of humans. Indeed, it is estimated that about one billion people worldwide rely on fish as their primary source of animal protein, mainly in Africa and Asia [1], while the consumption of fish is continuously promoted for its multifaceted health benefits [2–4]. However, the use of marine resources (mainly fisheries) as the main protein and oil ingredients in aquafeed is no longer feasible due to the stagnation of the catches, and the increased demand for both human food and aquafeed. This scenario has forced the industry to explore alternative and more sustainable raw materials as aquafeed ingredients [5, 6] and plant ingredients have been used to replace marine feedstuffs at relatively high levels in many fish species [7–11]. However, low fish meal (FM) and low fish oil (FO) inclusion diets are often associated with poor growth and survival, enteritis or immune suppression and impaired quality [12–19]. Furthermore, the nutritional value of marine farmed fish can be compromised by a low content of ω-3 long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids, when low FO inclusion levels are used [20–22]. Thus, a better understanding of the long-term physiological consequences of plant-based diets or other alternative feed ingredients is a major issue, and there is now an increasing interest for fish feed additives to prevent or repair adverse effects of extreme diet formulations. In addition, the need to find potential substitutes to antibiotics has led to the use of other functional feed additives including probiotics, prebiotics, synbiotics, immunostimulants, organic acids, nucleotides and medicinal herbs for boosting aquafeeds and safeguarding general health of aquatic animals. Some of these substances have been found to possess beneficial immunostimulant and stress relieving properties and their use increases the consumer confidence in farmed fish (reviewed in [23]).

The objective of the present study was to assess whether extreme vegetable diets induced changes in the intestinal mucus proteome, gut autochthonous microbiota and disease susceptibility, and whether these changes could be reversed by the addition of sodium butyrate to the diets. We first performed a preliminary short term trial (T1) in which small juveniles were fed for 10 weeks with the additive (0.8%) supplementing a basal diet with low vegetable inclusion (D1) and then challenged with a homologous pathogenic bacterium to detect effects on survival. This dose of additive produced a mild inflammatory reaction in the intestine and pronounced glycogen accumulation in liver [42]. Consequently, we performed a second trial (T2) where we fed fish with even more extreme low FM/FO diets (D2, D3) and tested the long-term effect of sodium butyrate (D4) at a lower dose (0.4%) on the intestinal proteome and microbiome. In a third trial (T3), the long-term effectiveness of sodium butyrate (D4) to prevent disease outcome after an intestinal parasite challenge was tested.

Three feeding trials were conducted and are summarised diagrammatically in Fig. 1. A preliminary short trial (T1) was conducted at the facilities of the Planta Piloto de Acuarios de Experimentación (PAE) del Servei Central de Suport a la Investigació Experimental (SCSIE) at the University of València (UV, Spain). Fish (n = 400) with an initial average size of 10 g were randomly distributed in two 600 L tanks, acclimated to the experimental conditions (water temperature = 21 ± 0.5 °C, water salinity = 30‰) and fed a basal diet (D1) for 3 weeks, and then fed ad libitum for 10 weeks with two different diets. D1 was a control diet corresponding to the 33VO (vegetable oil) diet in Benedito-Palos et al. [43], and D2 was D1 supplemented with 0.8% of a commercial sodium butyrate preparation (Gustor BP-70 ®Norel). This preparation is a partially protected sodium butyrate, with 70% sodium butyrate and 30% vegetable fat. This small amount of fat allows the active principle to be active along the entire gastrointestinal tract.

In a third feeding trial (T3), juvenile GSB (25–30 g) were fed with diets D1, D3 and D4 for 3 months in 500 L tanks under the same water and feeding conditions of T2 before the parasite challenge.

At the end of the trials, one day-fastened fish were sacrificed by overexposure to the anaesthetics benzocaine (100 g/L, in T1) or 3-aminobenzoic acid ethyl ester (MS-222, 0.1 g/L, in T2 and T3) and tissue samples were obtained for microbiome, proteome and parasitological analyses.

Procedures in trial T1 were approved by the Ethics and Animal Welfare Committee of UV and carried out in registered installation facilities (code ES461900001203). Procedures of trials T2 and T3 were approved by the Ethics and Animal Welfare Committee of IATS. They were carried out in a registered installation facility (code ES120330001055) in accordance with the principles published in the European animal directive (2010/63/EU) and Spanish laws (Royal Decree RD53/2013) for the protection of animals used in scientific experiments. For lethal samplings, the suffering of animals was kept to a minimum.

The intestinal mucus of sacrificed fish was sampled following the method described by Kim et al. [44]. Briefly, the intestine from the midgut region to the hindgut region was aseptically separated from the abdominal cavity and the contents were removed by mechanical force with forceps. These compartments have been reported to have the greatest microbial activity [34]. After rinsing the evacuated gut several times with sterile PBS, the mucus was scraped off with a sterile scalpel and collected in sterile 1.5 ml tubes. Four pools per dietary group were obtained (two pools per each replicated tank). Each pool consisted of the intestinal mucus from two different individuals, resulting in a total number of 16 samples for microbiome analysis. During the time lapse from mucus sampling and DNA extraction, less than 4 h, samples were held fresh in ice.

DNA was extracted using the Master Pure Complete DNA and RNA Purification Kit (Epicentre Biotechnologies) following the manufacturer’s instructions and adding some modifications according to Carda-Diéguez et al. [45]. The DNA concentration and quality was determined by agarose gel electrophoresis (1% w/v agarose in Tris-acetate-EDTA (TAE) buffer) and Qubit dsDNA HS Assay Kit (Life Technologies). DNA was stored at −20 °C until used for PCR amplification.

The first 500 bp of the 16S rRNA gene, covering the V1 to V3 regions, were chosen for sequencing as they provide robust and informative taxonomies for studying microbial diversity [46]. 16S rRNA genes were amplified with the universal eubacterial primers 27F (5′-AGAGTTTGATCMTGGCTCAG-3′) and 533R (5′-TTACCGCGGCKGCTGGCACG-3′) with an annealing temperature of 52 °C and 20 cycles to minimise PCR biases [47]. A secondary amplification with equal conditions was performed using the purified PCR product as a template when the DNA concentration was insufficient. The 27F universal primer was modified to contain an 8 bp “tag sequence” specific to each sample, following McKenna et al. [48]. Barcodes were different in at least two nucleotides from each other to minimise mistakes in sample assignments. The Agilent High Technology Assay (Agilent 2100 Expert) was used to determine the amount and quality of DNA per sample.

PCR products were mixed in equal concentrations and purified using the PCR Clean-up DNA Purification Kit (Mo Bio). Samples were sequenced using the Genome Sequencer GS Junior Series (454 Life Science, Brandford, USA) at the Central Service Support Experimental Research (SCSIE) (University of Valencia, Spain).

Quality filtering of the raw sequences was performed using the Ribosomal Database Project (RDP) pipeline [46]. Sequences shorter than 200 bp, as well as those with an average quality score lower than 20 and sequences with more than one ambiguous base call were removed. Quality sequences were allocated to respective samples according to the barcode sequences at the beginning of each read. Chimeras were detected using UCHIME [49]. Taxonomic assignment of the sequences was made using the RDP classifier [46], implemented in the MG-RAST server database, with an 80% confidence threshold. Sequences were clustered into operational taxonomical units (OTUs) at 97% sequence identity.

Rarefaction curves were obtained by plotting the number of observed OTUs against the number of sequences. When the curves approximated saturation, the number of sequences was considered appropriate for further analyses. The Shannon diversity index was calculated as a measure of alpha-diversity. Beta-diversity among samples was calculated using by Fast Unifrac [50], and visualised using principal component analysis (PCA). Krona analysis was used to allow for a complete visual exploration of relative abundances within the complex hierarchies of microbial communities [51]. The shared and unique OTUs among the four dietary groups were also represented by a Venn diagram. All the above analyses were performed using the GPRO software [52] and R statistical software (v3.3.1).

The batch of sequences from this study has been deposited in the Sequence Read Archive of National Centre for Biotechnology Information under the project identification name “BIOPROJECT ID PRJNA381135” (from SAMN06670806 to SAMN06670821).

The proteome of the intestinal mucus of fish fed the four experimental diets in T2 was analysed by means of the quantitative iTRAQ technique. This analysis was carried out in two stages, (1) an initial analysis examining separately samples of anterior and posterior intestinal segments, using in total 8 pooled diet samples (each pool consisting of 6 individuals per each intestine segment and diet), and (2) a second analysis of only the anterior intestine, using individual samples from each diet (n = 6 for each diet, a total of 24 samples).

Intestines of sacrificed fish were removed and unfolded on a sterile petri dish. The posterior end of the intestine, including the rectum plus three times the rectum length, was cut and locked at one end with hemostatic pliers. With a sterile syringe, 2 ml of mucus isolation buffer (PBS with 1% dithiothreitol, 1% sodium pyruvate, 0.6% HEPES and 0.03% amphotericin B) was introduced through the open end of the intestinal segment, after which the open end was immediately locked with hemostatic pliers. The same procedure was performed with an anterior intestine segment of equivalent length, placing the first pliers closely after the pyloric caeca. After 20 min incubation at 20 °C, isolation buffer was recovered by puncture with a syringe and individually disposed into ice-cold tubes. Each incubated intestinal tissue was opened lengthwise and the overlaying mucus layer softly recovered with a spatula avoiding epithelial scrapping. Mucus samples from anterior and posterior intestine were then centrifuged for 30 min at 13,500×g at 4 °C, and supernatants were transferred to cryotubes and kept at − 80 °C until further processing.

Protein samples were precipitated with trichloroacetic acid, washed with cold acetone and air-dried. Pellets were dissolved with 40 μl of 8 M urea 0.5 M tetraethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and quantified by Qubit (Invitrogen) according to manufacturer instructions. For each 100-μg sample, volume was adjusted up to 40 μl with 0.5 M TEAB. Samples were then reduced with 50 mM Tris-(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine at 37 °C for 180 min, alkylated with 100 mM methylmethanethiosulfonate for 10 min, and urea concentration was lowered to less than 2 M with 500 mM TEAB. Samples were then digested with 10 μg of sequencing grade trypsin in 0.5 mM TEAB overnight at 37 °C and dried in a speed vacuum. Trypsin digested samples were labelled for 3 h with 8-plex iTRAQ reagents with the signature ion signals 115 to 121 Da and an internal standard was included. Labelled samples were dissolved with 200 μl of 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea and 1.6% ampholites.

After iTRAQ labelling, peptides were separated by isolectrofocusing (IEF) on immobilised pH gradient (IPG) strips (13 cm, pH 3–11) with 5000 V to 25,000 Vh. After IEF, each IPG strip was cut into 11 equal pieces and peptides were extracted with 120 μl of acetonitrile (ACN) solutions at increasing concentrations (5%, 50%, 70%, 100%) plus 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). After concentration by POROS R2 (Millipore), labelled peptides were speed vacuum-dried and adjusted to a concentration of 0.20 μg/μl in 2% ACN and 0.1% TFA.

iTRAQ tagged peptides from IEF fractions were analysed with the mass spectrometer nanoESI qQTOF (5600 TripleTOF, AB SCIEX). Samples were desalted out with 0.1% TFA at 3 μl/min for 5 min with a NanoLC Column (3 μ, C18CL, 15 cm × 75 μm), and then loaded onto an analytical LC column (3 μ, C18CL, 25 cm × 75 μm) equilibrated in 5% ACN and 0.1% formic acid (FA). Elution was achieved using a linear gradient of ACN (5% - 35%) in 0.1% FA for 90 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Mass spectra were acquired in Information Dependent Acquisition mode by TOF MS scanning from 350 to 1250 m/z performed at spectral acquisition time of 0.25 s, followed by product ion scanning from 100 to 1500 m/z performed at 0.075 s on the 25 most intense charged ions. The MS data has been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD006183.

Protein identification and relative quantification were performed with the ProteinPilot software (version 5.0) using the Paragon algorithm as the search engine. Each MS/MS spectrum was searched against the protein dataset expressed from CSIC Nutrigroup gilthead sea bream transcriptomic database (http://www.nutrigroup-iats.org/seabreamdb) [53]. Parameters considered for the search were trypsin as the digestion enzyme and MMTS as cysteine alkylation reagent. To minimise false positive results, the cut-off value of Unused Protein Score for protein identification was set at > 1.3, corresponding to a confident limit of 95%, and the score threshold was set at a 5% FDR. The resulting dataset was auto bias corrected to remove any variations due to unequal mixing during the combining of different labelled samples. Peptides for quantification were automatically selected by the ProteinPilot Pro Group algorithm. Functional analysis of identified proteins was performed by means of IPA software (www.ingenuity.com). For each protein in the analysis, the Uniprot accession equivalent for one of the three higher vertebrates model species in IPA (human, rat or mouse) was searched as previously reported for the transcriptome-encoding proteins of gilthead sea bream [53].

Data on protein expression was analysed using SPSS 21.0. Comparison of anterior and posterior intestine samples was performed by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) analysis followed by Benjamini–Hochberg multiple testing correction. Differences among experimental diets in anterior intestine individual samples were assessed by ANOVA followed by a Student–Newman–Keuls (SNK) post hoc test. A P value < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Principal component analysis (PCA) and K-means cluster analysis of proteins with differential abundance were performed using Genesis software (v1.7.7). Heatmaps were constructed using R statistical software (v3.3.1).

At the end of the feeding period of trial T1, 60 fish per dietary treatment (20 fish/tank, 3 replicates), which means a total of 6 tanks, were lightly anaesthetised with clove oil (30 ppm, Guinama, Spain), intracoelomically injected with 0.1 ml of bacterial suspensions in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, pH 7.4) with 8.0 × 107 colony forming units (CFU) ml−1 [54, 55]. A low lethal dose producing mortalities around 20% (LD20) was chosen for the bacterial challenge with Photobacterium damselae subsp. piscicida (Phdp) [56]. Bacterial suspensions consisted of Phdp strain SK 216/12, isolated from diseased European sea bass (Dicentrarchus labrax), cultured in tryptic soy agar (TSA, Pronadisa, Madrid, Spain) supplemented with NaCl at a final concentration of 1% (TSA-1) and sheep blood at a final concentration of 5% (TSAB-1), at 22 °C for 48 h.

A group of 10 fish per dietary treatment was injected with 0.1 ml PBS, as a control of the experimental handling. Fish were fed the same diets along the post-challenge period. After the challenge, the average water temperature was 21 ± 1 °C and fish mortality was monitored daily until no more mortalities were recorded for a minimum of two consecutive days. Post-mortem examination was performed by standard microbiological methods (pathogen culturing and isolation steps as described above) to confirm the presence of Phdp. Identification of the pathogen was carried out by means of an agglutination test with the corresponding antiserum. Cumulative mortality (CM) was calculated per dietary treatment using the following formula: CM = “number of dead fish” × “initial total number of fish”−1 × 100. Mortality percentages were subjected to an analysis of variance, using the SPSS 19.0 software (SPSS Inc.) to determine the differences among diets. A P value < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

Recipient fish (n = 30) were tested by qPCR and histology to be free of E. leei infection before starting the experimental feeding. At the end of the feeding period of T3, fish were distributed in 12 200 L tanks (20 fish/tank, average weight 120 g). Four replicate tanks were allocated to each diet group. After 1 week of acclimatisation, two tanks of each diet were challenged with the intestinal myxozoan parasite Enteromyxum leei and the other two were not exposed to the parasite (control). Each diet group continued to be fed with the same experimental diets after parasite challenge. Parasite challenge was performed by anal intubation, as previously described [57]. Briefly, each recipient fish received 0.35 ml of an inoculum containing viable parasites from a single homogeneous batch prepared from donor infected fish. The inoculum was maintained cold and with frequent mixing to ensure similar viable parasite doses to each fish. Control fish were intubated with the same volume of PBS. A non-lethal (NL) PCR was conducted 5 weeks post intubation (p.i.) to verify the status of the infection in all recipient D1 fish and to decide the final sampling point. NL samples were obtained by probing the rectum with a swab [58] and PCR diagnosis was carried out as indicated in Sitjà-Bobadilla & Palenzuela [59]. Fish were weighted and sized before the challenge, at an intermediate time point (5 weeks p.i.) when checked for the infection status, and at the last sampling (10 weeks p.i.). Fulton’s condition factor (CF = (100 × body weight)/length3) and SGR (100 × ln (final body weight − initial body weight) / days)) were also calculated. Only two casualties were registered after the challenge in recipient groups: one in D3 and one in D4. All fish were sacrificed and intestinal samples taken 10 weeks p.i. for parasite diagnosis by histology and qPCR.

After necropsy, entire intestines of 12 experimental fish per tank were removed and individually weighed. They were then placed in stomacher bags (Stomacher® 400, Seward), and the volume of each sample was adjusted by eye with variable volumes of PBS (4–8 ml), depending on the tissue weight/volume. Samples were homogenised, mesh-filtered and collected. Aliquots (500 μl) were taken from each sample for DNA extraction. They were centrifuged, and the pellets suspended in 200 μl of DNA lysis buffer. DNA extraction from these samples was performed using commercial silica-based spin columns kits. Parasite rDNA gene copies in the samples were quantified by qPCR [59]. Numbers were interpolated from the cycle thresholds (Ct) of the samples using a standard curve with known numbers of the target gene (6–7 orders of magnitude), run in the same plates on each assay. Only data from reactions with standard curves within an efficiency range (E = 0.85–1.1), and R 2 > 0.99 were accepted. Two dilutions of each DNA sample were run. Samples with Ct < 38 were considered positive whereas samples with 38 < Ct < 40 were flagged and repeated. In several cases, new dilutions and new DNA extractions from additional aliquots of the original homogenates had to be processed to reach a consensus on the status of weakly positive or inconsistent samples. Statistical differences between groups on prevalence, intensity and abundance data were analysed by Fisher’s exact test, one-way ANOVA or Kruskal–Wallis tests followed by Tukey’s or Dunn’s multiple comparison tests (significance was considered when P < 0.05).

After necropsy, anterior, middle and posterior intestinal segments of 5 fish from each tank (different from those used for qPCR) were fixed in 10% buffered formalin, dehydrated in a graded ethanol series, embedded in paraffin, 4-μm sectioned and stained with Giemsa. Parasitological evaluation was done by the observation of all the microscopic fields of the three intestinal segments by the same observer in a blind mode. The intensity of the infection by E. leei was semi-quantitatively evaluated in a scale ranging from 1 (very low) to 6 (very high), and the type of parasitic stages registered. The parasite was not detected in any control fish. The prevalence of infection and the mean intensity of infection for each of intestinal segment were calculated. The possible dependence between the prevalence of infection and the diet group for each intestinal segment was analysed by chi-square with Yates’-correction (significance was considered when P < 0.05).

Microbial communities present in the intestinal mucus (autochthonous or resident microbiota) of fish fed different experimental diets in T2 were analysed. A total of 143,283 quality reads were obtained, ranging from 2985 to 11,906 reads per sample, and with an average of 8955. Reads were clustered and assigned to OTUs, and were predominantly classified to the phylum Proteobacteria. Since rarefaction curves approximated saturation (horizontal asymptote), a good coverage of the bacterial community was achieved and the number of sequences for analysis was considered appropriate (Additional file 1: Figure S1). Rarefaction analysis and the Shannon index was used to examine alpha-diversity and showed that microbiota from fish fed control diet (D1) was more diverse than fish fed experimental D2 and D3 diets, but less than those fed D4 diet. Thus, the diet supplemented with butyrate showed the highest diversity (Table 1).

Principal component analysis (PCA) was used to visualise the relatedness of the samples depending on microbial community composition (Fig. 3a). The first two components, PC1 and PC2, explained 77 and 9.4% of the total variance, respectively. Variability of replicates within diet groups was shown using ellipses and clearly displayed a decrease in variability of microbial communities in response to the D3 diet. The largest variability was found in response to D4 diet. A closer look at the position of the multivariate centroids (Fig.
3b) revealed that the higher the FO substitution with VO (D2 < D3), the further the separation from D1. Interestingly, addition of butyrate in D4 induced a partial recovery of the control diet phenotype evidenced by the reversion in PC1 (77%).

An initial iTRAQ analysis was performed with eight pooled samples resulting from the combination of individual samples of each intestinal segment (anterior and posterior) and dietary treatment (D1–D4). In this first analysis, more than 2000 proteins were unequivocally identified in samples of intestinal mucus (Additional file 7: Table S2). The first two components of the PCA explained 65% of the total variance (45 and 20% for PC1 and PC2, respectively), and this analysis clearly separated the two intestinal segments along the first principal component (Fig. 4a). Comparison of anterior and posterior intestine samples revealed that 196 proteins were significantly more abundant in one intestine portion, with 139 proteins greater in abundance in the anterior intestine and 57 in the posterior intestine. Among them, 180 proteins (91.8%, 126 from anterior intestine and 54 from posterior intestine) were eligible for functional pathway analysis using the Ingenuity IPA software. In the anterior intestine, 101 over-abundant proteins participated in 26 relevant molecular functions. Among them, the most representative (Fig.
4b) were related to lipid metabolism (absorption of cholesterol and triacylglycerol), catabolism of amino acids and energy production (oxidation of fatty acids). In posterior intestine, 40 over-abundant proteins participated in 25 relevant molecular functions (Fig.
4c), with special relevance on post-translational modification (mainly protein deubiquitination) and several functions (cellular development, cellular assembly and organisation, cellular function and maintenance, cell death and survival, cellular growth and proliferation) related to cell proliferation. The molecular function of lipid metabolism was not extensively represented in the posterior intestine, with only seven proteins with higher abundance than in the anterior intestine, although it is interesting to note that two of them (fatty acid binding protein 6 and phospholipase A2 group 1B) had the highest abundance ratio between posterior and anterior intestines (33.33 and 5.26, respectively) (Additional file 7: Table S2).

For proteins of clusters 1–4, PCA analysis showed that the two first components explained 81% of the total variance (Fig. 6a). PC1 separated the groups according to the inclusion level of FM (D1: 23%; D2, D3, D4: 3% FM), whereas the distribution of groups along PC2 was related to the different inclusion level of FO/VO (D1: 15.6% FO; D2: 6.5% FO, 8.8% VO; D3-D4: 2.5% FO, 13% VO). Accordingly, fish fed D2 and D3 diets moved along PC1 and PC2 when compared to D1 and only along the PC2 when compared to each other. Butyrate supplementation (D4) helped to restore the intestinal mucus proteome of fish fed the control diet evidenced by a reversion in both PC axes. When considering all the proteins as a whole, regardless of their reversion patterns, some molecular and cellular functions were highlighted as statistically significant (determined by Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA), and corrected by Benjamini–Hochberg multiple testing correction) (Fig.
6b). Among the proteins with a reversion pattern to control values in the D4 diet group (clusters 1 and 2), processes related to protein degradation, cell signalling, vitamin and mineral metabolism, amino acid metabolism, molecular transport, and cellular development and morphology were highly represented.

In trial T1, the average mortality rate of fish fed the butyrate supplemented diet (D2) after bacterial inoculation was lower (18.33%) than that of non-supplemented one (D1) (21.67%). However, this improvement was not statistically significant. Mortality started 3–4 days after bacterial inoculation and prolonged until day 10 post-injection. No mortality was observed in fish injected with PBS, regardless of the diet. The inoculated bacterium was always isolated from internal organs of moribund fish in pure culture (Fig. 7).

In trial T3, there were no significant differences in the prevalence of infection by E. leei, though the values registered with the experimental vegetable diets (D3) were slightly higher (Fig. 8a). No significant differences between groups D1 (control) and D3/D4 (experimental diets) were found in the mean, mode or distribution of values related to the intensity of infection, i.e. DNA copies of parasite per gram of intestine (Fig.
8b) or per fish (data not shown). However, a wider range and a noticeable cluster of values on the lower end of the intensity distribution in D4 were observed (Fig.
8b). Thus, when the intensity of infection data was segmented into three groups with equal number of individuals, statistically significant differences were detected in the mean and the median between D4 and D1 groups within the lower infection level category (Fig.
8c). The histopathological study of the different intestinal segments showed a statistically significant influence of diet on the prevalence of infection at the anterior intestine (Fig.
8d). Few D1 fish were infected at the anterior intestinal segment, whereas D3 registered the highest prevalence and D4 an intermediate value. Only the difference between D1 and D3 was significant. None of the D1 fish were infected at the middle intestine, which is the last segment being infected during the chronology/progress of the infection (Fig.
8d). The number of fish with more than one infected intestinal segment was significantly higher in D3 (66.7%) than in D1 (12.5%), but did not differ statistically from D4 (40%).

Since clinical signs of enteromyxosis include anorexia, weight loss and cachexia, growth performance parameters were analysed throughout the trial. No statistical differences in weight were detected among replicates or diet groups before the challenge, nor at the intermediate sampling (5 weeks p.i.), but differences did appear at the end of the trial (10 weeks p.i.). Specific growth rate (SGR) decreased in all recipient groups with respect to their control group, and although no significant differences were detected, the greatest decrease was observed in D3, and there was little difference between D4 and D1 (Fig. 9a). The effect of the infection on growth performance was clearly dependent on the nutritional background, as the condition factor (CF) of fish exposed to the parasite decreased significantly due to the infection in both D1 and D3 recipient fish, whereas almost no impact was found in D4 recipient fish (Fig.
9b).

The fish gastrointestinal (GI) microbiota is a relatively new field of research, and has only begun to be adequately defined with NGS tools in the past few years (reviewed in [32, 33, 60, 61]). The analysis of GI microbiota (mainly the transient one) in GSB, in wild and farmed individuals, has been addressed in few recent works using 16S 454 or Illumina sequencing platforms [62–64], PCR-denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (PCR-DGGE) [65–67] or amplified ribosomal DNA restriction analysis and 16S rRNA gene sequencing of cultivable colonies [68]. However, scarce information on the diversity and role of prokaryotic populations adhering to intestine mucus in fish (autochthonous) is available, and specifically with respect to host health status. In this study, we focused on the characterisation of the autochthonous microbiota in the intestine of cultured GSB after a dietary intervention using pyrosequencing of the 16S rRNA gene.

Another effect of the vegetable diets was a decrease in variability, which was also reversed by butyrate addition. In fact, in humans, the constellations of microbes that make up an individual’s microbiome are unique, with only up to 30% conservation of strains shared among unrelated individuals [97]. In European sea bass, the high variability of the bacterial profiles among groups reared under the same conditions was attributed to differences in genotypes [71]. In GSB, other authors found the variability among fish within the same group in the mixed gut microbiota was higher in fish fed an extreme vegetable diet than in those fed a standard one [63].

The iTRAQ methodology is a gel-free approach that allows the simultaneous comparison of multiple proteomes, each labelled with specific isobaric mass tags, and the ratio of the intensities between the different reporter ions can be used to measure increases or decreases in the amount of the corresponding peptides [98]. This technique yields highly reliable quantitative results for the same protein in different samples, though it cannot quantify in absolute levels or discriminate post-translational modifications, and is highly dependent on homologous protein databases to match and quantify the obtained MS spectra. In the present trial, this yielded a high number of intestinal mucus proteins (2217 in pooled samples) that was reduced to 1045 on individual samples, since proteins not present in all the individual analysed samples were not taken into account in the analysis. Recently, we have also identified more than 2000 proteins in the skin mucus of GSB using 1-DE/MS approaches [99], when the digested protein fragments were matched against our protein database with a high coverage of GSB protein-codifying sequences (more than 15,000 unique sequences in Swissprot). These numbers are in the same order of magnitude or even higher than those reported for other mucosal tissues and body fluids in humans and other animal models [100–102], and in skin mucus in GSB [103, 104]. The recent use of the iTRAQ technique to characterise the proteins in bile and intestinal mucus of Nile tilapia [105] was also able to discriminate more than 2700 peptide fragments, but only 319 (corresponding to 179 different proteins) were properly identified. Whether this relatively low number reflects the limitations of the use of a non-homologous protein database in iTRAQ approaches remains unclear.

Altogether, the use of extreme vegetable diets induced changes in intestinal mucus proteome that could lead to an increased susceptibility to pathogens and a partial loss of intestinal functions. This was especially evident with the downregulation of mucins that affect the composition of the mucus layer and protect the epithelium, and with the downregulation of proteins related to digestion. Importantly, most of these changes were partially reversed with butyrate addition in D4 diet, suggesting butyrate/SCFA supplementation as a means to improve the use of vegetable diets.

SCFAs, primarily butyrate, not only play a role in energy homeostasis [127], but also possess antioxidative, anticarcinogenic and anti-inflammatory properties that play an essential role in maintaining gastrointestinal and immune homeostasis in humans and different animal models [128–131]. However, whether SCFAs impact antimicrobial host defences remains largely unknown. Previous studies with human pathogens [132, 133] and animal (mammals and birds) models [80, 134–137] have shown the capability of different dietary butyrate formulations to reduce some bacterial and parasitic infections or their impact on the host. However, the impact of butyrate on fish health is poorly documented and studies mainly focus on improvement of immune factors/genes [37, 138–140]. Studies on the effect of SCFAs against fish pathogens are very scarce [141, 142].

In the present study, the concomitant changes detected in the microbiome and the mucus proteome of D4 intestines could also help to explain the better disease outcome of these fish. In particular, research in the last decade in humans and other animal models has convincingly demonstrated that the microbiota is crucial in order to prime and orchestrate innate and adaptive immune responses and influence barrier function as well as multiple developmental and metabolic parameters of the host. Reciprocally, host reactions and immune responses instruct the composition of the microbiota [154]. Changes in the balance between commensal and pathogenic bacteria could result in a different impact of bacteria at the epithelial level (the target site of E. leei) or even affect the development of the parasite. This has already been demonstrated for an insect-parasite model: a Trypanosoma cruzi clone changes the microbiota population in the digestive tract by modulating the host immune responses and this contributes to parasite development in the gut of Rhodnius prolixus [155]. Likewise, human intestinal apicomplexan parasites have a remodelling effect on the gut microbiota profile [156]. Although rapid advances in our understanding of host-intestinal bacteria interactions have been achieved in fish [157, 158], the inter-relationship of intestinal microparasites and gut microbiota remains largely unexplored and future efforts should be made to address this gap. Further studies in this fish-parasite model will elucidate how much the parasite infection alters the gut microbiota and the mucosal proteome.

Figure 10 summarises and integrates the current results with those previously obtained by us using a fish-parasite model. Opposed forces are driven by dietary plant ingredients and sodium butyrate supplementation in GSB diet. On the one hand, vegetable diets induced high parasite infection levels that provoked drops in growth performance, inflammation and loss of gut integrity and function, reduction in intestinal microbiota diversity and dominance of Photobacterium genus, as well as changes of gut mucosal proteome with potential detrimental effects on intestinal function. On the other hand, butyrate addition did not prevent the infection, but avoided growth retardation and decreased inflammation in challenged fish, as well as restored gut integrity and function, increased intestinal microbiota diversity with a higher representation of butyrate-producing bacteria and reversed most changes in the gut proteome.

This multifaceted integrative study provides insights on the pleiotropic effects of a dietary additive on the maintenance of intestinal health and disease resilience. The notion that different dietary components can modulate the microbiota has started to be used therapeutically in humans [159] and is becoming a major avenue of research in aquaculture. However, information and understanding regarding fish gut microbiota still lags behind that of human and other mammals, including evidence for cause-effect relationships between gut microbiota and host physiology. In any case, this study is an important step towards establishing GSB as a powerful model for the development of sustainable and healthy fish feeds.



Conceptualization: ASB, JPS, BF. Data curation: JCG, JPS, BF, OP. Formal analysis: BF, OP, JCG, MCP. Funding acquisition: ASB, JPS, VK, MP. Investigation: MCP, JCG, BF, IE, PSM, OP, ASB, JPS. Project administration: ASB, JPS. Resources: VK, MP, JPS, ASB, OP. Supervision: ASB, JPS. Visualisation: MCP, ASB. Writing—original draft: MCP, JCG, BF, OP, ASB, JPS. Writing—review and editing: all. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

This work has been carried out with financial support from the European Union under grant projects ARRAINA (FP7-KBBE-2011-288,925) to JPS, MP and VK and ParaFishControl (H2020-634429) to ASB. This publication reflects the views only of the authors, and the European Commission cannot be held responsible for any use which may be made of the information contained therein. Additional funding has been received from Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness (MINECO) project no. AGL2013-48560-R to JPS and ASB, and Generalitat Valenciana (PROMETEOII/2014/085) to ASB. MCP was contracted under CSIC PIE project no. 201740E013 and MINECO FPDI-2013-15741, and IE under APOSTD/2016/037 grant by the “Generalitat Valenciana”.

All relevant data are within the paper and its Additional files.

This study does not involve the use of human subjects. The ethic statements regarding animal experimentation are included in the Methods section.

Not applicable.

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (10.1186/s40168-017-0390-3) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

