Microbiome-associated human genetic variants impact phenome-wide disease risk





Following the sequencing of the human genome and gut microbiome, microbiome-associated variants (MAVs) were discovered that link human genetic variation with either microbiome compositions or the relative abundance of particular microbes in the gut. Reciprocally, human gut microbes have been associated with a growing number of diseases. Using an integrative framework of case–control studies in humans and two of the largest repositories of electronic health records globally, we assembled a collection of MAVs from 11 microbiome by human genome studies and tested their associations with tissue-wide gene expression patterns, clinical diseases, and evolutionary patterns. These results reveal the origins and diversity of MAVs and their linkages with disease risk.

Human genetic variation associates with the composition of the gut microbiome, yet its influence on clinical traits remains largely unknown. We analyzed the consequences of nearly a thousand gut microbiome-associated variants (MAVs) on phenotypes reported in electronic health records from tens of thousands of individuals. We discovered and replicated associations of MAVs with neurological, metabolic, digestive, and circulatory diseases. Five significant MAVs in these categories correlate with the relative abundance of microbes down to the strain level. We also demonstrate that these relationships are independently observed and concordant with microbe by disease associations reported in case–control studies. Moreover, a selective sweep and population differentiation impacted some disease-linked MAVs. Combined, these findings establish triad relationships among the human genome, microbiome, and disease. Consequently, human genetic influences may offer opportunities for precision diagnostics of microbiome-associated diseases but also highlight the relevance of genetic background for microbiome modulation and therapeutics.

The human gut microbiome associates with health and disease due to wide-ranging roles in immune system training and maintenance, metabolite production and conversion, and homeostatic signaling (1–4). While many factors (e.g., diet, environment, social exposures, etc.) explain degrees of gut microbiome variation (5–8), studies indicate that human genomic variation associates with microbiome variation in the gut, skin, vagina, and mouth, with the gut microbiome being the most deeply characterized to date (9–15). For example, human microbiome by genome-wide association studies (mbGWAS) on individuals without chronic disease reveal hundreds of associations between human gut microbiome-associated variants (MAVs) and microbiome traits, including community diversity and taxon relative abundance (16–23). The most consistent and recurring gene-microbe associations are between the lactose digestion LCT/MCM6 genomic region and the gut genus Bifidobacterium (17, 23–26); however, variation in this genomic region is not associated with preferential expansion of any one species of this taxon (27). In contrast, associations between the blood antigen genomic region ABO and several gut microbes are inconsistently detected (22, 23, 26, 28–31), indicating that in addition to sample size, other biological and technical factors may belie the discovery of gene–microbe relationships. Determining whether host genetics simultaneously associates with differential microbial abundance and disease risk is a central challenge to resolve with substantive potential for personalized diagnostics and/or treatments for disease. If select taxa are adapted for certain human physiological or metabolic niches, their modulation through behavioral, dietary, or medical intervention may prevent or contribute to deleterious outcomes. However, how MAVs interrelate with disease risk is largely uncatalogued.

Population-level approaches are in their infancy in the microbiome field and have thus far addressed a small number of MAVs (16, 19, 22, 43–45). Although an invaluable data source, electronic health repositories (EHRs) are sparse, and each differs in their patient and phenotype distribution as well as access to researchers, with preceding works leveraging an EHR-based biobank outside of the United States. We connect Vanderbilt’s EHR-based biobank of ∼90,000 individuals to a comprehensive set of MAVs assembled across 11 studies to assess the clinical traits and disease phenotypes of significant MAVs identified to date (Fig. 1) (46). To determine the replicability of MAV associations, we compare disease-linked variants with phenome-wide association study (PheWAS) data in the UK Biobank, the largest collection of clinical health records globally. By extension with microbiome by genome-wide association data and gene expression patterns, this framework may indirectly connect gut microbes with a plurality of human phenotypes that covary at shared genomic loci. These unique resources coupled with PheWAS open an unbiased lens to broadly characterize the triad between human genomes, gut microbiomes, and human diseases.

To assemble a set of significant and unbiased gut MAVs, we used 11 large mbGWAS to investigate single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that associate with gut microbial taxon relative abundance and beta diversity (Table 1). Binary microbiome traits (presence/absence) were excluded in this analysis. Genotypes and microbiome traits were measured in individuals without chronic illness from multiple continents and biogeographical populations, and we aggregated variants below a genome-wide significance of P < 5×10−8 in these studies through a review of the published genome-wide association study (GWAS) summary statistics. This produced a dataset of 1,220 significant MAVs and 925 unique MAVs following the removal of duplicates that were significant within and between studies (Dataset S1). All measured gut microbiome traits and differential relative abundances derive from subject fecal samples using either 16S ribosomal RNA (16S rRNA) or shotgun metagenomic sequencing (whole-genome shotgun sequencing [WGS]). MAVs were annotated to the exact level of taxonomic resolution from their study of discovery down to the strain level where available.

For each study, the geographic population is noted. Multiple populations were sampled in one large study spanning 11 nations, including the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom, Israel, South Korea, Germany, Denmark, the Netherlands, Belgium, Sweden, and Finland. The sequencing method for each study is listed as 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing or WGS.

Of the 925 MAVs, 908 had annotations based on the Ensembl genome database using Variant Effect Predictor and SNPNexus (Dataset S2) (47–49). Annotated MAVs span chromosomes 1 to 22, with a global minor allele frequency (MAF) range of 0.02 to 49.8% (mean = 15.5%) (SI Appendix, Fig. S1). Just 4 of 908 MAVs are protein coding, representing two synonymous and two nonsynonymous variants. Among the remaining 904 MAVs, 437 are intergenic with nearest genes noted, 415 are intronic, and 45 are variants in the 3′ untranslated region (UTR; 18) or the 5′ UTR (27) (Fig. 2A). Twenty-five percent of intergenic variants were identified between two long intronic noncoding RNA or two processed pseudogene regions. In total, two MAVs and nine MAV-containing genes replicated between two studies (AC005833.1, BANK1, CDH13, FHIT, FNDC3B, MAP4K4, R3HDM1, RAB3GAP1, SPRY4-AS1), while one MAV and two MAV-containing genes (MCM6 and PTPRD) replicated between three studies (Dataset S2). Notably, recurring associations between the microbiome and the lactose digestion LCT/MCM6 genomic region have been well described (17, 23–26), while the significance of microbiome-linked variants in or near PTPRD has not previously been investigated.

Since MAV eQTLs are enriched in sites related to gut microbiome functions, including the gastrointestinal and cardiovascular systems, we next explored the biological pathways of genes correlated with MAV eQTLs from the identified enriched tissues. Using the human Reactome database (53), we performed overrepresentation analysis by first narrowing down the collection of MAVs to those from the 15 tissues that were significantly enriched. Next, we analyzed MAV eQTL target genes individually in the following tissues (number of target genes): skin [223], esophagus [202], thyroid [189], nerve [179], artery [179], adipose [178], whole blood [148], testis [143], muscle skeletal [132], lung, colon, heart, pancreas, spleen, and pituitary. We identified significant overrepresentation shared among all 15 enriched tissues, including tissues of the colon, heart, and lung (FDR < 0.05) (Fig. 2D, Dataset S5, and SI Appendix, Fig. S3). Many of these common pathways, including interferon, T cell receptor (TCR), and Programmed Cell Death Ligand 1 (PD-1) signaling pathways, collectively reflect T cell interactions as well as other immune system functions. This indicates that both generalized and specific pathways are ubiquitously enriched by target genes from MAV eQTL. The more generalized “adaptive immune system” pathway term was enriched in 10 of 15 tissues (Fig. 2D). Interestingly, no single tissue had MAV eQTL target genes associated with a unique overrepresented pathway. Collectively, pathway representation corresponds with expected host–microbiome immunological interactions as well as inflammatory and autoimmune disorders that emerged during the PheWAS analyses described below.

To identify which, if any, MAVs are associated with disease, we performed a PheWAS using the 908 annotated MAVs in populations stratified by European ancestry (EA) and African ancestry (AA), the two largest ancestral sample populations in Vanderbilt’s biobank-linked EHR repository. In its simplest form, PheWAS is a regression analysis that can determine if a genetic variant is associated with a disease based on the medical records of large populations (with and without the phenotype) that have all been genotyped at a given locus. Briefly, the PheWAS analysis was performed as a series of individual logistic regressions (e.g., MAV by phenotype), which included variables for age, sex, and the first five principal components of genetic ancestry. Analytical methods for EHR biobank data are chosen based on the characteristics of the sampled population, including size, sequencing methodologies, scope of collection criteria, and medical phenotyping definitions. For example, the PheWAS method used for BioVU data removes related individuals prior to the analysis, while the method used for UK Biobank adjusts for relatedness in each regression model. In the BioVU discovery cohort, we applied a conservative cutoff of at least 200 cases of a phenotype to be considered and required that a medical code in an individual’s EHR appear twice or more to avoid spurious conditions. At the time of analysis, the Vanderbilt BioVU dataset for the 908 MAVs contained 201 to 25,467 cases and 24,935 to 56,748 controls spanning 815 EHR-derived phenotypes.

Following identification of 31 PheWAS phenotype associations in the EA cohort in Vanderbilt BioVU, 13 of 31 significant phenotype associations from five MAVs were reidentified in the UK Biobank PheWEB database (Dataset S8). A deep vein thrombosis (DVT) PheCode (452.2) is not represented in the UK Biobank; instead, an association with (451.2) phlebitis and thrombophlebitis of lower extremities as a closest match is used. Odds ratios (ORs) shown are for the disease risk allele; OR > 1 indicates an increased likelihood of the phenotype with the indicated allele (FDR < 0.05).

An open question is whether the elements of a MAV–microbe–disease triad align, wherein a microbial relative abundance controlled by a MAV also links with the disease that the MAV associates with by PheWAS. If the triads occur, human genetic influences on both microbial relative abundance and disease may offer opportunities for precision diagnostics as well as potential challenges for probiotic therapies that target microbial relative abundance changes. To this point, we hypothesized that the links between MAV–microbe and MAV–disease may connect and predict the differential relative abundance of a microbe in the replicated phenotypes we detected in BioVU and the UK Biobank. We informally explored this through a post hoc analysis in the absence of a human phenotype–microbe simulation approach. For each of the eight replicated phenotypes, we sought peer-reviewed support in human case–control studies for a specific disease and significant change in the relative abundance of the previously associated microbe. Interestingly, we identify a supported triad in five of eight associations in which the human genotype links with both disease risk and a microbial relative abundance direction independently connected to disease in case–control studies, thus completing the triadic cycle of genome influences phenome, and microbiome and microbiome influences or is influenced by disease (Fig. 4 and Dataset S9). We cautiously present these observations as hypotheses for future research as the data are derived from multiple independent studies, and interestingly, half of these triads involve the core gut family Lachnospiraceae that exists in humans from infancy to adulthood (56). Lachnospiraceae are enriched in pathways degrading diet-derived polysaccharides and frequently associated with inflammatory conditions, depressive syndromes, and MS that link with gut microbial relative abundance changes. The implications and specific associations of Lachnospiraceae with phenotypes are explored below.

A single association for metabolic disease was identified between gout and MAV rs3749147 (A), which is linked with the increased relative abundance of Eggerthella (Eggerthellaceae [family]) (20). Gout is a common metabolic disease in which purine metabolism and urate transport dysfunction lead to the formation of urate crystals, causing joint and renal damage (87, 88). The gout-linked MAV is an eQTL that targets, among several genes, GCKR, a glucokinase inhibitor with significant gout associations (89, 90). The associated taxon for this MAV, Eggerthella (20), is differentially abundant in urine microbiome samples of gout patients and has not been associated with gut microbiomes in gout patients (91).

Using the same PheWAS parameters as above, we did not identify significant MAV associations in the AA cohort (SI Appendix, Fig. S5). Additionally, we performed a secondary PheWAS on a subset of MAVs in the AA cohort for comparison using a 100-case cutoff, MAF greater than 25% (which included 18 MAVs from the significant EA results), and a control–case ratio greater than 4:1 to account for limitations in the size of the AA cohort and the quality of International Classification of Diseases, Ninth and Tenth Revision (ICD-9/10) codes. Prior PheWAS power analysis simulations using these parameters estimated 75% power to detect allele disease penetrance above 20% in binary traits (92). This PheWAS did not detect any associations between MAV and disease phenotypes. We reason that the lack of identified associations in the AA cohort could be attributed to two factors. Mainly, AA sample sizes at large and in comparable phenotypes lack the power to observe an association in many EA-positive phenotypes in the AA cohort (Dataset S10). Additionally, differences among population genetic architectures may contribute to diluted EA effect sizes in non-EA populations (93, 94). We explored the extent to which differentiation between populations could contribute to the variation of MAVs below.

To examine the evolutionary processes acting on the regions identified in the PheWAS, we ran the 10 significant MAVs from our discovery cohort through an evolutionary analysis pipeline designed to detect enrichment in evolutionary signals using a variety of sequence-based metrics of population differentiation and selection (95). Of the 10 MAVs identified in the BioVU discovery cohort with disease phenotype associations, 4 MAVs with phenotype associations, including increased risks for cardiovascular, sensory, and musculoskeletal traits, produced sufficient background control datasets to enable testing and interpretation following simulation for null hypothesis testing (Fig. 5A and Dataset S11). The interpretation of six MAVs that did not produce suitable simulation data for comparison testing is described in Methods.

Two MAVs with replicated phenotypes in size and direction in the UK Biobank also produced viable evolutionary scores for simulation with the evolutionary analysis pipeline. First, MAV rs8176645, linking B. bifidum, hypercoagulable traits, and pulmonary heart disease, has a high ARGWEAVE (103) score (z score = 1.551), low FST values, and similar MAFs across ancestries (43% African, 38% East Asian, and 40% European). ARGWEAVE estimates the time to the most recent common ancestor (TMRCA) to be 115,179 y for this variation, which is much higher than in the control set (62,855 y). That suggests this MAV arose in ancient humans. The low FST and similar MAFs between ancestries collectively indicate that the allele is under balancing selection in concordance with an old TMRCA. Notably, both alleles (T and A) of this MAV are observed in Denisovans supporting the observed TMRCA estimate (107, 108). Second, MAV rs3758348, linked with Faecalibacterium and also associated with hypercoagulable traits and pulmonary heart disease, stands out for its low PhyloP100 score (z score = −1.36), which measures evolutionary conservation (99). The ancestral G allele is the major allele at this position and is conserved throughout old world monkeys and apes. The negative value at this location is most consistent with human-specific mutational acceleration. In contrast to the previous MAV, which shared hypercoagulability and pulmonary heart disease traits and is under balancing selection, this MAV demonstrates faster evolution than expected under neutral drift. Finally, MAV rs12910631, associated with microbiome beta diversity and joint stiffness, does not exhibit any z scores for evolutionary metrics greater or less than one, which suggests that the region is likely evolving neutrally.

Understanding the precise relationships between the human genome, microbiome, and clinical traits remains limited yet central for research and efforts aimed at developing new therapies and personalized diagnostics of diseases with unclear etiologies. Here, using an unbiased framework integrating genetic, transcription, microbiome, and evolutionary approaches, we leveraged 11 mbGWAS and case–control studies with a phenome-wide scan of clinical health records from two independent health record repositories to uncover the genetic footprints of disease that interrelate with gut microbiome variation. We report six key results. 1) 10 MAVs associate with 31 BioVU clinical traits spanning neurological, autoimmune, metabolic, dermatological, and hematological diseases in EA but not AA individuals. 2) Five of these MAVs replicate the size and direction in the UK Biobank. 3) MAVs with clinical traits relevant to gut microbiome biology, including digestive and neurological diseases as well as dermatological traits, tend to exhibit complete triads in which the human genotype links with both disease risk and a microbial relative abundance direction connected to disease. Conversely, clinical traits that are not regularly linked with gut microbiome biology, including sensory and musculoskeletal functions, do not exhibit complete triads with microbial relative abundance. 4) Gut MAV eQTLs are enriched in tissue-specific gene expression profiles related to gut microbiome functions, including the gut–lung axis, gastrointestinal and cardiovascular tissues, and metabolic traits. 5) Pathways of MAV eQTLs are overrepresented in all enriched tissues for immune signaling and antigen processing pathways, while disease MAVs were most enriched in diseases of immunological dysfunction, supporting a model that immunogenetic variation and microbial relative abundance collectively influence dysregulation. 6) Finally, evolutionary analyses demonstrate significant population differentiation of a MAV-linked disease risk allele and a haplotype pattern, suggesting a selective sweep on a disease risk allele in EA and East Asian ancestry populations. Together, these results establish relationships between the genome, microbiome, and human diseases, with opportunities to account for these triads in targeted case–control disease studies while generating hypotheses for disease–microbiome associations.

In summary, our results establish a set of relationships between the genome, microbiome, and human diseases, with opportunities to account for triadic relationships in targeted case–control disease studies. However, genetic influences on microbiome variation associated with clinical traits could also pose operational hurdles for therapies that target microbial compositions, which are presumed to be malleable but may be less so due to underlying host genetic factors. As such, human genetic influences may offer opportunities for precision diagnostics, especially as the relationship between the relative abundance of specific microbes and disease risk is further elucidated.

Large-scale microbiome by genotype studies testing gut microbiome traits in fecal samples were reviewed. Studies were not considered if they did not report sufficient GWAS summary statistics for further analysis or relied on related individuals. Preference was given to studies of 1,000 or more individuals during the literature review. A significance threshold of P < 5×10−8 was used for inclusion of SNPs in the creation of a SNP panel for further analysis. In studies that found associations between multiple microbiome traits and an individual SNP , the microbiome trait with the lowest P value was retained as the presumptive leading microbial trait. Variants were annotated and accessed using a web interface for Variant Effect Predictor (48) and SNPNexus (49), both utilizing the Ensembl genome database (47) for reference. All computational analyses were performed using the R statistical programming language (version 3.6.2) in RStudio (version 1.4.1103).

Simulated background sets were generated using SNPsnap (default parameters, HLA not excluded) (50), which matches input SNPs with randomly drawn sets of SNPs based on allele frequency, the number of SNPs in LD, the distance to the nearest gene, and gene density. Two hundred SNPsnap sets were generated to calibrate background expectations. Quantitative trait loci annotation was performed using the using the R package Qtlizer (118) (Qtlizer::get_qtls) to retrieve GTEx (version 8) tissue-specific gene expression results (119). SNP sets were processed using custom R scripts to calculate the number of distinct SNP eQTLs in each tissue and tissue group. Tissue grouping was applied uniformly in both SNP and MAV groups to condense related tissues of a generalizable tissue type. MAV z score and one-sided P value (FDR < 0.05) were computed in each tissue and then, FDR corrected across all tissues (FDR < 0.05). Only significant tissues are shown in Fig. 2B. All summary statistics are shown in Dataset S4.

Pathway analysis was performed using the Reactome Knowledgebase web platform (53). Following eQTL analysis, MAV eQTL target genes were filtered by tissue, selecting only the 15 tissues that were shown to be significantly enriched. Target genes within each tissue were then used to perform pathway overrepresentation analysis on the gene list with the Reactome web-based platform with the selected options for “Project to human” and “include interactors.” P values and FDR-adjusted P values were computed under a hypergeometric model to determine if the number of selected entities (eQTL target genes) associated with a Reactome pathway is larger than expected. The entities ratio (the total entities in the pathway divided by the total entities for the entire species) and the reaction ratio (the total reactions in the pathway divided by the total reactions for the entire species) are additionally reported for each tissue.

The PheWAS populations were derived from the Vanderbilt University Medical Center (VUMC) BioVU repository, in which deidentified EHR data are linked to a DNA biobank extracted from discarded patient blood samples. BioVU subjects genotyped using the Illumina Infinium Multi-Ethnic Genotyping Array platform were stratified by genetic ancestry using principle component analysis (PCA) in conjunction with HapMapreference populations to define AA and EA populations. This resulted in 15,862 AA individuals and 75,408 EA individuals in total. This population was further filtered to include only individuals over 18 y old during PheWAS. Case and control sizes for individual BioVU phenotypes are listed in Datasets S6 and S9.

ICD-9/10 codes from VUMC BioVU EHRs were converted to 1,815 PheCodes version 1.2. Cases were defined by individuals with two or more occurrences of an ICD code on different dates in their medical records. Controls for each phenotype were defined using PheWAS case–control definitions. PheCodes were analyzed at two case count/MAF criteria levels with 200 cases and MAF ≥ 0.01 as default parameters and 100 cases and MAF ≥ 0.25 MAF to detect associations in the smaller AA population. These levels are supported by prior simulation to retain statistical power ≥75% when cases ≥ 100, MAF ≥ 0.25, case–control ratio > 4, and disease penetrance ≥ 0.15 (92).

The phenome-wide association analysis was performed in R with the PheWAS package (120) using multivariable logistic regression on binary traits (phenotype present or phenotype absent) with each stratified population separately. The code for this analysis is available in GitHub (Data Availability). Briefly, the first 10 principle components (PCs) calculated within each ancestry were retained with the first five covariables used in the regression model within each stratified genetic ancestry group. Additionally, terms for age and sex were included. To adjust for multiple testing, P values were adjusted using the false discovery rate Benjamini–Hochberg method. FDR < 0.05 was considered significant.

A PheWAS association between rs139904671 and “neoplasm of unspecified nature of digestive system” was observed; however, due to the very low allele frequency, lack of extant variant annotation, and unrealistic effect size, we omit this result from downstream analysis (Dataset S6).

PheWAS replication was performed using the TOPMed-imputed (121) UK Biobank PheWeb browser (122) to identify summary statistics for variants of interest among 1,419 EHR-derived phenotypes in >400,000 White British individuals (cases: 51 to 78,000; controls: 167,000 to 407,000). Analyses on binary outcomes were computed using the SAIGE method (54) to account for size and case–control imbalances. Covariables were included for genetic relatedness, sex, birth year and the first four principal components. Associated P values were multiple test corrected in R using “p.adjust, method = fdr.”

To examine the evolutionary history of the regions identified in the PheWAS, we ran the significant variants through an evolutionary analysis pipeline (more details are in ref. 95). This pipeline is designed to detect enrichment in evolutionary signals using a variety of sequence-based metrics of selection. The value for these metrics observed for each variant is compared against 5,000 control variants matched on linkage disequilibrium structure, MAF, and proximity to genes. The pipeline produces both a P value and z score for each metric. The z score represents the amount of enrichment or depletion for the test variant as compared with the background distribution. The P value represents the statistical value of that enrichment or depilation based on the background distribution.

The interpretation of nonviable MAV variants following the simulation for null hypothesis testing with the evolutionary analysis pipeline is as follows. The four variants located on chromosome 6 (rs35026345, rs78279385, rs9357092, rs11751024) are in highly variable regions of the human genome, making sequence-based evolutionary metrics difficult to deploy. The variant rs139904671 was not present in the database used for identifying linked variants and is very rare among modern human populations. The variant rs3749147 did not produce viable results due to an unusual linkage and MAF structure that produced only 230 of the 5,000 required matched control regions.

Data parsing and visualization were performed using Tidyverse version 4 (129) and ComplexHeatmap version 2.12 (130) packages. The Manhattan plot of PheWAS results by category was created in R using custom scripts. The phenogram plot was created using the Phenogram tool (131). Figs. 1 and
4 were created using illustrations from BioRender.com with full publishing rights secured.

The authors declare no competing interest.

This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.

This article contains supporting information online at https://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.2200551119/-/DCSupplemental.

PheWAS summary statistics, eQTL data, SNPsnap data, and Reactome data have been deposited in FigShare under the project “Microbiome-associated human genetic variants impact phenome-wide disease risk” (https://figshare.com/projects/Microbiome-associated_human_genetic_variants_impact_phenome-wide_disease_risk/125482) (132). Code to generate results and figures has been deposited in GitHub (https://github.com/BordensteinLaboratory/VMI_MAV) (133). Due to privacy issues concerning the human genotype data and EHRs, access is restricted to authorized Vanderbilt researchers; other researchers may contact The Vanderbilt Institute for Clinical and Translational Research (gro.cmuv@secivres.troppus.hcraeser) to make inquiries about data access.

