Metformin Strongly Affects Gut Microbiome Composition in High-Fat Diet-Induced Type 2 Diabetes Mouse Model of Both Sexes



Effects of metformin, the first-line drug for type 2 diabetes therapy, on gut microbiome composition in type 2 diabetes have been described in various studies both in human subjects and animals. However, the details of the molecular mechanisms of metformin action have not been fully understood. Moreover, there is a significant lack of information on how metformin affects gut microbiome composition in female mouse models, depending on sex and metabolic status in well controlled experimental setting. Our study aimed to examine metformin-induced alterations in gut microbiome diversity, composition, and functional implications of high-fat diet-induced type 2 diabetes mouse model, using, for the first time in mice study, the shotgun metagenomic sequencing that allows estimation of microorganisms at species level. We also employed a randomized block, factorial study design, and including 24 experimental units allocated to 8 treatment groups to systematically evaluate the effect of sex and metabolic status on metformin interaction with microbiome. We used DNA obtained from fecal samples representing gut microbiome before and after ten weeks-long metformin treatment. We identified 100 metformin-related differentially abundant species in high-fat diet-fed mice before and after the treatment, with most of the species relative abundances increased. In contrast, no significant changes were observed in control diet-fed mice. Functional analysis targeted to carbohydrate, lipid, and amino acid metabolism pathways revealed 14 significantly altered hierarchies. We also observed sex-specific differences in response to metformin treatment. Males experienced more pronounced changes in metabolic markers, while in females the extent of changes in gut microbiome representatives was more marked, indicated by 53 differentially abundant species with more remarkable Log fold changes compared to the combined-sex analysis. The same pattern manifested regarding the functional analysis, where we discovered 5 significantly affected hierarchies in female groups but not in males. Our results suggest that both sexes of animals should be included in future studies focusing on metformin effects on the gut microbiome.

Metformin is the first-line therapy for the treatment of type 2 diabetes (T2D). According to the American Diabetes Association and European Association for the study of Diabetes guidelines, it is the preferred option for initiating glucose-lowering due to its efficacy, safety, tolerability, and low cost (1)⁠⁠. The molecular mechanism of action of metformin, however, remains unclear.

This study’s main objective was to evaluate the effect of metformin on the mice microbiome at the strain level that has not been performed before and understand the impact of other factors on this process. We hypothesize that metabolic status at the time of intervention and the sex of the animals have a strong influence on the metformin actions. All of the published animal studies focusing on metformin effects on T2D-related gut microbiome have exploited the 16S rRNA gene sequencing strategy; therefore, as far as we are aware, this is the first study reporting the results of such analysis obtained by shotgun metagenomic sequencing. This approach allows the best taxonomic resolution. Furthermore, our research provides novel information on potential functions by which the gut microbiome contributes to the antidiabetic effects of metformin addressed in each of the sexes separately.

We designed this study as a randomized block experiment comprised of three blocks with a three-way factorial treatment arrangement where factors of interest are T2D status induced by high-fat diet (HFD) or control diet (CD) feeding, sex, and metformin therapy status, forming eight different treatment groups – HFD_M_Met-, HFD_F_Met-, HFD_M_Met+, HFD_F_Met+, CD_M_Met-, CD_F_Met-, CD_M_Met+, and CD_F_Met+ (Supplementary Figure 1). Study’s sample size was determined by the Resource Equation method, appropriate for complex designs (20)⁠⁠. In each of the eight treatment groups, we included three experimental units, 24 in total. As the experimental unit was a cage with three animals – the total number of animals involved in the experiment was 72.

After the adaptation week, all experimental units of the same block were randomly assigned to HFD- or CD-fed groups so that each of the treatment groups would consist of animals with similar body weight, and experimental units of both sexes would be represented in the same number in both types of treatment groups. After the induction of T2D manifestations, experimental units were randomly assigned to receive or not to receive metformin treatment providing that the number of experimental units in each of the groups is equal. During all the procedures, treatments, and measurements, as well as sample collection were performed randomly within the same block. Work with each of the blocks was performed on separate days of the week, keeping the interval between interventions in the same block constant. Blinding was applied where appropriate.

Age-matched 4-5-week-old male and female C57BL/6N mice with specific pathogen-free (SPF) status were obtained from the University of Tartu Laboratory Animal Centre.

All the cages were enriched with cardboard tunnels, plastic shelters, wooden sticks, and nesting material. For the whole duration of the experiment, animals were observed once a day; if we observed any type of suffering that could not be alleviated, the suffering animal was euthanized by cervical dislocation. During the study humane endpoint was implemented for 13 animals mainly due to male fighting wounds. Thus 59 animals completed the study, however, at the end of the experiment each of the experimental units remained represented by at least one animal.

After aone to two-weeks long adaptation period during which animals were fed regular chow diet ad libitum and received regular drinking water a diet change was initiated. The age of animals at this point was approximately six weeks. All the cages from each of the blocks were randomly assigned to a high-fat diet-fed group or control diet-fed group. Animals were provided with a rodent diet containing 60 kcal% fat (D12492, Research Diets) or rodent diet with 10 kcal% fat (D12450J, Research Diets) ad libitum. Both types of diets were sterilized by irradiation. Body weight and food intake (per cage) were measured once a week (see Supplementary Data for further details); water intake (per cage) – twice a week.

All the animals were sacrificed by cervical dislocation without any other anesthesia, as the effect of other medications would interfere with the study’s aims.

The DNA from fecal samples representing each experimental unit at two timepoints – before and after the metformin treatment (N = 48) was extracted with the FastDNA®SPIN Kit for Soil (MP Biomedicals) following manufacturer’s instructions. DNA yield was determined using the Qubit dsDNA HS Assay Kit on the Qubit® Fluorometer 1.0 (Invitrogen Co.). The extracted DNA samples were then diluted to a concentration of 5 ng/μl.

Pooled, circularized and barcoded libraries were used as templates for DNA nanoball preparation (16 samples per lane) and further analyzed on DNBSEQ-G400RS next generation sequencing platform (MGI Tech Co., Ltd.) using DNBSEQ-G400RS High-throughput Sequencing Set (FCL PE100) (MGI Tech Co., Ltd.) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Sequencing depth was calculated to achieve at least 20 million paired-end 100 bp reads per sample.

Read quality evaluation was performed with FastQC (21)⁠. Adapter clipping was performed with cutadapt v1.16 (22)⁠. Reads were trimmed from 5’ and 3’ end using 5 bp window with quality threshold 20 using Trimmomatic v0.39 (23)⁠⁠. Paired reads with length 75 bp or longer were retained for further data processing.

Hypothesis testing for changes in alpha diversity before and after therapy was performed using paired t-test for each metformin and diet group separately. The normality of the diversity differences between time points was assessed with the Shapiro-Wilk test. P-values < 0.05 were considered statistically significant.

Mice were fed with HFD for 20 weeks in order to induce T2D manifestations. Significant differences in body weights between HFD-fed and CD-fed mice were observed after two weeks with mean body weight 22.89 ± 3.36 and 19.9 ± 3.08 g, respectively (P-value = 0.03) (Figure 1A). As expected, body weight was higher in males than in females in each of the diet groups. Metformin treatment had no significant effect on body weight gain in any of the studied groups.

Fasting blood glucose level was monitored by glucometer fortnightly. Upon detecting statistically significant differences in blood glucose levels between HFD-fed and CD-fed groups, we initiated regular determination of fasting glucose and insulin levels in plasma samples (Table 1). We calculated the HOMA-IR index, and values above two were considered to correspond to insulin resistance suggesting the onset of T2D. Before the beginning of the metformin treatment mean HOMA-IR index was above 2 in all of the HFD-fed groups but below 2 in all of the CD-fed groups. After the ten-week-long metformin treatment, fasting glucose and insulin levels in plasma samples were remeasured.

N = 3 in each of the studied groups. Significance codes: 0 (***), 0.001 (**), 0.01 (*), >0.05 (NS).

We determined the microbiome composition of fecal samples by shotgun metagenomic sequencing. The median value of the obtained paired-end reads was 40044941 (IQR 10957336). After quality trimming and host removal, a median of 28807601 (IQR 9664060) reads were retained. The median percentage of classified reads after taxonomic classification was 40.33% (IQR 12.24%).

At the time point after the treatment, we identified an increase in Bacteroides relative abundance in all HFD-fed groups, which was maintained at the expense of reduced relative abundance of Lachnospiraceae, whereas Bacteroides, Lactococcus, and Lachnospiraceae remained top taxa in all HFD-fed groups. All CD-fed groups were dominated by Bacteroides, followed by smaller proportions of Lactococcus, Lachnospiraceae, and Muribaculaceae.

We identified a trend of decrease in the alpha diversity of the HFD_Met+ groups before and after metformin treatment (Figure 1B), though not statistically significant. In CD_Met+ groups and groups that did not receive metformin, no alpha diversity changes were observed before and after metformin treatment. Overall the effective number of species (ENS) was higher in HFD-fed groups – mean ENS before treatment was 10.99 ± 3.04 and 9.62 ± 2.64 in HFD-fed and CD-fed mice, respectively. The same was observed at the time point after the treatment – mean ENS was 10.62 ± 3.55 and 10.18 ± 1.70 in HFD-fed and CD-fed mice, respectively.

Beta diversity analysis revealed clustering depending on various factors included in the study (Figures 1C, D). Samples obtained from HFD-fed mice clustered apart from those of CD-fed mice at both time points, with the principal microbial identifiers being Pediococcus acidilactici, Lactobacillus spp., Desulfomicrobium orale, Desulfovibrio fairfieldensis, Fusicatenibacter saccharivorans, Proteus spp. before the beginning of metformin treatment. Lactospiraceae bacterium 6_1_37FAA, Staphylococcus xylosus, Intestinimonas massiliensis supplemented this list of microbial identifiers after the metformin treatment, though some species were represented by < 100 reads in any of the samples. Furthermore, when analyzing both sexes separately, before the treatment, HFD_F groups were directed toward Lactobacillus vectors, but HFD_M groups towards Proteobacteria members. In both sexes of CD-fed mice, principal identifiers were affiliated to Bacteroidetes and Clostridia, although the species were different for males and females. After the treatment, samples of HFD-fed mice tended to cluster closer, and Clostridia members appeared among the most characteristic taxa of these groups. In CD_F groups, representatives of Bacteroidetes and Clostridia remained the principal identifiers; however, in CD_M_Met+ group, a shift towards Proteobacteria was observed. Nevertheless, no apparent clustering regarding metformin treatment status was observed.

We evaluated the relative abundance of different species of microbes between groups using various contrasts shown in Figure 3 (see Supplementary Data for further details).

The 58 % and 76 % of differentially abundant species were shared between contrasts HFD_Met- vs. CD_Met- and HFD_Met+ vs. CD_Met+, respectively. When the same contrasts were analyzed at the time point after the treatment, 83 % and 100 % were shared.

To investigate the changes in the functional profile of the gut microbiome in response to metformin treatment, we evaluated the relative abundance of each Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) BRITE hierarchy in metagenomic data focusing on carbohydrate, lipid, and amino acid metabolism. Statistical analysis of the differentially abundant functional hierarchies between experimental groups in various contrasts corresponding to the ones indicated in Figure 3 (see Supplementary Data for further details) showed significant differences in ten occasions mainly shared with the previously identified significant differences in taxa relative abundances.

Similar to what was observed in the longitudinal contrast between HFD_Met+ groups when analyzing differentially abundant species, functional analysis in each of the sexes separately reinforced sex-related differences. In males, none of the analyzed hierarchies showed alterations in the number of corresponding reads. In females, 5 functions were significantly differentially represented by the reads (Figure 5B). The list of altered hierarchies in females coincides with the ones identified in the combined analysis of both sexes, albeit the changes were more pronounced in female mice, for example, phenylalanine metabolism (ko00360) (LogFC =1.07, FDR < 0.001), and glyoxylate and dicarboxylate metabolism (ko00630) (LogFC = -0.96, FDR = 0.003). In contrast to the combined analysis in both sexes, in females, the relative abundance of only one hierarchy - pyruvate metabolism (ko00620) was slightly increased (LogFC = 0.15, FDR < 0.05).

An effect of metformin on gut microbiome composition and function has been reported in previous studies both in humans and animal models and even in vitro. However, all rodent studies used 16S rRNA gene sequencing, and most were limited to evaluating metformin effects on only one of the animal sexes. Our study has several strengths. First, we utilized a shotgun metagenomic sequencing approach, which allows a species- or even strain-level precision in detecting microbiome representatives. Additionally, it enables the determination of the functional profile. Second, we included mice of both sexes in contrast to almost all existing studies in this specific field, providing valuable information on sex-related differences in response to metformin treatment regarding changes in the gut microbiome. Next, we employed a randomized block factorial design, which rendered the study feasible in terms of time and available resources, increased power and reproducibility, and limited the impact of various controllable and uncontrollable sources of bias. We aimed to reliably evaluate metformin’s effect on the microbiome rather than reach the maximal effect of metformin response with elevated doses. Therefore, we chose to use a smaller metformin dose (50 mg/kg body mass/day) compared to other studies (200-300 mg/kg body mass/day) to match the concentrations applied to humans. Besides, we fed the mice representing control groups in our study with a well-matched diet and not the regular chow, which is not standardized and has beneficial effects on the gut microbiome per se due to its short-chain fatty acid-increasing nutritional composition (31)⁠. The use of regular chow is common in previous studies assessing the effect of metformin on the microbiome, which can substantially alter the results.

We compared CD_Met- and HFD_Met+ groups to investigate whether metformin shifts microbial composition in the direction of healthy, undisturbed microbiome expected to be observed in CD-fed groups not receiving metformin treatment. Metformin increased the relative abundance of Bacilli and some Bacteroidetes, in addition to a decrease of Clostridia. This finding supports previous reports that metformin shifts the dysbiotic microbiome associated with metabolic disease phenotypes to a microbiome corresponding to a more healthy state by increasing the relative abundance of members of Bacteroidetes (36)⁠.

Species with the most substantially decreased relative abundance in response to metformin treatment Hungatella hathewayi (LogFC = -3.58, FDR = 0.01) has been previously described as a strictly anoxic, Gram-positive, spore-forming, rod-shaped bacterium isolated from human feces (37)⁠⁠. The bacterium used carbohydrates as fermentable substrates, producing acetate, ethanol, carbon dioxide, and hydrogen as the major glucose metabolism products.

A recent study has discovered Lachnoclostridium sp. members as fecal bacterial markers for early detection of colorectal cancer by being significantly enriched in adenoma patients (49)⁠⁠⁠. Another species with decreased relative abundance in response to metformin is Flavonifractor plautii, a flavonoid-degrading bacteria that have been associated with colorectal cancer in Indian patients (50)⁠. Flavonoids are substantial components of the human diet and have favorable effects on the prevention of T2D (51, 52)⁠.Recent research shows that metformin has benefits in lowering the risk of developing cancer, including colorectal cancer (53)⁠. Our findings suggest that chemoprevention effects of metformin could be mediated through the gut microbiome.

This study revealed a uniform effect of metformin treatment on bacteria representing Bacilli. Genus Lactobacillus is represented L. murinus, L. farraginis, L. paracasei, L. kefiranofaciens. This finding is consistent with previous work showing that metformin increases the relative abundance of genus Lactobacillus in HFD-fed rats (54)⁠⁠. Probiotic supplementation with Lactobacillus improves glucose parameters in diabetic rats and prevents insulin resistance and hyperglycemia in HFD-fed mice (54)⁠, which is in line with our observations. Lactococcus, another genus of lactic acid bacteria Lactococcus, including L. raffinolactis, L. garvieae, L. fujiensis, L. chungangensis, L. lactis, L. plantarum is increased in response to metformin treatment, which is in agreement with a recent study evaluating the effect of metformin on the microbiome in the short term HFD-induced obesity (14)⁠.

Metformin-induced changes in the abundance of Akkermansia muciniphila and metabolic improvement due to these changes have previously been shown in several studies (8, 18)⁠. Instead, our study reports no significant changes in A. muciniphila abundance in response to metformin in fecal metagenomic data.

We focused the functional analysis on the hierarchies related to the three main macronutrients consumed in the diet – carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins, which can reach the colon due to their structural complexity or ingested amount, which surpasses the possibilities of primary digestion (63). Most of the altered hierarchies in response to metformin treatment in HFD-fed groups are representing amino acid metabolism-related functions. Our data show that metformin increases the metagenome functions affiliated to arginine and proline metabolism; glycine, serine, and threonine metabolism; and cysteine and methionine metabolism, in turn valine, leucine, and isoleucine biosynthesis is hindered.

In conclusion, our study for the first time identified changes in microbial diversity and composition at species and strain level and functional implications of the gut microbiome in response to metformin treatment in high fat diet-fed mice. We also show that metabolic status at the time of the intervention strongly affects metformin mediated effects on microbiome. Furthermore, sex-specific differences were discovered where male mice experience more pronounced changes in metabolic markers; however, inverse effects on metabolic markers were revealed in female mice together with more marked changes in gut microbiome composition. We suggest that both sexes of animals should be included in future studies focusing on metformin effects on the gut microbiome.

The data presented in the study aredeposited in the European Nucleotide Archive (ENA), accession number PRJEB43173.

The animal study was reviewed and approved by National animal welfare and ethics committee, State Food and Veterinary service, Riga, Latvia.

LS designed and performed the experiment, collected samples, prepared samples for sequencing, and wrote the manuscript. IS performed data processing and analysis. MU and IK performed the experiment. ZK, RP, and IE collected samples. JK supervised the study and revised the manuscript. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.

This work was supported by European Regional Development Fund (ERDF), Measure 1.1.1.1 “Support for applied research” project “Investigation of interplay between multiple determinants influencing response to metformin: search for reliable predictors for efficacy of type 2 diabetes therapy” (Grant No. 1.1.1.1/16/A/091).

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fendo.2021.626359/full#supplementary-material

