Impact of antibiotics on the human microbiome and consequences for host health



It is well established that the gut microbiota plays an important role in host health and is perturbed by several factors including antibiotics. Antibiotic‐induced changes in microbial composition can have a negative impact on host health including reduced microbial diversity, changes in functional attributes of the microbiota, formation, and selection of antibiotic‐resistant strains making hosts more susceptible to infection with pathogens such as Clostridioides difficile. Antibiotic resistance is a global crisis and the increased use of antibiotics over time warrants investigation into its effects on microbiota and health. In this review, we discuss the adverse effects of antibiotics on the gut microbiota and thus host health, and suggest alternative approaches to antibiotic use.

Antibiotics can have several negative impacts on host health; both direct and indirect effects. The gut microbiota plays a crucial role in host health regulation. Effects of antibiotics on the host through the gut microbiome are immense and can affect various functions including immune regulation, metabolic activities, and thus overall health.

Since their discovery, antibiotics have revolutionized the treatment of infectious diseases on a global scale. They are recognized as one of the contributing factors to increased life expectancy in the 20th century owing to the decline in infectious disease mortality (Adedeji, 2016). However, their overuse and misuse in human and veterinary medicine and animal husbandry have resulted in the current global antibiotic resistance crisis (Llor & Bjerrum, 2014; Vidovic & Vidovic, 2020) which is exacerbated by the slow rate of new drug development (Simpkin et al., 2017). Despite this, antibiotics are still widely prescribed in disease treatment and studies have reported increased consumption of antibiotics in certain countries in the past number of years (Adriaenssens et al., 2011; Klein et al., 2018).

This review thus focuses on the negative impacts of antibiotics on human health from pregnancy through to adulthood, most of which are microbiota‐dependent, although we also provide evidence of nonmicrobiota‐associated negative impacts. We discuss the changes to microbiota composition and functionality and the consequences for host health (Figure 1). We look at the impact of antibiotics at the single bacterial cell level, and how antibiotic use and misuse result in antibiotic resistance development. Further, we consider alternative approaches to antibiotic therapy and discuss therapeutics that can be used to maintain and improve host health and minimize the effects of antibiotics when used.

It was previously believed that infants are protected in the mother's womb which is a sterile environment, but studies have now demonstrated that amniotic fluid samples, placenta from mothers, and meconium samples from infants contain bacterial DNA suggesting the early exposure of infants to bacteria (Aagaard et al., 2014; de Goffau et al., 2019; Moles et al., 2013; Stinson et al., 2019). However, this is much debated (Perez‐Muñoz et al., 2017) due to issues with contamination and varying interpretations, thus we emphasize on microbiota development from infancy to adults in this review.

The gut microbiota of healthy adults is predominantly composed of the phyla Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes, representing the majority, followed by Actinobacteria, Proteobacteria, and Verrucomicrobia (Arumugam et al., 2011). Indeed, the gut microbiome can be perturbed by short‐term use or even low‐doses of antibiotics that can have long‐term effects on health (Jernberg et al., 2010), this cautions against the misuse and overuse of antibiotics, particularly in pregnant women and young children.

The use of antibiotic therapy during pregnancy and lactation varies depending on the underlying condition, country, and medical guidelines, but some of the most commonly prescribed antibiotics during pregnancy are β‐lactam antibacterials (Petersen et al., 2010). Some of the other antibiotic classes prescribed include sulfonamides/trimethoprim and macrolides/lincosamides/streptogramins (de Jonge et al., 2014). Common infections for which antibiotics are prescribed during pregnancy include urinary tract infections, respiratory tract infections, skin or ear infections, bacterial vaginosis, and fever of unknown origin (Heikkila, 1993; Petersen et al., 2010). Antibiotics are frequently administered to mothers during labor to prevent Group B Streptococcus transmission, to reduce and prevent infections in the endometrium, and to prevent wound infections (Braye et al., 2019); though the WHO advises against the prophylactic use of antibiotics post uncomplicated delivery. This is of concern as infant antibiotic exposure through intrapartum antibiotic prophylaxis (IAP) has been shown to alter infant gut microbial diversity (Tapiainen et al., 2019). Further, antibiotics are commonly prescribed to newborns, owing to their high susceptibility to infections and lowered immunity, particularly in premature infants (Clark, 2006; Vergnano et al., 2005). The most commonly used antibiotics for infants include amoxicillin, co‐amoxiclav, benzylpenicillin, cephalosporins, gentamycin, vancomycin, clindamycin, and azithromycin. These antibiotics are indicated in respiratory and ear infections, bronchitis, pharyngitis, and high temperature (CDC, 2017). Table 1 summarizes the commonly used antibiotics and their indication for use.

Perinatal and peripartum antibiotic use can impact gut microbial colonization and the resistome profile in infants (Wong et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2020). To understand the potential impact of antibiotic administration on offspring during pregnancy, scientists examined the temporal impact of cefoperazone, on both maternal and offspring microbiota when administered during the peripartum period in an interleukin 10 (IL‐10)‐deficient murine model of colitis (Miyoshi et al., 2017). Offspring from cefoperazone‐exposed dams developed altered gut microbial communities into adulthood and had increased susceptibility to spontaneous and chemically induced colitis (Miyoshi et al., 2017). Similar results were demonstrated by Schulfer et al. (2018), who inoculated germ‐free pregnant mice with an antibiotic‐altered microbial community. They observed that the altered microbial community was transmitted to the IL‐10‐deficient offspring which resulted in the development of markedly increased colitis (Schulfer et al., 2018). Another study demonstrated that uptake of antibiotics during pregnancy can lead to alterations in the vaginal microbial composition before birth (Stokholm et al., 2014); this can impact the microbial composition infants receive at birth (Dobbler et al., 2019). Maternal antibiotic uptake during pregnancy has been reported to be associated with altered microbial composition depending on the antibiotic type (Azad et al., 2016; Coker et al., 2020). It is also associated with increased risk of asthma and allergy in the infant (Stokholm et al., 2014) although there is some controversy around this (Kim et al., 2019), as well as with functional impairment in development and cognition (Kenyon et al., 2008), obesity (Mueller et al., 2015), immunological alterations and development of diabetes (Tormo‐Badia et al., 2014) in offspring.

Maternal antibiotic administration during lactation also influences the milk microbiota (Hermansson et al., 2019; Soto et al., 2014), which can in turn influence the infant gut microbial composition.

Premature infants are very often treated with antibiotics owing to their health conditions, and antibiotics are one of the most commonly prescribed drugs in the NICU (Clark, 2006). Many of the prophylactic antibiotics are broad‐spectrum and thus affect a huge proportion of the gut bacterial community, leading to many alterations in the early establishment pattern. Studies have reported that very preterm infants who received prolonged antibiotic treatment had less diverse bacterial populations and reduced species richness in their gut and more antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs; Gasparrini et al., 2019; Gibson et al., 2016). Both short‐term and long‐term exposure of preterm infants to antibiotics can alter their gastrointestinal microbiota. These changes include decreases in bifidobacteria and Bacteroidetes relative abundance, and an increase in Enterococcus abundance (Gasparrini et al., 2019; Zou et al., 2018; Zwittink et al., 2018). Extended antibiotic treatment in premature infants can result in an increased risk of developing late‐onset sepsis (primarily caused by Group B Streptococcus), necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC), and overall mortality (Esaiassen et al., 2017; Kuppala et al., 2011).

Similar results of reduced gut microbiota diversity have been observed in children (n = 39, monthly sampling in the first 3 years of life) who have undergone antibiotic therapy. The authors also reported the presence of ARGs on mobile genetic elements long after cessation of treatment (Yassour et al., 2016). Antibiotic use during infancy and childhood has been associated with the altered microbial composition and metabolic functions (Korpela et al.,2016), higher risk of asthma and allergy development (Ni et al., 2019; Yamamoto‐Hanada et al., 2017), and obesity (L. C. Bailey et al., 2014) in later life.

To investigate the long term effects of antibiotics on the healthy state microbial composition, the antibiotics amoxicillin (n = 6; Cochetière et al., 2005), ciprofloxacin (n = 3; Les Dethlefsen et al., 2008), and cefprozil (n = 24; Raymond et al., 2016) were administered to healthy individuals. These studies reported changes in microbial composition persisting for up to 12 weeks after treatment had ended with the incomplete restoration of microbial composition and emergence of antibiotic‐resistant strains. In one study, the authors examined the distal gut microbiota of three individuals over 10 months post‐administration of the antibiotic ciprofloxacin. They reported that the effect of ciprofloxacin on the gut microbiota was profound and rapid with a decrease in richness and diversity of microbiota accompanied by shifts in levels of Bacteroidetes, Lachnospiraceae, and the Ruminococcaceae. By 1 week after the end of each course, communities began to return to their initial state, but the return was incomplete and variable from the initial stage (Dethlefsen & Relman, 2011). Many studies have investigated the long‐term impact on gut microbiota following a course of antibiotics. A short term course of clindamycin (7 days) resulted in significant disturbances in the bacterial community such as a sharp decline in Bacteroides (Jernberg et al., 2007; Löfmark et al., 2006) and enterococcal colonies (Lindgren et al., 2009) that remained for up to 2 years post‐treatment and was accompanied by increased levels of ARGs and strains (Jernberg et al., 2007; Lindgren et al., 2009; Löfmark et al., 2006). Another study (n = 10) that analyzed adult fecal samples from 11 days to 12 months post antibiotic treatment demonstrated that the use of ciprofloxacin for 10 days resulted in lower abundances of Bifidobacterium but did not affect Lactobacillus and Bacteroides levels, but clindamycin treatment for the same number of days caused Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium to decrease and Bifidobacterium did not normalize until 1‐year post‐treatment, showing that different bacterial groups require different times for normalization post‐treatment (Rashid et al., 2015).

Furthermore many antibiotics are used for dentistry procedures routinely. These antibiotics can increase the number of resistant strains present orally, can increase the minimum inhibitory concentrations, and can also eliminate the nonpathogenic strains (Harrison et al., 1985; Ready et al., 2004), which can lead to systemic infections and inflammation.

Due to the role of the microbiota in host metabolism and physiology, many studies postulate that microbial imbalances can be related to obesity (Riley et al., 2013; Scott et al., 2016), diabetes (Boursi et al., 2015; Mikkelsen et al., 2015), and asthma (Arrieta et al., 2015; Kozyrskyj et al., 2007). Blaser and Falkow (2009) have suggested a link between the “missing microbes” and modern conditions such as obesity and juvenile diabetes. These multifactorial conditions can be controlled by identifying the controllable factors such as the microbiota component and dietary habits, thus preventing them from occurring if possible.

Antibiotics can lead to antibiotic‐associated diarrhea (AAD) and studies have demonstrated that clindamycin can result in alteration of the microbial community which can promote the colonization of potential pathogens such as C. difficile which can lead to diarrhea and colitis (Buffie et al., 2012; McDonald, 2017). Another study in a mouse model reported that antibiotic treatment resulted in decreased alpha and beta diversity, which potentially caused a decrease in levels of serotonin, tryptophan hydrolase, and secondary bile acids which can further affect gut motility and metabolism (Ge et al., 2017).

Extrinsic factors such as antibiotics can alter the diversity of the maternal microbiota that can affect the infant's gut microbiota diversity, immunity, and disease development in later life, both directly and indirectly (Azad et al., 2016; Nyangahu et al., 2018; Tapiainen et al., 2019; Tormo‐Badia et al., 2014). According to the hygiene hypothesis, if the host is not exposed to a diverse range of microbiota early in childhood or in the developing stages, immune‐related disorders may develop such as asthma and allergic sensitization. Antibiotics can have a similar effect when administered during infancy. Preterm infants are often exposed to antibiotics which results in an altered microbial composition (Clark, 2006; Gibson et al., 2016; Zou et al., 2018), predisposing them to probable infections such as NEC, and invasive fungal infections (Esaiassen et al., 2017). Animal studies have reported that administration of low dose or subtherapeutic concentrations of antibiotics in early life can disturb the microbial composition, affecting the expression of genes involved in immunity and carbohydrate metabolism, and can alter metabolic homeostasis predisposing the host to adiposity later in life (Cho et al., 2012; Cox et al., 2014; Schulfer et al., 2019). Obesity has been widely linked with altered microbial colonization during early life owing to the role of the gut microbiota in dietary metabolism. Studies have demonstrated that early‐life antibiotic exposure has potential links to increases in body mass index, overweight and central adiposity, and this can be gender‐specific affecting males more than females (Azad et al., 2014; Murphy et al., 2014). Both murine models (Cho et al., 2012; Cox et al., 2014) and human studies have reported that antibiotic exposure in the first few months of life is associated with increases in body mass index and risk of overweight (L. C. Bailey et al., 2014; Scott et al., 2016; Trasande et al., 2013) and asthma (Kozyrskyj et al., 2007; Risnes et al., 2011) in childhood. Similarly, studies have reported that antibiotic administration in early life can be associated with a heightened risk of asthma, allergy, and atopic dermatitis, and IBD (Johnson et al., 2005; Kronman et al., 2012; Ni et al., 2019; Yamamoto‐Hanada et al., 2017). NEC and AAD have also been associated with prolonged or prophylactic antibiotic uptake in early life (Alexander et al., 2011; Kuppala et al., 2011; Michael Cotten et al., 2009).

The immune system is trained to fight pathogens during infancy, and this is the time when microbial colonization takes place. Any disturbance to microbial colonization has been shown to affect immune maturation due to this co‐developmental process. Studies in germ‐free mice have confirmed that the absence of microbes in the gut results in both physiological and immunological changes to the gut environment. These changes include alterations in mucus thickness and composition (Szentkuti et al., 1990), reduced gastric motility (Abrams & Bishop, 1967), improper development and functioning of intestinal cells and immune cells (Cahenzli et al., 2013; Vaishnava et al., 2008) and improper development of the immune system (Bauer et al., 1963; Macpherson & Uhr, 2004). Antibiotic treatment has been shown to reduce the thickness of the colonic mucus layer thus increasing the risk of pathogen invasion and intestinal inflammation in 8–10‐week‐old mice (Wlodarska et al., 2011). Another study in mice reported that antibiotic‐induced alterations in the microbiota shift the TH1/TH2 balance toward TH2‐dominant immunity—which leads to atopy development, accompanied by a reduced number of lymphocytes (Oyama et al., 2001). Altered microbial composition and altered gene maturation profile such as downregulation of genes coding for MHC class 1b and class II proteins and products of Paneth cells such as defensins were seen post clamoxyl treatment in neonatal rats, which could affect mucosal barrier development (Schumann et al., 2005).

These studies demonstrate the complex relationship between the microbiota and the host immune response, and the impact of antibiotics on this interaction which needs to be further studied. It can also impact the effectiveness of vaccines used postantibiotic treatment.

The gut microbiota is responsible for the production of many essential metabolites including SCFAs and amino acids (Mills et al., 2019). Studies have reported that commensal‐produced butyrate and propionate have anti‐inflammatory roles, promoting the generation and differentiation of regulatory T cells (Arpaia et al., 2013; Furusawa et al., 2013), with roles in energy metabolism (den Besten et al., 2013; De Vadder et al., 2014). By impacting the composition of the microbial community, antibiotics also alter microbiota functionality and thus the metabolites produced (Ferrer et al., 2017).

Studies have also reported that antibiotic uptake can result in changes in protein expression, energy metabolism in the microbiota, with a slight increase following antibiotic therapy, which may be as a coping mechanism to antibiotic stress but decreased at later stages and post‐antibiotic usage (Pérez‐Cobas & Artacho et al., 2013). Another study demonstrated that antibiotics have a sex‐dependent effect on host metabolism. They reported that vancomycin and ciprofloxacin–metronidazole treatment resulted in significant reductions of Firmicutes and SCFAs in female mice, which was only observed after vancomycin treatment in males. They also reported that both antibiotic exposures significantly decreased the levels of alanine, branched‐chain amino acids (leucine, isoleucine, and valine), and aromatic amino acids in colonic contents of female mice but not in male mice (Gao et al., 2019).

Xenobiotics (including antibiotics, heavy metals, and environmental chemicals) have an impact on gut microbial composition. The effect here is cyclical in that the microbiota is necessary for xenobiotic biotransformation (Figure 3). The metabolism of xenobiotics before it reaches its target organ site is largely dependent on the microbiota. The gut microbiota can affect the xenobiotic half‐life in the host, the extent to which they reach the target receptor, and may also influence the host's capacity to metabolize xenobiotics (Koppel et al., 2017). Both in vivo and in vitro studies have shown that the gut microbiota is involved in the biotransformation of xenobiotics (Lu et al., 2013). Studies using germ‐free and conventional rodents reported that the absence of gut microbiota‐affected gene expression of many liver enzymes including active androstane receptor and host detoxifying enzymes such as glutathione peroxidases, sulfotransferase, epoxide hydrolases, and N‐acetyltransferases (Björkholm et al., 2009; Meinl et al., 2009). However, the absence of microbes necessary for metabolizing particular compounds can result in their accumulation in the host which may lead to toxicity. Ciprofloxacin administration to SPF and germ‐free mice revealed decreases in hepatic Cyp3a11 expression, this was associated with the gut microbiota. The lower lithocholic acid (LCA) levels due to decreases in LCA‐producing bacteria post antibiotic administration could be responsible for decreases in the expression of Cyp3a11. Similar effects in humans can result in less clearance of multiple CYP3A4 (human analog of Cyp3a11)‐dependent medications (Lynch & Price, 2007).

Furthermore, cross‐feeding is a significant feature of the gut microbiota. For example, B. adolescentis produces lactate and acetate by utilizing fructo‐oligosaccharides and starch. Butyrate‐producing anaerobes cannot utilize fructo‐oligosaccharides and starch but rely on lactate and acetate as growth substrates. Therefore, B. adolescentis indirectly facilitate the proliferation and expansion of butyrate‐producing species through cross‐feeding. This type of dependency is also seen in many other bacterial groups (Heinken & Thiele, 2015; Rowland et al., 2018). This codependency can be disturbed by antibiotic use leading to increased accumulation or deficiency of some metabolites/compounds. For example, a study reported a decrease in abundance of Gram‐negative bacteria in the gut by vancomycin which is a Gram positive‐targeting antibiotic (Ubeda et al., 2010). This can be due to the interdependency of bacteria in their community.

Antibiotics can alter the transcription of several major functional genes such as those encoding transport proteins, genes involved in the metabolism of carbohydrates, and protein synthesis (Goh et al., 2002; J. T. Lin et al., 2005). A study demonstrated induced expression of virulence‐associated genes in Pseudomonas aeruginosa leading to higher secretion of rhamnolipids and phenazines on exposure to subinhibitory concentrations of antibiotics (Shen et al., 2008). Many studies have reported that aminoglycosides (Hoffman et al., 2005), β‐lactams (Kaplan et al., 2012; K. M. Ng et al., 2014), vancomycin, and oxacillin (Mirani & Jamil, 2010) can induce biofilm formation even at sublethal concentrations. These biofilms then act as reservoirs of antibiotic resistance. This confers additional resistance to bacteria against several antibiotics and host defense, which can make treatment difficult in humans and can cause several issues such as blockage of pipes/equipment in healthcare settings and food industries (Muhammad et al., 2020).

Bacteria interact with their host using pattern recognition receptors (PRR) via signaling through the production of bile acids, SCFAs, fatty acids, amino acids, LPS, lipoteichoic acid, flagellin, CpG DNA, and peptidoglycan. These signaling molecules either serve as a source of energy for other cells, regulate or modulate the function of immune cells such as monocytes, macrophages, T cells via G‐protein coupled receptor and nuclear receptor family, free fatty acid receptors (Brestoff & Artis, 2013). Antibiotic use results in a reduction of these bacteria and hence the PRRs such as TLR signaling and downstream regulation of innate defenses (Willing et al., 2011). A study reported that an antibiotic‐mediated decrease in butyrate‐producing bacteria resulted in reduced epithelial signaling through the intracellular butyrate sensor peroxisome proliferator‐activated receptor γ (Byndloss et al., 2017). Similarly, antibiotic disruption of the commensal microbiota in newborn mice increases their susceptibility to pneumonia, due to interrupted migration of IL‐22 producing lymphoid cells (IL‐22 + ILC3; Gray et al., 2017). This effect could be reversed by the transfer of commensal microbiota to mice at birth (Gray et al., 2017). Another study reported the importance of commensals in protecting against colon injury and maintaining intestinal homeostasis (Rakoff‐Nahoum et al., 2004). In this case, commensals induced release of protective factors via TLRs; these factors were not released in mice treated with antibiotics lacking the commensal bacteria (Rakoff‐Nahoum et al., 2004). Antibiotics can thus impact complex host‐microbial interactions due to changes in microbial community composition.

ARGs are now reported to be found in the environment including oceans and freshwater bodies (Hatosy & Martiny, 2015), soil (Cycoń et al., 2019), glaciers (Segawa et al., 2013), the food chain, and also within humans. Apart from bacteria, viruses have also been reported to be carriers of ARGs (Debroas & Siguret, 2019). Some of this spread of ARGs is historical such as in some untouched/uncontaminated environments (Van Goethem, 2018) but much of it is because of the wide use of antibiotics by humans.

In the gut, bacteria can horizontally and vertically transmit genes to other related or unrelated bacteria due to their proximity via mobile genetic elements (Table 2). ARGs in the infant gut microbiota can be derived from that of their mothers, as AR bacteria can be transmitted from mother to infant through breastfeeding (Parnanen et al., 2018). The presence of ARGs in humans is a global crisis because it makes the treatment of infections more difficult, costly, and inefficient.

Associations between antibiotic usage during pregnancy with neonatal and congenital abnormalities have been reported. For example, studies have reported an increased risk of developing cerebral palsy, epilepsy, cardiac and genital malformations in infants born to mothers treated with macrolides during pregnancy and which are more harmful when consumed during the first trimester (Källén & Danielsson, 2014; Kenyon et al., 2008; Meeraus et al., 2015). Similarly, amoxicillin use during the first trimester was linked to cleft lip and cleft palate development, and though reported in only a small number of cases, it exemplifies the adverse effects of antibiotic use during pregnancy (Lin et al., 2012). Birth defects such as microphthalmia, hypoplastic left heart syndrome, atrial septal defects, and cleft lip with cleft palate have also been associated with the use of sulfonamides and nitrofurantoin during the first trimester of pregnancy (Crider et al., 2009). Similarly, trimethoprim–sulfonamide use during pregnancy is associated with a higher risk of cardiovascular malformations (Czeizel et al., 2001). The evidence in all cases is mixed (Muanda & Sheehy, 2017), and is usually linked with consumption during the early months of pregnancy. This could be due to the antibacterial impacting the neonate during the organogenesis and early development stages in utero. Though the examples cited represent potential associations and not causal relationships, a reappraisal of antibiotic usage during pregnancy is warranted.

Studies have reported that antibiotics can exert direct toxic effects on host tissues such as mitochondrial damage, suppressed ribosomal gene expression (Morgun et al., 2015), and oxidative tissue damage in mammalian cells (Kalghatgi et al., 2013). Though controversial, some studies suggest that antibiotic use can be related to increased risk of breast cancer (Tamim et al., 2007; Velicer et al., 2004) and increased risk of miscarriage (Fan et al., 2019). Sometimes, antibiotics can worsen the condition they are meant to treat. The bactericidal action of many β‐lactam antibiotics has been reported to increase toxin production such as Shiga toxin which is released from entero‐hemorrhagic E. coli, predisposing the host to a higher risk of a hemolytic uremic syndrome (Kimmitt et al., 1999; Wong, 2000). Antibiotics can also affect host metabolism directly without microbes as a mediator while making the targeted pathogen less susceptible to the antibiotic. These changes in host metabolites are mostly local to the site of infection and include high levels of AMP which decrease the efficacy of antibiotics and also increase phagocytic activity. This was accompanied by impaired immune function because of the inhibitory effect of antibiotics on the respiratory activity of immune cells (Yang et al., 2017).

It is now well established that antibiotic use results in changes in microbial composition, the consequences of which can be detrimental for the host. Certain approaches can be used along with or post antibiotic therapy to restore the microbial composition faster (Figure 4). Probiotics are widely used for this purpose and have been shown to increase the abundance of beneficial microbes, stabilize the microbial community and thus alleviate the effects of antibiotics (Ki Cha et al., 2012; Korpela et al., 2018). Probiotics exert their effects by promoting antimicrobial peptide production, producing bacteriocins, suppressing the growth of non‐commensals via competing for nutrients and receptors on the intestinal mucosa, enhancing barrier function in the gut, and modulating immunity (Bron et al., 2011; Cazorla et al., 2018; Collado et al., 2007; O'Shea et al., 2012; Xue et al., 2017), but the use of probiotics may not lead to complete restoration of the gut microbiota.

One of the major advantages of bacteriocins, phages and their endolysins, and monoclonal antibodies is that they can be highly target‐specific thus rendering minimal if any, collateral damage to the microbiota.

This review has summarized the importance of the gut microbiota in host metabolism and immune functions such as immunity development, colonization resistance, cell signaling, and with the help of advanced omics technologies, the complex interactions between host and microbiota are now becoming clear. Antibiotics disrupt the microbial balance and hence the networking within the bacterial community, and that with the host. The resulting resistant bacteria make clinical treatment difficult. Due to this complex link between the host and microbiota, the current usage of antibiotics requires careful stewardship, with an emphasis on the application of antibiotic alternatives, while limiting collateral damage. To this end, we need to design, develop, and translate new antibiotic alternatives from bench to bedside, in addition to methodologies that are efficient in conserving and restoring the microbial community after antibiotic‐associated perturbations.

None declared.

None required.

Dhrati Patangia: Conceptualization (lead); writing – original draft (lead), writing – review and editing (equal), Paul Ross: Supervision (equal); conceptualization (supporting); writing – review and editing (equal), Catherine Stanton: Supervision (equal); conceptualization (supporting); writing – review and editing (equal), Tony Ryan: Supervision (equal); conceptualization (supporting); writing – review and editing (equal), Eugene Dempsey: Supervision (equal); conceptualization (supporting); writing – review and editing (equal).

Not applicable.

