Improvement in Uncontrolled Eating Behavior after Laparoscopic Sleeve Gastrectomy Is Associated with Alterations in the Brain–Gut–Microbiome Axis in Obese Women

Background: Bariatric surgery is proven to change eating behavior and cause sustained weight loss, yet the exact mechanisms underlying these changes are not clearly understood. We explore this in a novel way by examining how bariatric surgery affects the brain–gut–microbiome (BGM) axis. Methods: Patient demographics, serum, stool, eating behavior questionnaires, and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were collected before and 6 months after laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy (LSG). Differences in eating behavior and brain morphology and resting-state functional connectivity in core reward regions were correlated with serum metabolite and 16S microbiome data. Results: LSG resulted in significant weight loss and improvement in maladaptive eating behaviors as measured by the Yale Food Addiction Scale (YFAS). Brain imaging showed a significant increase in brain volume of the putamen (p.adj < 0.05) and amygdala (p.adj < 0.05) after surgery. Resting-state connectivity between the precuneus and the putamen was significantly reduced after LSG (p.adj = 0.046). This change was associated with YFAS symptom count. Bacteroides, Ruminococcus, and Holdemanella were associated with reduced connectivity between these areas. Metabolomic profiles showed a positive correlation between this brain connection and a phosphatidylcholine metabolite. Conclusion: Bariatric surgery modulates brain networks that affect eating behavior, potentially through effects on the gut microbiota and its metabolites.

Over the last decade, obesity and obesity-related comorbidities have become the leading causes of morbidity and mortality in the developed world [1]. It is expected that this trend will continue to rise along with the risk of cardiovascular disease, diabetes mellitus, and other obesity-related diseases [1]. To date, dietary and lifestyle modifications remain one of the main treatments for obesity. Unfortunately, a large proportion of patients will continue to have difficulty maintaining a diet long enough to reach significant and sustainable weight loss. While a variety of pharmacological interventions have had minor successes, bariatric surgery remains one of the few proven methods that is able to accomplish significant and sustained weight loss over time [2]. The two most common surgical procedures for bariatric surgery include Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB) and laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy (LSG). Both RYGB and LSG have similar effects on weight loss and have been shown to be associated with lower hunger scores and changes in food preference [3,4]. At baseline, resting-state functional brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies have shown that patients with obesity have alterations in the connections relating to metabolic sensing and reward processing [5,6]. After bariatric surgery, these connections and alterations in brain signaling often normalize [7,8,9]. However, the exact mechanism by which bariatric surgery can alter appetite, eating behaviors and brain signaling is still poorly understood.

One potential area that can connect bariatric surgery to changes in brain signaling and behavior is the brain–gut–microbiome (BGM) axis. The BGM axis is a tightly regulated bidirectional axis whose derailment is a feature of such diseases as irritable bowel syndrome, autism spectrum disorder, and even obesity [10]. Preclinical models have shown that the gut microbiome is involved in brain development, behavior, and neurotransmitter signaling [11,12,13], and that the brain can alter the gut microbiome via changes in mucus production, motility, and immune signaling [14]. In regards to obesity, alterations in the gut microbiome have been associated with changes in eating behavior, development of metabolic syndrome, and alterations in gastrointestinal hormones such as glucagon-like peptide-1 [10,15,16,17]. Changes in eating behavior and gastrointestinal hormones have also been seen in patients who have undergone bariatric surgery. Several studies have shown that bariatric surgery, including LSG, can lead to sustained and significant changes in the gut microbiome, in eating behaviors, and in satiety signaling [18,19,20]. However, how these changes are connected to brain signaling is not entirely clear. In our study, by using an integrated systems biology approach, we applied morphological and functional resting state brain imaging, microbial analysis, and serum metabolomics to investigate the role of bariatric surgery induced changes on the brain–gut–microbiome axis in regulating eating behaviors.

Patients were recruited from the University of California, Los Angeles Bariatric Surgery Program. Only patients undergoing LSG were included to negate any effect of different surgical procedures on brain and microbiome alterations. We further focused our selection to female patients as female patients have a higher prevalence of food addiction than males [21]. Inclusion criteria included adult patients who were considering bariatric surgery and met eligible criteria for surgery. Because brain morphology differs by handedness and advanced age, we limited the study to include right-handed patients age 18 to 55 years old undergoing laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy (LSG) following the Guidelines for Clinical Application of Laparoscopic Bariatric Surgery by of American Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic Surgeons (SAGES) [22,23]. Exclusion criteria includes a prior history of major gastrointestinal surgery including weight loss surgery, use of medications known to affect hunger, satiety or intestinal motility, any contraindication to undergo MRI, current or past alcohol or drug abuse, pregnancy, current use of insulin or insulin dependent diabetes, inflammatory bowel disease, irritable bowel syndrome, use of probiotics, or use of antibiotics within 1 month of enrollment. Patients were enrolled into the study before undergoing LSG. Subjects underwent a screening visit and 2 study visits occurring at baseline and at 6 months after surgery. Multimodal magnetic resonance brain imaging (MRI), demographic information, height, weight, measures of eating behavior, questionnaire for anxiety and depression, stool samples for 16S ribosomal RNA sequencing, and serum for metabolomics and inflammatory markers were collected at baseline and at 6 months. All subjects gave their informed consent for inclusion before they participated in the study. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the UCLA Institutional Review Board (IRB# 13-001552).

A certified nutritionist at the UCLA Clinical & Translational Research Center (CTRC) measured height, weight and Body Mass Index (BMI) using techniques and methods described in the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES III) at baseline and at 6 months after surgery. All measurements were taken in duplicate.

To assess for anxiety or depressions, patients were asked the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS). A cutoff of 8 or above was considered as abnormal, similar to prior research [24]. To measure eating behaviors, both the Three-Factor Eating Questionnaire R21(TFEQ-R21) and the Yale Food Addiction Scale (YFAS) were used. The TFEQ-R21 is a 21-question survey that measures three categories of eating behavior: cognitive restraint (CR), uncontrolled eating (UE), and emotional eating (EE). A higher score in each subcategory represents higher restraint for eating, more uncontrolled eating, and a predisposition to emotional eating, respectively [25]. The YFAS is a 25-question survey developed to assess food addiction based on the substance dependence criteria, as found in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorder, 4th Edition (DSM-4) [26]. It measures withdrawal, dependence on food, tolerance, continued use despite problems, loss of control, time eating, an inability to cut down, and clinical significant impairment. Food addiction was defined as having a YFAS symptom count ≥3 with clinically significant impairment or distress [21].

Similar to prior published works, DNA was extracted using the ZymoBIOMICS DNA Microprep Kit (Zymo Research, Irvine, CA, USA) per the manufacturer’s protocol. The V4 region of the 16S ribosomal RNA gene was amplified by PCR and underwent 250 × 2 paired-end sequencing on an Illumina HiSeq (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) [27,28]. The sequences were processed using the DADA2 pipeline in R which assigns taxonomy using the SILVA 132 database [29]. After pre-processing in R, the data were incorporated into QIIME 2 version 2019.10 [30]. Amplicon sequence variants were filtered if not present in at least 15% of all samples. Sequence depths ranged from 60,710 to 269,258 per sample.

All neuroimaging was conducted at baseline and at 6-month follow-up on a 3T Siemens PRISMA at the UCLA Ahmanson-Lovelace Brain Mapping Center. T1 images were acquired using the Magnetization Prepared- Rapid Gradient Echo (MP-RAGE) sequence (TR: 2300 ms, TE: 2.98 ms, TI: 900ms, flip angle: 9°, field of view: 240 × 256, slice thickness: 1 mm, voxel resolution: 1 × 1 × 1 mm) to assess brain structure. A 10-min resting-state fMRI scan was acquired to assess resting-state functional connectivity (TR: 2000 ms, TE: 28 ms, flip angle: 77°, acquisition matrix: 64 × 64, slice thickness: 4mm, voxel resolution: 3.44 × 3.44 × 4 mm, 300 volumes).

Regions of interest (ROIs) for the morphometry analysis included the bilateral hypothalamus, nucleus accumbens, amygdala, brainstem, putamen and anterior insula based on past literature [31,32,33,34,35]. The same ROIs were used as seeds for the resting-state functional connectivity analysis to the rest of the brain.

To determine differences in gray matter from baseline to 6 months, a voxel-based morphometry analysis was completed using FMRIB Software Library (FSL)-voxel-based morphometry (VBM), part of the FSL software package [36]. Brain extraction was first conducted using the robust version of the Brain Extraction Tool (BET), which calls the command multiple times, moving the center of gravity to the true center. All images were then checked manually to confirm the brain had been extracted adequately. All brain images were then segmented into gray matter (GM), white matter (WM) and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) using FMRIB’s Automated Segmentation Tool (FAST) in FSL [37]. A study specific GM template was then created using affine non-linear registration to the ICBM-152 template. Finally, all GM images were non-linearly registered—including a Jacobian modulation to account for differences in transformation—to the study-specific template [38,39] and smoothed with a 4 mm Gaussian kernel. This created a 4D smoothed image.

Preprocessing for the structural and resting-state functional images were done in SPM12 [40]. The first two volumes were discarded to allow for stabilization of the magnetic field. Slice-timing correction was performed followed by six-degree motion correction alignment. The motion parameters were examined for excessive motion in each degree for motion less than 2 mm. Mean frame-wise displacement (FD) and root mean squared (RMS) realignment estimates were also calculated as robust measures of motion using publicly available MATLAB code from GitHub [41]. Each subject’s T1 images was segmented into gray matter, white matter and cerebrospinal fluid, then normalized into the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space. Resting-state images were then co-registered with their respective anatomical T1 images, resulting in resting-state images normalized in MNI space.

The pre-processed, normalized functional images, along with their normalized T1 images and segmentations were then uploaded to the CONN fMRI toolbox [42]. The Schaefer 400 cortical atlas, Harvard-Oxford Subcortical atlas, and the Ascending Arousal Network brainstem atlas were used as ROI’s in MNI space for each subject. The functional images were then denoised using ordinary least squares regression of potential confounding effects and temporal band-pass filtering (0.008–0.09 Hz). The aCompCor method [43] was used and included noise components from white matter, cerebrospinal fluid, estimated subject-motion parameters, and session effects. Fisher transformed correlations were computed (Z) between the functional time series of all the parcellated regions to derive a 417 × 417 matrix for each participant. The bottom half of the undirected matrix was then concatenated into one vector of each subject representing each ROI pair.

Serum was collected from patients while they were fasting and stored at −80 C until being sent to Metabolon Inc (Morrisville, NC, USA) for processing as a single batch. Serum samples were processed and analyzed using an integrated analytic platform that consists of automated sample preparation, Liquid Chromatography/Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry (LC/GC/MS), peak identification and deconvolution, and chemical intelligence. Data are curated by mass spectrometry analysts using specialized software. Biochemicals are identified by comparison to library entries of purified standards. Chromatographic properties and mass spectra allow matching to the specific compound or an isobaric entity using proprietary visualization and interpretation software. Peaks are quantified using area under the curve. Library matches for each compound are verified for each sample. Based on prior published works on serum metabolites and bariatric surgery, we focused our analysis to short chain fatty acids, branched chain amino acids, para-Cresol, phenylacetylglutamine, phenol, indoles, tryptophan-related metabolites, N-acetyl-putrescine, glutamate, and phosphatidylcholine [44,45,46,47].

Clinical continuous variables were associated to each other using linear regression model in R. Means were compared using a univariate analysis of variance in R. Normality of data was tested using the Shapiro–Wilk method by using the function shapiro.test in R. Homogeneity of variance was tested using the F-test by using the function var.test in R. Categorical data were compared using the Fisher’s exact test in R. All means are expressed along with their standard deviations.

Correlations between metabolites and brain connectivity was assessed using linear regression adjusting for multiple hypothesis testing by using the FDR method. All statistical analysis was done using R.

Eighteen subjects were enrolled in the study, of which, 14 underwent brain imaging. The average age of the participants were 37.4 years old + 9.7 (Table 1). The average weight and BMI before surgery was 119.4 + 19.8kg and 45.5 kg/m2 + 4.9, respectively. The demographic makeup of the participants is described in Table 1. LSG led to significant reductions in weight at 6 months (Figure 1). The average percentage of total body weight loss was 24.3% + 5.2 at 6 months after surgery.

SD: standard deviation; y: year; BMI: Body Mass Index.

There was a significant reduction in maladaptive eating behaviors as measured by YFAS symptom count (p-value < 0.001) and TFEQ_R21 as well as a reduction in anxiety and depression scores post bariatric surgery (Table 2). Three subjects reached criteria for food addiction diagnosis pre-surgery, but no patients fulfilled the criteria for food addiction after surgery (p = 0.22).

YFAS: Yale Food Addiction Scale; HADS: Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale, TFEQ: Three-Factor Eating Questionnaire’ CR: cognitive restraint; UE: uncontrolled eating; EE: emotional eating. 6 mo: 6 months post-surgery.

By analyzing the functional and structural brain MRI of patients before and after surgery, we saw significant changes in important reward regions including the amygdala and the putamen.

By analyzing the resting state pairwise connectivity of the brain, we found that patients had lower connectivity between the precuneus and the putamen at 6 months after surgery compared to baseline (p.adj = 0.046). The connectivity between the precuneus to the putamen across both timepoints was positively correlated to the YFAS symptom count (p-Value = 0.013) (Figure 3). This change in brain connectivity was not significantly correlated with either scores for anxiety or depression or any of the subscales of the TFEQ-R21.

We then examined whether the brain connectivity between the putamen and precuneus was associated with any microbial or serum metabolite changes induced by surgery. By using the median value, resting state connectivity between the precuneus and the putamen were categorized as either high or low connectivity. There was no significant difference between subjects with a low versus a high connectivity in regard to alpha diversity. However, subjects with a higher connectivity between the precuneus and putamen did have a trend towards a lower alpha diversity than subjects with a lower level of connectivity (Figure 4A). Through the supervised learning model, sPLS-DA, subjects with low connectivity separated from subjects with high connectivity (Figure 4B) with an area under the receiver operating curve of 0.97. Thirty separate amplicon sequence variants contributed to the variation seen in the first component axis (Figure 4C). Of these 30 amplicon sequence variants, Bacteroides and Lachnospiraceae were associated the most to a low connectivity, while Anaerostipes was associated the most with a high connectivity. The taxonomic profiles are summarized in Figure 4D between patients with low or high connectivity. Differential abundance testing adjusting for time showed 28 different taxa associated with the connectivity between the precuneus and the putamen. An undefined species belonging to the family Ruminococcaceae and genus CAG-56 were associated with high connectivity while the other 26 taxa were associated with a low connectivity. Notable taxa belonging to those 26 associated with a low connectivity included 5 Bacteroides species, 2 Ruminococcus species, and Holdemanella, a microbe that was also associated with low connectivity, as determined by sPLS-DA (Figure 4E). Only one serum metabolite was significantly correlated with the connectivity between the precuneus and the putamen after adjusting for multiple hypothesis testing: 1-palmitoyl-2-palmitoleoyl, a phosphatidylcholine-related metabolite, was positively associated with the connectivity between the precuneus and the putamen (p.adj = 0.038, r = 0.63). There was no relationship between 1-palmitoyl-2-palmitoleoyl with any patient questionnaire data.

We then performed differential abundance testing with DESEq2 to see which microbes were associated with YFAS symptom count and levels of 1-palmitoyl-2-palmitoleoyl. Similar to above, we dichotomized the YFAS symptom count as either high or low by using a cutoff of three and we dichotomized the levels of 1-palmitoyl-2-palmitoleoyl as high or low by using the median value. The microbes that were associated with YFAS and 1-palmitoyl-2-palmitoleoyl are summarized in Figure 5. There were eight taxa that were positively associated with YFAS and seven taxa that were negatively associated. The two most abundant taxa belonged to the genus Prevotella and were both positively associated with YFAS. The most abundant taxa that was negatively associated belonged to the family Ruminococcaceae. Nine taxa were positively associated with 1-palmitoyl-2-palmitoleoyl and 11 taxa were negatively associated. Of the 20 taxa, the one with the greatest relative abundance was one belonging to the genus Ruminococcus and it was negatively associated with 1-palmitoyl-2-palmitoleoyl.

A summary figure of the previously mentioned analysis representing all of the key associations between the brain, microbes, metabolites, and eating behavior is shown in Figure 6.

This is one of the first studies to examine the interconnections between bariatric surgery and eating behavior through the brain–gut–microbiome axis. Despite the small sample size, this study showed a significant association between improvement in eating behaviors induced by bariatric surgery with changes in brain function at the putamen, a core reward region, and with shifts in gut microbiome composition.

We would like to acknowledge four important limitations of the current study. First, the main limitation to this study is its small sample size. Despite this, we were able to show significant changes relating bariatric surgery to the brain–gut–microbiome axis. Moreover, the longitudinal design of the study partially compensates for this shortcoming and gives a sense of the directionality of the associations. Second, we assessed eating behaviors and more specifically addictive-like eating behavior with the YFAS symptom score, which has a limited range (0–7) and may not be as sensitive to detect changes in other eating behaviors including impulsive eating behaviors. In addition, because of the small sample size, we could not control for the effect of changes in mood (anxiety, depression) or in appetite/gut peptide levels on the YFAS score after surgery. Third, because of the design and small sample size, we were not able to assess for the effect of dietary changes on the gut microbiome and metabolites. Furthermore, sPLS-DA modeling of the microbiome does tend to overfit data with small sample sizes. We have tried to overcome this limitation by also performing unbiased differential abundance testing with DESEq2 to confirm the findings from the sPLS-DA model. However, future larger studies should be performed to validate the findings found in our model. Fourth, our population comprises a relatively small number of women aged 18 to 55, without major comorbidities, and therefore our findings cannot be extrapolated to other obese populations. The strengths of our study include a well-characterized population, followed closely for 6 months. Data and samples were prospectively collected in a standard manner. This data included eating behavior questionnaires, anthropometrics, high-resolution fMRI of the brain, stool samples for high-depth sequencing using up to date analysis techniques that provide better taxonomic resolution, and well-characterized serum metabolite data.

In conclusion, this is one of the few studies to date to examine the effects of bariatric surgery on eating behavior using a multi-omics approach. We believe that our study builds on prior published works to show how bariatric surgery can affect eating behavior through alterations in the gut microbiome, serum metabolites, and brain morphometry and connectivity. While these results may shed new light on novel pathways to aid patients with weight loss, they should be validated in a larger cohort of patients that includes both men and women. Future studies will also be required to further investigate the mechanisms behind these BGM interactions following bariatric surgery.

