Differential effects of synthetic psychoactive cathinones and amphetamine stimulants on the gut microbiome in mice

The list of pharmacological agents that can modify the gut microbiome or be modified by it continues to grow at a high rate. The greatest amount of attention on drug-gut microbiome interactions has been directed primarily at pharmaceuticals used to treat infection, diabetes, cardiovascular conditions and cancer. By comparison, drugs of abuse and addiction, which can powerfully and chronically worsen human health, have received relatively little attention in this regard. Therefore, the main objective of this study was to characterize how selected synthetic psychoactive cathinones (aka “Bath Salts”) and amphetamine stimulants modify the gut microbiome. Mice were treated with mephedrone (40 mg/kg), methcathinone (80 mg/kg), methamphetamine (5 mg/kg) or 4-methyl-methamphetamine (40 mg/kg), following a binge regimen consisting of 4 injections at 2h intervals. These drugs were selected for study because they are structural analogs that contain a β-keto substituent (methcathinone), a 4-methyl group (4-methyl-methamphetamine), both substituents (mephedrone) or neither (methamphetamine). Mice were sacrificed 1, 2 or 7 days after treatment and DNA from caecum contents was subjected to 16S rRNA sequencing. We found that all drugs caused significant time- and structure-dependent alterations in the diversity and taxonomic structure of the gut microbiome. The two phyla most changed by drug treatments were Firmicutes (methcathinone, 4-methyl-methamphetamine) and Bacteriodetes (methcathinone, 4-methyl-methamphetamine, methamphetamine, mephedrone). Across time, broad microbiome changes from the phylum to genus levels were characteristic of all drugs. The present results signify that these selected psychoactive drugs, which are thought to exert their primary effects within the CNS, can have profound effects on the gut microbiome. They also suggest new avenues of investigation into the possibility that gut-derived signals could modulate drug abuse and addiction via altered communication along the gut-brain axis.

The synthetic psychoactive cathinones (SPCs) are members of a larger class of drugs now referred to as synthetic psychoactive drugs (SPDs). This family also includes synthetic psychoactive cannabinoids, SP opiates and SP hallucinogens. These agents are designed to mimic the actions of known abused drugs and they remain high on the list of the most abused drugs in the USA and across Europe and Asia. Because of their acute and chronic effects, which include cardiovascular, neurological, and infectious disease (i.e., HIV), as well as psychiatric disorders [1–4], and which can progress to liver and kidney failure, rhabdomyolysis and even death [5], these drugs constitute a serious public health crisis [4]. The principal members of the SPC class are mephedrone (4-methyl-methcathinone; Meph), methcathinone (MeCa), methylone and 3,4-methylenedioxypyrovalerone (MDPV). These drugs share remarkable structural similarity with the amphetamine class of psychostimulants, differing only in their possession of a β-keto group. For instance, the β-keto/deketo analogs are cathinone/amphetamine, MeCa/methamphetamine (Meth) and methylone/MDMA. The structural similarity shared by these drugs translates into an extensive overlap in their pharmacological, neurochemical and behavioral effects. The SPCs and amphetamines share the ability to interact with monoamine transporters to cause the release of dopamine (DA), serotonin (5HT) or norepinephrine (NE) [6–8], alter thermoregulation [6,9,10], increase locomotor activity [6,9,11] and serve as discriminative stimuli [9,12,13]. The abuse potential of these drugs has also been affirmed in animal models of addiction [14–16].

Despite the paucity of published papers in the area of drug abuse and gut microbiome interactions, the premise for undertaking such studies is actually quite compelling for the following reasons: 1) SPCs primarily target the transporters for 5HT (SERT), DA (DAT) and NE (NET) [6,33] to increase extracellular neurotransmitter levels in the brain and these same transporters are highly expressed in the gut [34–36]; 2) these same monoamine transporters are also targets for psychostimulants like Meth and cocaine [8,33]; 3) enhanced monoamine signaling in the gut can change the composition of the microbiome [37] and, in turn, modify gut function [38,39]; 4) production of ammonia from urea is catalyzed by urease enzymes in gut bacteria (the human genome does not encode urease genes) [40], suggesting the microbiome as a site, in addition to the liver, of ammonia production that is known to modulate Meth-induced neurotoxicity; and 5) antibiotics, which deplete the gut microbiome, counteract reinstatement of Meth-seeking behaviors [41,42] and reduce development of an MDPV conditioned place preference [43]. In summary, the gut microbiome is a likely target of the SPCs and the amphetamine-like psychostimulants. Therefore, as a first step in gaining a better understanding of how drugs of abuse might alter gut-brain communication, we have characterized the effects of selected SPCs and amphetamines on the gut microbiome of mice.

(R,S)-N-Methcathinone HCl and (R,S)-mephedrone HCl were provided by the NIDA Research Resources Drug Supply Program. Racemic 4-methylmethamphetamine HCl was synthesized as described by Davis et al. (2012) from methylamine HCl and 4-methylphenylacetone purchased from Alfa Aesar (Ward Hill, MA, USA). (+)- Methamphetamine HCl, was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). All DEA schedule controlled drugs were purchased under DEA registration numbers RK0237986 (Schedule 1) and RK0245995 (Schedules 2–5).

Female C57BL/6 mice (Harlan, Indianapolis, IN, USA) weighing 18–25 g at the time of experimentation were housed 5–7 per cage in large shoe-box cages in a light- (12 h light/dark) and temperature-controlled room. Female mice were used as they have been shown to be impacted by the neurotoxicity induced by amphetamines and to maintain consistency with our previous studies of Meth and β-ketoamphetamine interactions [44–47]. Mice had free access to food and water. The mice used were randomly divided into treatment groups (N = 5–7 mice per group) and were treated through intraperitoneal injection (i.p.) with saline (controls), Meth (5 mg/kg), 4-methylmethamphetamine (4MM; 40 mg/kg), MeCa (80 mg/kg), or Meph (40 mg/kg) in a single-day binge-like regimen, which involves 4 injections (0.2 mL) at 2 h intervals. This binge treatment regimen has been established by multiple prior studies in this laboratory and others to elicit significant neurotoxicity for amphetamine compounds [48–51]. Doses of β-keto amphetamines and 4MM eliciting mild to moderate DA depletion were selected based on prior studies [44–47,52–54]. Mice were sacrificed by decapitation 1, 2 or 7 days after drug treatment and caecum contents were harvested, weighed and stored frozen at -80°C until DNA isolation. Stressors such as noise and handling by multiple persons were avoided and mice were monitored daily for signs of distress or injury until the endpoints at 1, 2 or 7 days. The Institutional Care and Use Committee of Wayne State University approved the animal care and experimental procedures. All procedures were also in compliance with the NIH Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and were conducted in compliance with ARRIVE guidelines and under IACUC-approved protocols.

DNA was extracted from caecum contents (~200 mg wet weight) using QIAamp PowerFecal DNA kits and sample DNA concentrations were determined using a Qubit 4 Fluorometer and ranged from 70–100 ng/μl. Samples were sequenced in duplicate on an Illumina MiSeq system using a 2 X 250 cycle V2 kit following Illumina sequencing protocols and with Illumina reagents following the procedures detailed by Kozich and colleagues [55]. The 16S rRNA gene primers used targeted the V4 region of the gene (forward primer: 5’-GTGCCAGCMGCCGCGGTAA-3’; reverse primer: 5’-GGACTACHVGGGTWTCTAAT-3’). The 16S rRNA gene sequences from the paired fastq files were trimmed, screened and aligned using mothur [56], in accordance with the MiSeq SOP established by Schloss and colleagues (https://www.mothur.org/wiki/MiSeq_SOP). After de-multiplexing and quality control (e.g., truncating reads with >2 adjacent low quality base calls; discarding reads containing any ambiguous base calls in surviving sequences), sequences were binned into operational taxonomic units (OTUs) based on percent sequence identity (97%), the OTUs were taxonomically classified in mothur, and the bacterial community data were thereafter visualized and statistically analyzed using PAST software (v3.20; [57]). Microbiome diversity was characterized in terms of α-diversity using the Chao1 (i.e. community richness) and Shannon and Simpson (1-D) (i.e. community heterogeneity) indices. Because the number of sequences per sample was significantly different among treatment groups, subsampling was performed to the level of the least represented sample prior to calculating α-diversity measures. The number of sequences obtained were as follows: 123,742 ± 22,459 (pre-subsampling) with Good’s coverage values of 99.7 ± 0.05 and 42,528 (post-subsampling) with Good’s coverage values of 99.3 ± 0.07. β-diversity was assessed using the Jaccard (i.e. shared composition) and Bray-Curtis (i.e. shared structure) indices based on relative abundance data. High-dimensional class comparisons were carried out with linear discriminant analysis effect size (LEfSe) in an on-line interface [58] using default parameters with the exception that LDA score was set to 3.6. Heat maps were generated using MetaboAnalyst 4.0 [59].

The indices for α-diversity were obtained using PAST software (v3.20). The results were analyzed statistically with a one-way ANOVA, and subsequent post hoc comparisons were performed with Tukey’s test using GraphPad Prism (v6.07) for Windows (GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA, USA, www.graphpad.com). The indices for β-diversity were also calculated, and statistical analyses were carried out, using PAST software (v3.20). The results were analyzed using a two-way NPMANOVA, and post hoc comparisons were made using one-way NPMANOVAs. Taxonomic distributions at the phylum level (treatment X phylum) and lower taxonomic levels (treatment X time) were analyzed with a two-way ANOVA followed by post hoc comparisons using Tukey’s tests in GraphPad Prism.

Study drugs caused drug- and time-dependent alterations in the richness and heterogeneity of the gut microbiome at the OTU level as shown in Fig 1. α-diversity values were based on 3 metrics (Chao-1 richness estimator, Shannon diversity index and the Simpson (1-D) index) for 16S rRNA gene profiles for each study drug. The effects of drug treatments on all α-diversity metrics were tested statistically with a one-way ANOVA (F4,23 = 7.52, p = 0.0005 for Chao-1; F4,23 = 8.91, p = 0.0002 for Shannon; and F4,23 = 19.41, p = 0.0001 for Simpson (1-D)) followed by post hoc Tukey’s tests. At 1 day after treatment, MeCa was the only treatment in which the gut microbiome exhibited increased richness in comparison to controls (p < 0.001). The microbiomes of MeCa-treated mice were also more OTU-rich than those of mice receiving Meth (p < 0.05), Meph (p < 0.01) and 4MM (p < 0.05) (Fig 1A). The pattern of drug effects on gut microbiome heterogeneity at the 1-day time point, using the Shannon index, was similar to that seen for richness in that Meth and MeCa significantly increased heterogeneity in comparison to controls (p < 0.05 for both), and all drugs significantly increased microbiome diversity in comparison to Meph (Fig 1B; p < 0.05 for all). The Simpson (1-D) index shown in Fig 1C also revealed that Meth, MeCa and 4MM exhibited increased microbiome heterogeneity compared to controls (Meth p < 0.05; MeCa & 4MM: p < 0.001 for both) and Meph (p < 0.0001 for all). The microbiomes of Meph-treated mice did not differ from those of controls using any α-diversity metric. The alterations in taxonomic richness and heterogeneity caused by these drugs at 1 day were not present at either 2 or 7 days post-treatment (S1 Fig).

Fig 4 presents results from linear discriminant analysis effect size (LEfSe) analysis and highlights the effect size of the study drug treatments on affected taxa. It can be seen in Fig 4A that the relatively more abundant OTUs varied for each treatment group compared to the other groups at the 1-day time point. For instance, the discriminant taxa for MeCa were Porphyromonadaceae and Lachnospiraceae, whereas the taxon with relatively more abundance after Meth treatment was Anaeroplasma. Meph treatment was marked by Odoribacter, Musispirillum and Clostridiales, whereas 4MM was marked by abundant OTUs classified as Clostridium XIVa, in addition to Lachnospiraceae, Porphyromonadaceae and Bacteroidales. OTUs classified as Prevotellaceae, Clostridiales, Lachnospiraceae and Alistipes were relatively more abundant in the control group at the 1-day time point. The OTUs that were relatively abundant at the 2-day time point (Fig 4B) were quite different for each drug by comparison to the 1-day time point. For instance, 7 of 8 OTUs that were differentially abundant 1 day after MeCa treatment were from the family Porphyromonadaceae, but none of these OTUs characterized MeCa at the 2-day time point. Porphyromonadaceae (3 of 4 OTUs) and Lachnospiraceae (1 of 4 OTUs) remained differentially abundant 2 days after treatment with 4MM, in line with their relative abundance at 1 day post-treatment (6 of 9 OTUs). In general, the number of OTUs that were identified as differentially abundant for the study drugs decreased with the passage of time since drug injections, especially for MeCa and 4MM. Notably, Meth was the study drug with the fewest number of discriminating OTUs. The effects of Meph treatment were relatively constant over time with regard to the number of OTUs (5–6) that were relatively more abundant in this treatment than in others; by the 7-day time point (Fig 4C), 5 of 6 OTUs demarking Meph were from the family Porphyromonadaceae.

In light of the changes seen at the OTU level, it was important to next evaluate the effects of the study drugs on specific bacterial phyla. Therefore, drug effects on the percent relative abundance of represented bacterial phyla were quantified and the results are presented in Fig 5. For these analyses, the factor of time was considered as an independent variable. As expected, the greatest number of changes occurred in the Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes phyla. For the 1-day time point (Fig 5A), the main effect of drug was not significant but the main effect of phylum (F8,207 = 657.9, p = 0.0001), and the interaction of drug X phylum (F32,207 = 1.97, p = 0.0025), was significant. Post hoc comparisons revealed that MeCa (p < 0.01) and 4MM (p < 0.01) caused significant increases in percent relative abundance of Firmicutes versus controls. No other pairwise comparisons among the control group and drugs were significant with regard to Firmicutes. As seen above for Firmicutes, MeCa (p < 0.01) and 4MM (p < 0.05) also significantly increased the percent relative abundance of Bacteroidetes. Mice treated with Meth (p < 0.001) and Meph (p < 0.05) were significantly lower than those treated with MeCa and 4MM for the percent relative abundance of Bacteroidetes. Fig 5B shows that Meph significantly changed the percent relative abundance of Verrucomicrobia at the 2-day time point by comparison to controls (p < 0.01), MeCa and 4MM (p < 0.05 for both). MeCa was also significantly different from control (p < 0.01), Meth and Meph (p < 0.01 for both) with regard to percent relative abundance of Firmicutes, whereas changes in Bactoidetes were restricted to MeCa versus controls (p < 0.001), Meth and 4MM (p < 0.05 for both). None of the other pairwise comparisons were altered significantly at the 2-day time point. Several changes in percent relative abundance persisted for 7 days after drug treatments as seen in Fig 5C. Specifically, 4MM was significantly reduced by comparison to MeCa for Firmicutes, as well as in comparison to controls (p < 0.001). For Bacteroidetes, 4MM was different from control (p < 0.05) and from Meph and MeCa (p < 0.001 for both).

A BLAST analysis (i.e., comparison of 16S rRNA representative gene sequences to those in the BLAST taxonomy database) for all OTUs revealed as differentially abundant in the LEfSe analysis (Fig 4) identified (i.e. > 99.6% identity) several bacterial species, including Fusimonas intestini and Mucispirillium intestinale for Meph, Duncaniella muris and Paramuribaculum intestinale for MeCa, and Muribaculum intestinale for 4MM at the 1-day time point. Meph was signified by Akkermansia muciniphila and Paramuribaculum intestinale at the 2- and 7-day time points, respectively. These results are summarized in Table 1.

The consensus sequence for the OTUs identified as being differentially representative for each study drug in the LEfSe analysis was obtained in mothur and queried against the BLAST taxonomy database. Only those sequences with > 99% identity to a characterized bacterial species are included in the table.

The goal of the present study was to determine if selected drugs of abuse alter the gut microbiome. The results were clear in showing that Meth, Meph, MeCa and 4MM each caused significant alterations in the diversity and taxonomic structure of the gut microbiome of mice. Three different metrics for assessing α-diversity established that all study drugs caused significant changes in microbiome richness and heterogeneity. Specifically, Meth, MeCa and 4MM increased microbiome α-diversity, whereas Meph generally resulted in a small but significant decrease. These changes occurred within 1 day of drug treatment and microbiome α-diversity returned to control levels by 2 and 7 days post-treatment. With regard to β-diversity, all drugs caused significant alterations in microbiome composition and structure that were apparent within 1 day and which persisted for 2 to 7 days after treatment. These changes in the gut microbiome caused by Meth, Meph, MeCa and 4MM are notable for the rapidity of their onset as well as for their persistence.

In conclusion, the present study establishes that important psychoactive drugs of abuse cause significant alterations in the gut microbiome. Despite sharing remarkable structural similarities, the study drugs caused distinct changes in the gut microbiome that were rapid in onset and relatively long-lived. Our results establish an initial foundation upon which future studies can build by investigating longer-term exposure to individual drugs and to drug combinations favored by individuals with SUDs. It is not yet possible to relate the present results in mice to humans with SUDs, given that the only report of the effects of Meth on the gut microbiome in humans combined Meth, heroin, ephedrine, alcohol and tobacco into one group, so it is not possible to discern drug-specific effects [32]. Finally, as more research strengthens a link between drugs of abuse (and addiction) and the gut microbiome, additional studies can use treatments that target the microbiome (e.g., antibiotics, microbiome transplantation, probiotics) to reduce substance abuse and relapse.

