Microbiome and colorectal cancer: Roles in carcinogenesis and clinical potential

The gastrointestinal tract harbors most of the microbiota associated with humans. In recent years, there has been a surge of interest in assessing the relationships between the gut microbiota and several gut alterations, including colorectal cancer. Changes in the gut microbiota in patients suffering colorectal cancer suggest a possible role of host-microbe interactions in the origin and development of this malignancy and, at the same time, open the door for novel ways of preventing, diagnosing, or treating this disease. In this review we survey current knowledge on the healthy microbiome of the gut and how it is altered in colorectal cancer and other related disease conditions. In describing past studies we will critically assess technical limitations of different approaches and point to existing challenges in microbiome research. We will have a special focus on host-microbiome interaction mechanisms that may be important to explain how dysbiosis can lead to chronic inflammation and drive processes that influence carcinogenesis and tumor progression in colon cancer. Finally, we will discuss the potential of recent developments of novel microbiota-based therapeutics and diagnostic tools for colorectal cancer.

The gut comprises an abundant and diverse community of microorganisms (archaea, fungi, protozoa and viruses), which is collectively referred to as the “gut microbiome” (Costello et al., 2012). A typical gut microbiome may comprise trillions of microbial cells from over several hundreds of different species, which genomes can entail, globally, over three million genes (Sender et al., 2016). This complex ecosystem is not a passive colonizer of our gut, but rather interacts with the host in many ways, contributing to various processes such as nutritional absorption, metabolism, immunity, tissue development, and carcinogenesis (Bosch and McFall-Ngai, 2011; Dzutsev et al., 2015). Alterations in the composition of the gut microbiome - a state known as dysbiosis - have been associated with a growing number of prevalent human diseases, including cancer (Schwabe and Jobin, 2013). Indeed, it has been estimated that more than 20% of the cancer burden worldwide is attributable to known intestinal infectious agents that are often normal residents of the intestinal microbiota (Zur Hausen, 2009). In particular, dysbiosis-related inflammation and the biosynthesis of chemical carcinogens (e.g. acetaldehyde, N-nitroso compounds) by microbes are among several possible mechanisms through which the microbiota may have a role in carcinogenesis (Arthur et al., 2012; Kostic et al., 2013; Rubinstein et al., 2013; Sears et al., 2008). The colon is the most heavily colonized section of the digestive tract, and it has been estimated that this organ contains approximately 70% of the estimated human microbiome (Sekirov et al., 2010). The colon is also the section of the digestive tract that is more prone to develop cancer, with cancer incidence being 12-fold higher in the colon as compared to the small intestine (Gagnière et al., 2016). In addition, known risk factors in colorectal cancer (CRC), such as dietary habits and life-style (Moskal et al., 2016; Torre et al., 2015), are known to modulate the gut microbiota. Thus, a plausible hypothesis is that certain colonic microbes or alterations of the typical resident colonic flora may create a microenvironment that is more favorable to tumor development. This hypothesis is supported by findings from several studies that explored the gut microbiota associated with individuals with CRC (Gagnière et al., 2016; Kostic et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2012; Weir et al., 2013). In this regard, a growing number of studies report specific alterations in the gut microbiome associated with CRC and explored its value for CRC screening (Wong et al., 2017a). This is particularly important for CRC, as an early diagnosis of the tumor (in stages 0, I or II) is associated to 80% survival rate over five years, which is reduced to only 10% in later diagnosis (stage IV). In this context, the detection of specific microbiome alterations has emerged as a promising strategy for CRC diagnostics (Wong et al., 2017a; Zeller et al., 2014a). Finally, some bacterial genera have been hypothesized to be protective against CRC (Appleyard et al., 2011). This protective phenotype may be mediated through metabolite production, induction of immunological tolerance, or an ability to outcompete pathogenic bacteria or fungi (Coker et al., 2018a; Zhu et al., 2011). In the long run, a better knowledge of the relationships between the microbiota and the origin and progression of CRC may open novel opportunities for the development of therapies targeting the microbiome. In this regard the development and use of prebiotics, probiotics, specific antibiotics, phage therapies, or the transplantation of whole microbiomes may bring new tools for the prevention and treatment of CRC (Kelly, 2013; Lynch and Pedersen, 2016; Schmidt et al., 2018). In this review we provide an overview of how the gut microbiome is studied and survey recent research directed towards unveiling possible relationships between gut microbiota and the origin and development of CRC. We next provide an overview of potential applications related to microbiome-based diagnostic and therapeutic tools, which are still in very early-development stages. Finally, we discuss the current limitations and future potential of this field of research.

Metagenomic studies have most commonly used one of two main approaches to assess the composition of microbiomes: whole-genome shotgun (WGS) sequencing, and 16S ribosomal RNA amplicon sequencing. In both cases, DNA sequences of microbes present in a given sample are read using next generation sequencing technologies, and compared to a database of known sequences to determine the presence and abundance of particular taxa. Depending on the sequencing and analysis approach, a resolution at the strain, species, genus, or higher taxonomic levels can be achieved, often depending on the specific clades. In addition, WGS can provide information on the genes encoded by the strains present in the sample, at least the most abundant ones. This information can be used to reconstruct potential metabolic capacities of a given microbial ecosystem.

Metabolomics is the study of small molecules or metabolites present in biological specimens. Metabolites and other chemical compounds are the ultimate link mediating host-pathogen interactions, and therefore the metabolome may provide important mechanistic insights into cancer-related processes (Armitage and Barbas, 2014). Metabolites of microbial or host origin are released in the gut and affect the tumor microenvironment. The main final aim of metabolomics research in CRC is to apply this knowledge to i) improving understanding of CRC etiology – for individual/population risk stratification, and effective cancer prevention policies, ii) describing metabolite profiles capable of predicting patients with CRC at early stages of tumorigenesis, even distinguishing solitary adenoma from disease-free controls (diagnosis biomarkers) (Farshidfar et al., 2016; Tan et al., 2013; Uchiyama et al., 2017), and iii) finding prognosis, survival and recurrence biomarkers to improve intervention and treatment strategies in patients with different molecular CRC subtypes (Liesenfeld et al., 2015; Qiu et al., 2014). In addition, metabolomic analyses can serve as orthogonal lines of evidence to confirm mechanistic hypotheses generated in MWASs.

CRC is a complex malignant disease whose multi-stage development involves numerous factors, including genetic and environmental risk factors. It has been shown that an accumulation of genetic and epigenetic alterations in proto-oncogenes, tumor suppressor genes, and/or DNA repair genes, leads to transformation of the normal colonic epithelium into tumoral cells (Fleming et al., 2012). The majority of CRC cases occur sporadically and less than 20% of CRC cases are hereditary (Carethers and Jung, 2015). Smoking, alcohol consumption, obesity and diabetes are all known factors involved in this disease. Dietary factors such as a diet rich in processed foods, animal fat and red meat coupled with a low intake of fibre and fruits have also been validated as an important risk factor for the development of sporadic CRC (Moskal et al., 2016). More recently, an increasing number of studies report alterations of the gut microbiota in CRC samples, suggesting that gut microbiota may be an essential contributing factor to the initiation and development of this cancer.

Different hypotheses have been put forward to explain the role of microbial unbalance in carcinogenesis. Some authors propose that some types of dysbiotic gut microbiota originate a functional imbalance that triggers sustained pro-inflammatory responses and epithelial cell transformation, leading to cancer (Hajishengallis et al., 2012; Lamont and Hajishengallis, 2015; Maloy and Powrie, 2011). A related hypothesis is the ‘driver-passenger theory’ (Tjalsma et al., 2012). According to this model indigenous intestinal bacteria (defined as driver bacteria) trigger the DNA damage in epithelial cells, which in turn contributes to cancer initiation. In a second step, ongoing tumorigenesis alters the surrounding microenvironment, favoring the proliferation of opportunistic bacteria (termed bacterial passengers). Thus, this model proposes that disease progression causes changes in the microenvironment as a result of the growing tumor, and bacteria are replaced by others which show a competitive advantage in the tumor microenvironment and are capable of nurturing tumor progression. This scenario suggests that bacterial drivers and passengers have distinct temporal associations with CRC and may have separate roles in pathogenesis.

The transition from normal mucosa to CRC is a multi-step process, from the development of pre-neoplastic lesions to the adenomatous polyps. The adenoma-carcinoma sequence may take at least 10 years to develop, which makes CRC an ideal malignancy to be screened. Screening can prevent CRC by the detection and removal of precancerous growths, or by enabling the detection of cancer at an early stage, when treatment has a higher success rate. Guided by these promising facts, several countries have adopted population-wide screening and prevention programs aimed at improving CRC survival. The main screening strategies used worldwide are the fecal occult blood test (FOBT) and the fecal immunochemical test (FIT), which are generally coupled to a subsequent colonoscopy when the test is positive and other parameters recommend it (Navarro et al., 2017). A broad meta-analysis showed that FOBT and FIT reduced the mortality of CRC by 14% and 59%, respectively, as compared with no screening in average-risk populations (Zhang et al., 2017a). This study also concluded that colonoscopy is the most effective examination to reduce CRC mortality. However, colonoscopy requires previous bowel preparation and sedation, and it is an expensive, time-consuming, and invasive procedure that exposes patients to serious medical complications (Rutter et al., 2014). These limitations prevent the application of colonoscopy on population-wide screenings and highlight the need for efficient pre-colonoscopy tests. FOBT and FIT share the advantage of being non-invasive, stool-based techniques but they have a moderate sensitivity (69–86%) to detect CRC (Lee et al., 2014; Robertson et al., 2017). Thus, despite the undeniable advances for CRC prevention brought about by the current screening techniques, research for more accurate diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers is still needed. Most current research is directed towards finding additional criteria, such as risk factors and other biomarkers to be considered by the decision algorithms used to derive persons with a positive FOBT or FIT test to colonoscopy. In this sense, some molecular biomarkers related to the processes underlying carcinogenesis in CRC are being considered. These include circulating tumor cells, cell-free DNA, microRNAs as well as metabolites from plasma samples (Coghlin and Murray, 2015).

In addition to the use of the microbiome, some studies have explored the metabolome, mostly in feces, to find CRC-associated signatures [reviewed in (Zhang et al., 2017b)]. Some fecal metabolites (short-chain fatty acids such as acetate and butyrate, fructose, linoleic acid and nicotinic acid among others) have been suggested as potential diagnostic markers of CRC since they have been found at lower levels in fecal metabolome of CRC patients in comparison to healthy individuals (Monleón et al., 2009; Phua et al., 2014). Some other studies claim the possibility of discriminating between CRC patients and tumor-free controls using a panel of urinary metabolites (Cheng et al., 2012) or differentially expressed serum metabolites with a sensitivity of 0.981 and a specificity of 1.000 (Li et al., 2013). However, a prospective cohort study of patients with CRC could distinguish early-stage patients from more advanced stages of the disease but not intermediate stages based on the urinary metabolome (Liesenfeld et al., 2015). As in the case of the microbiome, extrinsic and genetic factors may affect the metabolome, and this technique also suffers from similar reproducibility and standardization problems (Villéger et al., 2018). Thus metabolic profiling has the potential of being used as a biomarker for CRC diagnosis, but still more extended and comparable studies are needed to obtain more clear and robust conclusions. Overall, the final purpose of all this emerging research is integrating information on genomics, epigenetics together with microbiome, metabolomics and lifestyle and environmental factors to construct new risk models which are more robust and precise, thereby enabling a better prediction on CRC initiation, progression as well as therapeutic strategies.

Apart from the effects of human host genetics (Hall et al., 2017; Kurilshikov et al., 2017), the composition of the gut microbiome is influenced by many host extrinsic factors, including diet (Singh et al., 2017), medications (Becattini et al., 2016; Le Bastard et al., 2018; Maier et al., 2018), and other lifestyle components, such as exercise, smoking, and sleep cycles (Biedermann et al., 2013; Claus et al., 2016; Das et al., 2018; Monda et al., 2017). In addition, research leading to the design of pre- and probiotics able to modulate the gut microbiome, the transplantation of fecal microbiota from healthy donors, or the use of phage therapy, among other strategies, has intensified in recent years (Zitvogel et al., 2018). This modulability of the gut microbiota opens the possibility of novel therapeutic approaches to prevent or treat diseases that are originated or influenced by alterations in the microbiota. Most clinical and pre-clinical studies assessing microbiome-modulation treatments suggest that these therapies may have an advantage over synthetic drugs, at least in terms of their potential side-effects (Juul et al., 2018; Lynch and Pedersen, 2016). Given the potential relationships of the gut microbiota with the origin and development of CRC discussed above, there is an increasing interest in exploring microbiome-related therapies for aiding in the prevention and treatment of this cancer. So far, strategies under development for CRC include fecal microbiota-transplantation (FMT), use of pre-/probiotics and diet, and phage therapy.

Another line of current research includes the use of probiotics. Probiotics help maintain healthy microbiota states by regulating pathogenic bacteria and immune system response, which in turn may reduce blood cholesterol, colitis, and prevent CRC (Raman et al., 2013). Different probiotics can inhibit CRC by different mechanisms: releasing detoxifying agents, anti-inflammatory factors, anti-cancer compounds (anti-angiogenesis, promoting anti-PDL1 drugs), and short-chain fatty acids (SCFA) that improve the intestinal barrier function (Lin et al., 2018). So far, several lines of evidence support a protective role of probiotics against CRC. For instance, it has been shown that the butyrate producing species Clostridium butyricum and Bacillus subtilis may have an anti-tumor effect in a CRC mouse model (Chen et al., 2015). Interestingly, another probiotic, Lactobacillus casei (strain BL23) not only inhibited CRC in a mouse model, but also, re-established the disrupted gut dysbiosis in CRC (Lenoir et al., 2016), whereas L. casei (strain ATCC 334) has been reported to produce a molecule: ferrichrome, which has been shown to inhibit progression of colon cancer by means of apoptosis mediated through the c-Jun N-terminal kinase pathway (Konishi et al., 2016). Another L. casei strain (variety rhamnosus, Lcr35) prevented induced intestinal mucositis in CRC-bearing mice (Chang et al., 2018). Recent clinical studies found out that Bifidobacterium probiotics could restore the equilibrium of gut dysbiosis and reduce small intestinal bacterial overgrowth induced in patients with CRC (Liang et al., 2016). Other authors suggest to focus on strategies that promote growth of positive bacteria to increase antitumor immunity, for instance, by use of prebiotics highly associated with diet. Also, the synergistic combination of prebiotics and probiotics in the form of dietary supplements or ingredients has been formulated, being called synbiotics. These include for instance OAT fiber/L. Plantarum and FOS/L. sporogens (Pandey et al., 2015). More recently, some authors highlighted the benefits of creating new generation probiotics for the treatment and prevention of CRC using genetic engineering techniques. For instance, increasing the potency of a well-documented probiotic species such as Bifidobacterium animalis subsp. Lactis (main source of butyrate: an anti-inflammatory and anti-tumor molecule), with the ability to produce mycosporin-like amino acids which exert prebiotic effects and is able to modulate host immunity by regulating cytokine production and the proliferation and differentiation of intestinal epithelial cells, macrophages and lymphocytes (Bozkurt et al., 2019). To date, 24 clinical trials of pro-/synbiotics therapies have been published and shown a favorable benefit for CRC patients (Ding et al., 2018). As previously mentioned, gut microbiome has a natural anticancer effect through the stimulation of the immune system. Therefore, it has been suggested that regulation of patients’ immune systems through the microbiota is one of the key mechanisms of tumor immunotherapy. It has been suggested that gut microbiota activate natural anticancer immune responses through three main mechanisms: microbial or tumoral antigens activate T-cell response which in turn may activate tumor-specific immune responses (Zitvogel et al., 2018). Among the species identified with known anti-tumoral response through activation of immune system (T-cells) there are: Bifidobacteria spp. (Matson et al., 2018; Sivan et al., 2015), Akkermansia muciniphilia (Routy et al., 2018), Enterococcus hirae (Daillère et al., 2016), Bacteroides spp (Vétizou et al., 2015). Alternative mechanisms include the activation of pattern recognition receptors that mediate pro-immune or anti-inflammatory effects, and, release of small metabolites that mediate systemic effects in the host (such as polyamines, vitamin and desaminotyrosine, among others (Ding et al., 2018)). Indeed, several studies showed a relation between the gut microbiota and the efficacy and toxicity of chemotherapies and immunotherapies (Ding et al., 2018; Iida et al., 2013; Pouncey et al., 2018). Taken altogether, these data highlight the interest of investigating the effect of new therapeutic strategies for the treatment of different types of cancer, including CRC, that benefit from the combined strategy of chemotherapy and/or immunotherapy with adjuvant treatments targeting the gut microbiota based on more personalized medicine, such as diet, probiotics and prebiotics. In this respect, recent studies have shown that oral therapy with bifidobacteria combined with PD-L1 inhibitors had a synergistic effect inhibiting almost completely the tumor growth, as compared with the individual effect of the drugs (Ding et al., 2018; Lee and Le, 2016; Routy et al., 2018).

As discussed in the previous sections, many studies have demonstrated the association between the microbiome composition and cancer, particularly CRC. Still the field faces many serious limitations that need to be considered. A recurrent limitation is that the non-bacterial components of the microbiome (i.e. fungi, protozoans, viruses) have been barely studied, mainly due to either their lower abundances or the technical difficulties in targeting them. In this regard, some promising fields which are growing rapidly are the study of the gut virome and mycobiome (i.e. the viral, and fungal components of the microbiome, respectively) in relation to CRC pathology. For example, a recent MWAS explored the virome community in fecal samples from CRC patients and control individuals using a WGS approach (Nakatsu et al., 2018). The authors reported a significant increase in the diversity of the bacteriophage virome in CRC patients and identified a set of viral markers (e.g. Orthobunyavirus, Inovirus and Tunalikevirus) that discriminated between CRC patients and healthy subjects and improved the performance of FOBT or FIT tests for detection of CRC. Gut virome dysbiosis was associated with CRC stage (early-vs late) and the prognosis of the disease, but it could not differentiate patients with colorectal adenomas from control individuals.

Another limitation, shared by many GWASs and MWASs is the potential lack of representativity of existing datasets, which are mostly focused on population of the “westernized” world. A recent study revealed the limited scope of existing data (Pasolli et al., 2019). By combining 50 publicly available datasets collectively representing 9500 WGS samples from various body sites, they more than doubled the current public repository of microbial genomes associated with the human microbiome. Many of these new genomes were found in “non-westernized” populations, hinting at our lack of a global understanding of the human microbiome. Another study supporting this idea made available the microbiome of an uncontacted Amerindian population in Brazil (Clemente et al., 2015). The authors suggest the need for extensive characterization of the function of the microbiome and resistome in remote “non-westernized" populations before globalization of modern practices affects potentially beneficial bacteria harbored in the human body. The study of the microbiome in more diverse populations would enable the generation of worldwide databases which include epidemiological and host-genetic information, for further comprehensive studies.

Despite the many limitations mentioned in the previous section, the good news is that many of them will be solved or attenuated by continuous improvements and cost reductions in sequencing technologies. Considering this, it is reasonable to predict that the near future will witness an increased focus on less covered taxonomic groups (i.e fungi, viruses) alongside bacteria, will provide increased resolution (i.e. at the species and strain level), and will additionally target less westernized populations (i.e African, Native American, etc). In addition improvements in study design, analytical methods, and increased awareness of interactions and confounding variables will help us to better disentangle relationships between microbes and origin and progression of diseases, including CRC. Similarly, we expect an increasing use, in combination with metagenomics, of complementary approaches such as metabolomics and metatranscriptomics, which will help us moving from descriptive studies to those able to derive mechanistic models of how microbes and hosts interact.

In this respect, it is also reasonable to predict a trend from generalized studies to those focusing on more personalized patterns. The analysis of longitudinal studies compiling multi-dimensional data about microbiome, diet, metabolic parameters and considering potential underlying disorders, will help to develop personalized diets and lifestyle recommendations to fine-tune the microbiota composition towards a healthy state. Also, we could hypothesize that once the composition of the microbiome of a given patient is characterized, he or she could benefit from personalized pre- and probiotics, or from a tailored phage therapy to restore a desired bacterial equilibrium (Paule et al., 2018). Furthermore, development of new culturing technologies may help to study for instance difficult-to-culture gut microorganisms in tissue engineering organoids (Williamson et al., 2018). This will constitute an ideal manipulable and fully-controlled platform to study mechanisms of host-pathogen interactions (Arnold et al., 2016). Moreover, it would pave the way for the testing and development of personalized therapies, drug screening, or pre-clinical studies for newly developed drugs.

This work was supported by grants from COST (European Cooperation in Science and Technology), COST Action CA17118; from the Spanish Ministry of Economy, Industry, and Competitiveness (MEIC) for the EMBL partnership, and grants ‘Centro de Excelencia Severo Ochoa’ SEV-2012-0208, and BFU2015-67107 cofounded by European Regional Development Fund; from the CERCA Programme/Generalitat de Catalunya; from the Catalan Research Agency (AGAUR) SGR857, and grants from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the grant agreement ERC-2016-724173, and the Marie Sklodowska-Curie grant agreement No H2020-MSCA-ITN-2014-642095; and from Instituto Nacional de Bioinformatica (INB, grant PT17/0009/0023 - ISCIII-SGEFI/ERDF).

None.

The following is the Supplementary data to this article:

