Digital Therapeutics Care Utilizing Genetic and Gut Microbiome Signals for the Management of Functional Gastrointestinal Disorders: Results From a Preliminary Retrospective Study



Diet and lifestyle-related illnesses including functional gastrointestinal disorders (FGIDs) and obesity are rapidly emerging health issues worldwide. Research has focused on addressing FGIDs via in-person cognitive-behavioral therapies, diet modulation and pharmaceutical intervention. Yet, there is paucity of research reporting on digital therapeutics care delivering weight loss and reduction of FGID symptom severity, and on modeling FGID status and symptom severity reduction including personalized genomic SNPs and gut microbiome signals. Our aim for this study was to assess how effective a digital therapeutics intervention personalized on genomic SNPs and gut microbiome signals was at reducing symptomatology of FGIDs on individuals that successfully lost body weight. We also aimed at modeling FGID status and FGID symptom severity reduction using demographics, genomic SNPs, and gut microbiome variables. This study sought to train a logistic regression model to differentiate the FGID status of subjects enrolled in a digital therapeutics care program using demographic, genetic, and baseline microbiome data. We also trained linear regression models to ascertain changes in FGID symptom severity of subjects at the time of achieving 5% or more of body weight loss compared to baseline. For this we utilized a cohort of 177 adults who reached 5% or more weight loss on the Digbi Health personalized digital care program, who were retrospectively surveyed about changes in symptom severity of their FGIDs and other comorbidities before and after the program. Gut microbiome taxa and demographics were the strongest predictors of FGID status. The digital therapeutics program implemented, reduced the summative severity of symptoms for 89.42% (93/104) of users who reported FGIDs. Reduction in summative FGID symptom severity and IBS symptom severity were best modeled by a mixture of genomic and microbiome predictors, whereas reduction in diarrhea and constipation symptom severity were best modeled by microbiome predictors only. This preliminary retrospective study generated diagnostic models for FGID status as well as therapeutic models for reduction of FGID symptom severity. Moreover, these therapeutic models generate testable hypotheses for associations of a number of biomarkers in the prognosis of FGIDs symptomatology.

Diseases of the gastrointestinal tract affect 60–70 million people in the United States (Everhart, 2008), and the total expenditure in 2015 for these illnesses was 135.9 billion dollars – greater than for other common diseases and likely to continue increasing (Peery et al., 2019). GI afflictions and altered bowel habits affect the quality of life, social functioning and can result in considerable loss of productivity (Buono et al., 2017; Peery et al., 2019). Thus, early identification of markers to diagnose functional bowel disorders and markers to personalize therapeutic approaches may help reduce healthcare costs and productivity losses and improve quality of life.

There is paucity of data looking at demographics, genomic SNPs and microbiome factors that are associated with successfully reducing symptomatology of FGIDs by means of weight loss. Knowledge of these factors could help tailor interventions for these individuals. Thus, our aim for this study was to assess how effective a digital therapeutics intervention personalized on genomic SNPs and gut microbiome signals were at reducing symptomatology of FGIDs on individuals that successfully lost 5% or more body weight. Additionally, we aimed at building statistical diagnostic models to describe the impact of demographics, genomic SNPs, and gut microbiome predictors on the likelihood of a subject presenting or not FGIDs, and then statistical therapeutic models describing reduction of summative symptom severity [irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), diarrhea, constipation, bloating, gas, and abdominal pain] as well as reduction of symptom severity in subjects with IBS, diarrhea, or constipation, based on the same predictors.

Functional gastrointestinal disorders are conditions that present as normal upon examination of the GI system but still result in poor GI motility – primarily with symptoms in the middle or lower gastrointestinal tract (American College of Gastroenterology, 2021). These disorders include irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), bloating, constipation, diarrhea, gassiness, and dyspepsia, among others (American College of Gastroenterology, 2021; International Foundation for Gastrointestinal Disorders, 2021). Although the pathophysiology of FGIDs is often complex due to their multifactorial nature, they are frequently encountered in both primary care and gastroenterology settings. FGIDs are thought to encompass combinations of dysregulation of the gut-brain interaction, altered gut microbiota, altered mucosal and immune function, gastrointestinal tract motility disturbance, and visceral hypersensitivity (Black et al., 2020; Sperber et al., 2021), and women appear to be afflicted at least twice as frequently as men (Chang, 2004).

Interestingly, it has been hypothesized that FGIDs and obesity may be mechanistically linked (Ho and Spiegel, 2008) and thus that symptom severity for all FGIDs just reviewed may be reduced by means of weight loss through digital therapeutics interventions.

Diet is considered an important trigger of gut-related symptoms. Poor nutrition, for example, consumption of highly processed and “fast” foods, has been implicated in FGID etiology (Shau et al., 2016; Schnabel et al., 2018). Conversely, a Mediterranean diet has been associated with a lower prevalence of FGIDs (Agakidis et al., 2019). A dietary therapeutics approach, for example a low-FODMAP diet in which rapidly fermentable carbohydrates that are poorly absorbed by the gut are eliminated or avoided as much as possible, is a typical dietary protocol for IBS patients (Henström and D’Amato, 2016; Wilder-Smith et al., 2017). Low-FODMAP diets have been associated with relieving other FGID symptoms, although functional dyspepsia seems least responsive to such a regimen (Marsh et al., 2016; Basnayake et al., 2019).

A randomized controlled trial by Johannesson et al. (2011) demonstrated that increased physical activity significantly reduced symptom severity in adult IBS patients, leading them to suggest that physical activity should be a primary treatment modality for IBS. Furthermore, a subset of the patients that continued increased physical activity 5 years later, continued to show improvements in IBS symptom severity, as well as in quality of life, fatigue, depression and anxiety in the long term (Johannesson et al., 2015). There is certainly a need for including diet and lifestyle changes in interventions to treat FGIDs.

Both gut microbiome and human genetics are likely contributors to FGID etiology (Henström and D’Amato, 2016; Wei et al., 2021). Evidence indicates a vital genetic component to FGIDs as demonstrated by prevalence within families and more substantial concordance between monozygotic versus dizygotic twins (Lembo et al., 2007; Saito et al., 2010). One evidence of a mutation in the SCN5A gene that regulates the sodium channel, linked to IBS, was replicated across two studies, and although the mutation is found in only approximately 2% of IBS patients, this finding indicates the influence genetics may have on IBS symptoms (Saito et al., 2009; Beyder et al., 2014). Functional constipation has also been associated with specific genes (Locke et al., 2006). However, much of the research around genome-wide association studies and FGIDs is hampered by small sample sizes (Henström and D’Amato, 2016), have not been independently replicated, or are otherwise not robust. Yet, the study of the genetics of FGIDs is rapidly evolving. What seems clear so far is that most IBS sufferers either share several common gene variants that each nominally contribute toward the overall risk of the disease, or, for a subset of sufferers, a few highly penetrant alleles are likely the significant risk factors. Given that IBS spans both complex polygenic conditions and rare single-gene forms, it evidences the need for different strategies to identify these genetic factors.

The gut microbiome is also extensively implicated in FGID and particularly IBS pathogenesis (Agnello et al., 2020; Carco et al., 2020). Both IBS and functional dyspepsia have been shown to arise in susceptible individuals following a course of acute onset gastroenteritis (Simrén et al., 2013). Recent studies have revealed dysbiosis of the gut microbiota in constipated patients compared with healthy controls, associated with suppressed intestinal motility by metabolites produced by intestinal bacteria (Zhao and Yu, 2016; Ohkusa et al., 2019). Other research has elucidated several mechanisms playing important roles in IBS. A dysregulated gut-brain axis has been adopted as a suitable model for IBS, and poor gut microbiome diversity may contribute to the onset and exacerbation of IBS symptoms. Dietary fiber appears to influence the gut microbiota, encouraging the growth of beneficial probiotics while preventing pathogenic and obesogenic bacteria from overgrowing (Chen et al., 2013; Zhao and Yu, 2016). Although clinical trials, which have attempted to characterize the gut microbiota in IBS, do not yet allow for a causal role to be inferred, they do confirm alterations in both community stability and diversity (Kennedy, 2014). This evidence suggests that genomic SNPs and microbiome taxa or functions may help build statistical diagnostic models of the likelihood of a subject presenting or not FGIDs, and therapeutic models describing reduction of FGID symptom severity.

Subjects were recruited from those who achieved 5% or more body weight loss when enrolled in the Digbi Health personalized digital care program (see Intervention below). Only those subjects who had retrospectively responded to questions about symptomatology of their FGIDs and other comorbidities at the start of the program and after successful weight loss were included in the study (Figure 1). The average number of days for participants in the program at the time of the survey was 84.26 days. The final cohort studied in this manuscript included 177 subjects with either genome SNP (n = 169) or baseline gut biome (n = 168) or both analyses performed. Subjects were divided into two groups for comparisons and models: those who reported any of 6 FGIDs (IBS, diarrhea, constipation, bloating, gassiness, and cramping) at baseline or at the time of survey (n = 104), and those who reported no FGIDs (n = 73).

Digbi Health is a next-generation, prescription-grade, digital therapeutics platform that analyzes genetics, gut bacteria, lifestyle, and demographics to build evidence-based individualized dietary and lifestyle plans using artificial intelligence (AI). It aims to help subjects reduce at least 5% of their baseline body weight and reduce weight-related inflammatory gut, musculoskeletal, cardiovascular, mental, and insulin-related comorbidities.

Based on analysis of genetic and gut microbiome profiles, as well as lifestyle vitals, a Digbi Health Wellness Report was generated for subjects. The results were evaluated with the participants one-on-one by a health coach over the course of 4 months at pre-determined weekly and bi-weekly intervals. To achieve its goal, the program sought to nudge participants toward making incremental lifestyle changes focused on reducing sugar consumption and timing meals to optimize insulin sensitivity, reducing systemic inflammation by identifying possibly inflammatory and anti-inflammatory nutrients, and increasing fiber diversity to improve gut health. Most importantly, these behavioral changes were implemented with the help of virtual health coaching and the app to ensure that these changes are habit forming, i.e., long-term sustainable.

Subjects self-collected buccal swab samples (Mawi Technologies iSwab DNA collection kit, Model no. iSWAB-DNA-1200) and fecal swab samples (Mawi Technologies iSWAB Microbiome collection kit, Model no. ISWAB-MBF-1200). Sample collection was completed by following standardized directions provided to all subjects in an instruction manual. DNA extraction, purification, and genotyping from buccal swab samples was performed using Affymetrix’s Direct to Consumer Array version 2.0 (“DTC”) on the Affymetrix GeneTitan platform at Akesogen Laboratories in Atlanta, GA, United States. Sample processing of baseline (pre-intervention) fecal samples was followed by 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing also performed at Akesogen Laboratories in Atlanta, GA, United States. DNA extraction was performed using Qiagen MagAttract Power Microbiome DNA Kit on an automated liquid handling DNA extraction instrument. The V3–V4 region of the 16S rRNA gene was amplified and sequenced on the Illumina MiSeq platform using 2 × 300 bp paired-end sequencing (Illumina, 2013). Sequence reads were demultiplexed, and Amplicon Sequence Variants (ASVs) generated using DADA2 in QIIME2 (version 2020.8) (Bolyen et al., 2019). We trimmed primers off the reads and low-quality bases (Q < 30). Taxonomic annotation was performed using the Naive Bayes classifier against the 99% non-redundant Silva database (Silva 138 Reference database, 2021). We excluded hits to Mitochondria, Chloroplast, Eukaryota, and unassigned taxa at the phylum level.

Survey data from 177 respondents (with either genome SNP or gut biome data) over the course of their successful weight loss journey in the Digbi Health personalized digital care program were analyzed retrospectively. Variables for models included demographic (gender, age, weight, and BMI during gut microbiome sample collection and weight loss achieved during the program), genomic SNPs, and baseline gut microbiome data. We used the Wilcoxon sum rank/signed-rank test or Kendall correlation test, as appropriate, to assess: (a) the change in the severity of either of the FGID symptoms and a summative severity change and (b) the effect of variables on the change in severity. Significance results were adjusted for multiple comparisons using the false discovery rate (FDR) correction method for the microbiome data.

The 16 SNP predictors, associated with lactose intolerance, gluten sensitivity, milk and peanut allergies, caffeine metabolism, and inflammatory markers (TNF and IL10), were from Digbi Health curated panels used for personalized interventions for subjects (Supplementary Table 1). Each SNP value was encoded as the number of risk alleles (0, 1, or 2) for each subject.

Bacterial genera abundances were analyzed for 168 survey respondents with baseline gut microbiome data available, using Qiime2 (Bolyen et al., 2019), qiime2R (Jordan E Bisanz, 2018), and phyloseq (McMurdie and Holmes, 2013). The following microbial features were filtered out from downstream analysis: (a) ASVs not classified at the phylum level, (b) phyla that had <25 ASVs (Elusimicrobiota, Nanoarchaeota, Bdellovibrionota, WPS-2), (c) uncultured and Incertae Sedis taxa, (d) genera that had <30 reads in at least 15% of samples, and (e) genera for which >25% of samples had zero read count. In total, 105 genera were kept in downstream analysis. The abundance of these bacterial genera was transformed to centered log-ratio (CLR) using the zCompositions package (Palarea-Albaladejo and Martín-Fernández, 2015) after first replacing zeros with pseudo counts based on a Bayesian-multiplicative replacement from the zCompositions package (Fernandes et al., 2014). Permutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) was performed on the gut microbiome Aitchison distance matrix, using gender, BMI (closest to date of gut biome sampling), and FGID status as variables using the CLR transformed abundances. Additionally, the read counts after zero replacement were transformed using additive log-ratio (ALR) to be utilized in downstream model statistics (see below) (Friedman et al., 2010; Gloor et al., 2017; Quinn et al., 2019).

Linear and logistic regression models were built, and visualizations generated using the R stats, ggplot2, pscl, car, pROC, Metrics, caret, glmnet, tidyverse, lubridate, imputeTS, and ggpubr packages. In order to utilize lasso regression for variable selection before fitting linear and logistic models, SNPs with >10% missing values were removed, then remaining missing SNPs were imputed to their most frequent value (mode). This resulted in the removal of rs4713586 gluten sensitivity SNP from both reduction in summative symptom severity and reduction in constipation symptom severity models. In order to avoid poor performance in regression models, variables with Pearson correlation to another variable of ≥80% were removed. This excluded two SNPs from all regression models that incorporated DNA: rs182549 of the lactose persistence haplotype was removed while the more highly cited correlated (Pearson correlation, r = 0.99) haplotype SNP, rs4988235, was retained. Additionally, IL10 SNP rs3024496 was removed as being highly correlated (Pearson correlation, r = −0.95) with rs1800896, another IL10 SNP, which was preferentially retained as having a higher risk in the population (SNPedia database, 2021).

For those respondents who self-reported any of the 6 FGIDs, change in symptom severity was analyzed with respect to their demographic, genome SNPs, and baseline gut microbiome data. 104 survey respondents rated the severity of their FGID symptoms on a scale of 1–5. A linear regression model was fit to describe the change in summative symptom severity as a function of demographic and genomic variables (D + G model). As above, this model was compared with two additional models: demographic plus microbial predictors (D + M model) and demographic, genomic, plus microbial predictors (D + G + M model). Lasso regression was employed as above for variable selection, followed by the use of the step function. Additionally, changes in IBS, diarrhea and constipation symptom severity were modeled for those subsets of participants who reported them, using lasso with threefold cross-validation and linear regression as above with D + G, D + M, and D + G + M predictors.

E&I Review Services, an independent institutional review board, reviewed and approved IRB Study #18053 on 05/22/2018. Additionally, IRB Study #21141 was determined to be exempt from E&I Review Services on 08/06/2021. Research material derived from human participants included self-collected buccal and fecal swabs. Informed consent was obtained electronically from study participants.

In total, 177 subjects who were successful at losing 5% or more body weight and had genetic and/or gut biome data while enrolled in the Digbi Health program were surveyed to assess any changes in the symptomatology of their FGIDs (Figure 1). We compared baseline characteristics of those who reported FGIDs vs. those who did not. The distributions of gender, age, and BMI are seen in Table 1. In this dataset, a significant difference was found in gender (X21 = 8.39, P = 0.004) and initial BMI (Wilcoxon sum rank test, P = 0.009), between those who reported FGID and those who did not, but no significant difference was found in age (Wilcoxon sum rank test, P = 0.60), number of individuals consuming alcohol or using recreational drugs such as cannabinoids and nicotinoids (including tobacco smoking) (X21 = 2.52, P = 0.112 and X21 = 0.28, P = 0.595, respectively). Subsequently, we investigated the effect of gender, BMI, and FGID status on the beta diversity of the baseline gut microbiome of subjects. The PERMANOVA analysis (Supplementary Table 2) shows that gender had a significant effect on the beta diversity (R2 = 0.012, P = 0.030), whereas BMI (R2 = 0.007, P = 0.279) and FGID status (R2 = 0.005, P = 0.532) did not.

aValues in italics are significant (P = < 0.05).

The SNP values were not significantly different (Welch’s two-sample t-tests, results not shown) between respondents with FGID and those without. Logistic regression modeled the associations of demographic, genome SNP, and baseline gut microbiome variables with FGID status in this cohort (Tables 2–4), fitting separate average effect size for each predictor while controlling for all other model variables. The D + G model described females in this cohort as 3.26 times more likely than males to suffer FGID while controlling for the genomic predictors in the model (Table 2), and each risk allele of the rs2187668 gene was associated with a 2.93 times greater likelihood of being an FGID sufferer. Similarly, risk alleles for rs2472297 and rs9275596 were associated with a lowered likelihood of FGID – conferring 0.45 and 0.56 times likelihood of being an FGID sufferer.

McFadden pseudo R2: 0.089, OR, odds ratio.

McFadden pseudo R2: 0.220, OR, odds ratio.

In a third logistic model studying the associations of D + G + M variables together on the likelihood of a subject having FGID status (Table 4), no SNPs had a significant association with FGID risk. Variables in Tables 3,
4 are identical, with just slight variations in odd ratios. Not surprisingly, pseudo R2 values from the D + M model (0.220) and the D + G + M model (0.227) were very similar, but most importantly, improved from that of the D + G model (0.089).

McFadden pseudo R2: 0.227, OR, odds ratio.

The proportion of subjects who experienced at least one point improvement in symptom severity ranged from 75.32% (77/104) for constipation to 90.63% (96/104) for bloating (Figure 2). Improvement in summative severity across the 6 FGIDs was seen by 89.42% of respondents (93/104), with an average summative reduction of 51.17% (Wilcoxon signed-rank test, P = <0.001). The improvement in FGID symptomatology over the course of the digital therapeutics intervention (percent summative reduction) was not correlated with percent weight loss (Kendall = 0.12, P = 0.91), age (Kendall = −0.66, P = 0.51), or gender (Wilcoxon sum rank, P = 0.809). Individually, we noted an average 45.93% reduction in the severity of IBS (Wilcoxon signed-rank, P = <0.001), 61.01% average reduction in the severity of bloating (Wilcoxon signed-rank test, P = <0.001), 38.55% average reduction in the severity of gassiness (Wilcoxon signed-rank, P =< 0.001), 61.69% average reduction in the severity of cramping/belly pain (Wilcoxon signed-rank, P = <0.001), 37.54% average reduction in the severity of constipation (Wilcoxon signed-rank, P = <0.001) and a 48.97% average reduction in the severity of diarrhea (Wilcoxon signed-rank, P = <0.001).

Supplementary Tables 3, 4 and Table 5 present linear D + G, D + M, and D + G + M models of reduction in summative FGID symptom severity, respectively. In the D + G model (Supplementary Table 3), each additional risk allele for SNPs rs4639334 and rs7775228 was associated with an increase in self-reported summative FGID symptom severity. In the linear D + M model (Supplementary Table 4), gut microbial genera Candidatus Soleaferrea, Eubacterium hallii group, Alistipes, and Desulfovibrio were all associated with an increase in self-reported summative FGID symptom severity. Microbial genera Ruminococcus torques group, Intestinimonas, unclassified genus GCA-900066575 of Lachnospiraceae family, and Megasphaera were all associated with a self-reported reduction in summative FBD symptom severity. In the linear D + G + M model (Table 5), risk alleles of the same two SNPs identified (Supplementary Table 3) were again associated with an increase in self-reported summative FGID symptom severity. Similarly, gut microbial genera Desulfovibrio, Candidatus Soleaferrea, and Eubacterium ventriosum group were associated with self-reported increase in summative FGID symptom severity. Microbial genera Megasphaera, unclassified genus CAG-352 of Ruminococcaceae family, Ruminococcus torques group, Streptococcus, and Intestinimonas were all associated with self-reported reduction in summative FGID symptom severity. Adjusted R2 values were 0.124 for the D + G model, 0.318 for the D + M model, and 0.442 for the D + G + M model. This indicates that the fit of the models improved when adding microbiome predictors, with the best fit model for a reduction in summative FGID symptom severity containing a mixture of genomic SNP and microbiome variables.

Adjusted R2: 0.442.

aValues in italics are significant (P = <0.05).

Tables 6–8 present linear D + G + M models for reduction of symptom severity for IBS, constipation, and diarrhea, respectively. Supplementary Tables 5, 7, and 9, present linear D + G models, and Supplementary Tables 6, 8, and 10, present linear D + M models for reduction of symptom severity for IBS, constipation, and diarrhea, respectively. Adjusted R2 values for the reduction in IBS symptom severity models were 0.130 for the D + G model, 0.432 for the D + M model, and 0.487 for the D + G + M model. Adjusted R2 values for the reduction in constipation symptom severity models were 0.038 for the D + G model, 0.413 for the D + M model, and 0.389 for the D + G + M model. Adjusted R2 values for the reduction in diarrhea symptom severity models were 0.090 for the D + G model, 0.610 for the D + M model and 0.528 for the D + G + M model. This shows that genomic SNP models based on the variables selected for this study performed relatively poorly and that the inclusion of microbiome variables constantly improved the fit of the models. Interestingly, the D + G + M was the best fit model for IBS symptom reduction, whereas, for constipation and diarrhea symptom reduction, the D + M models were the best fit.

Adjusted R2: 0.487.

aValues in italics are significant (P = <0.05).

Looking at the best fit models, Unclassified genus Clostridia UCG-014, Escherichia-Shigella, and Megasphaera were associated with reduction of IBS symptom severity, whereas risk alleles of rs7775228 (gluten sensitivity) and genera Fusicantenibacter and Moryella were associated with an increase. For constipation, there were only microbial taxa in the D + M model: Parabacteroides, Unclassified genus of Anaerovoracaceae Family XIII AD3011 group, Lachnospira and Terrisporobacter were associated with a reduction in symptom severity, whereas Eubacterium coprostanoligenes group was associated with an increase. For diarrhea change in symptom severity, like for constipation, only microbial taxa were found significant in the D + M model: genera Intestinimonas, Prevotella, Lactobacillus, and Phascolarctobacterium were associated with a reduction in symptom severity, while Unclassified genus UCG-009 of the Butyricicoccaceae family was associated with an increase.

Out of 177 subjects enrolled in this study who successfully lost 5% or more body weight through a digital therapeutics program, 104 presented one or more FGIDs. These FGID sufferers were significantly different from the non-FGID group in terms of gender and BMI at the time of sampling (Table 1). Additionally, gender was significantly associated with the composition of baseline gut microbiome samples in these subjects (Supplementary Table 2). Logistic regression models trained to differentiate FGID status confirmed that the female gender was associated with a higher prevalence of FGID as seen in the logistic regression D + G model, where females were 3.26 times more likely to be FGID sufferers than males while holding genomic predictors constant (Table 2). This is in accordance with what has been reported elsewhere (Narayanan et al., 2021). Additionally, when baseline microbiome was added to the model (D + G + M model), females were on average 2.26 times more likely to suffer from FGID than males while holding constant both genomic and microbial predictors (Table 4). Thus, some of the gender association in the D + G model is explained by microbiome variables in the D + G + M model, reinforcing the role of gender in shaping the baseline gut microbiome of subjects (Kim et al., 2020).

Adjusted R2: 0.389.

aValues in italics are significant (P = <0.05).

Ruminococcus torques group appears associated with FGID status in the D + G + M logistic model of Table 4 and associated with a reduction in summative FGID symptom severity in the D + G + M model of Table 5. Despite not being the best fit model, this taxon also was associated with a reduction of diarrhea symptom severity in the linear D + G + M model of Table 8. Different Ruminococcus torques subgroups have been associated in the literature with IBS-D, IBS-M, and Crohn’s disease subjects (Lyra et al., 2009). Additionally, genus Terrisporobacter, associated with inflammation and gut dysbiosis (Lee et al., 2020), was associated with FGID status in the D + G + M logistic model (Table 4). Collectively, these findings demonstrate the potential of gut microbial profiling not only for predicting current gastrointestinal health but also prognosis in FGID related symptoms as a response to personalized dietary intervention.

Adjusted R2: 0.528.

aValues in italics are significant (P = <0.05).

This study has some limitations that are important to note. First, the descriptive modeling exercise performed in this work is the best fit for the cohort analyzed here and is not intended to infer for the larger population. In particular, we aimed to investigate which demographic, genomic, and baseline microbiome predictors improved the fit of the models, along with the magnitude and direction of their association with FGID status or symptom prognosis. Second, whereas we used all microbiome taxa present in the baseline gut microbiome samples (n = 105 after the filters imposed), for genomic SNPs, we selected only markers that are used to inform diet and lifestyle interventions of subjects under the Digbi Health program, specifically those associated with intolerances and allergies. So, the fact that microbiome markers almost always outperformed genomic SNP markers may be due to the markedly different dataset sizes. Third, inclusion criteria in this study did not consider factors known to influence the microbiome composition (probiotic or antibiotic usage) or other comorbidities (musculoskeletal pain, skin conditions, hypothyroidism, diabetes, cholesterol, hypertension, and mental health) that may confound the results presented. Fourth, the survey instrument utilized was an ad hoc questionnaire that asked participants to rate their symptom severity for different FGIDs on a scale of 1–5 and was not a validated clinical instrument. The survey was performed retrospectively for both time points after subjects successfully achieved 5% or more body weight loss. And fifth, the findings from this study are derived from a weight loss cohort and thus may be only reflective of the population with FGID that is overweight or obese, or that may benefit from weight loss.

Despite the above limitations, the digital therapeutics care provided to subjects, informed by genetic and baseline gut microbiome and their interaction with participant’s lifestyle, effectively reduced symptom severity of FGIDs, including IBS, diarrhea, and constipation. One of our earlier studies supported the use of this care as a therapy for insulin resistance (Ricchetti et al., 2020), empowering subjects to manage their inflammation by awareness of the impact of processed foods and foods to which they are sensitive as per their genomic SNPs and gut microbiome results. Dietary fiber coaching also resulted in increased vegetable diversity and quantity. Whereas further research is required to better understand the effect of different components of the care (e.g., fiber types) on modulating the microbial taxa and genomic SNPs identified in the models and their corresponding effect on reduction of FGIDs symptom severity, this preliminary retrospective study generates testable hypotheses for associations of several biomarkers with FGID status and with the prognosis of FGID symptomatology. This study thus provides proof of concept on how a combined genetic and gut microbiome-based dietary intervention can yield biomarkers from human studies. Moreover, the methods presented add to the existing set of tools (e.g., Polster et al., 2021) that can be readily implemented to understand the role that genetics and gut microbiome play on disease etiology. Additionally, FGID and overweight or obesity are common comorbidities, yet concomitant reduction of body weight and reduction of FGID symptom severity is an endpoint which has been poorly studied but it is of high interest to clinicians and patients.

The datasets presented in this study can be found in online repositories. The names of the repository/repositories and accession number(s) can be found below: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/PRJNA760529.

The studies involving human participants were reviewed and approved by Ethical and Independent Review Services (E&I). The patients/participants provided their written informed consent to participate in this study.

SK: formal analysis, methodology, software, visualization, writing – original draft, and writing – review and editing. PF-L: conceptualization, data curation, formal analysis, methodology, software, validation, visualization, writing – original draft, and writing – review and editing. DK: data curation, formal analysis, methodology, software, visualization, and writing – original draft. TU and KM: data curation and software. CI and RR: writing – original draft and writing – review and editing. SS-R and DA: project administration, writing – original draft, and writing – review and editing. JU: software and writing- reviewing. PD: writing – review and editing. RS: conceptualization, funding acquisition, and writing – review and editing. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.

All authors except JU and PD were employees of Digbi Health. JU did contractual work for Digbi Health. PD was an advisor to Digbi Health. The authors declare that this study received funding from Digbi Health. The funder Digbi Health was not involved in the study design, collection, analysis, interpretation of data, the writing of this article, or the decision to submit it for publication. SK, DA, and RS had a patent-pending concerning this work: US Application No. 63/246,348, Methods and systems for multi-omic interventions as diagnostics for personalized care of functional gastrointestinal disorders. The digital therapeutics program provided to study participants in this work is a commercially available program developed and marketed by Digbi Health.

All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

This study was funded by Digbi Health, Mountain View, CA, United States. There were no additional external funding sources.

The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fmicb.2022.826916/full#supplementary-material

