Relating Gut Microbiome and Its Modulating Factors to Immunotherapy in Solid Tumors: A Systematic Review



Background: Gut microbiome is proved to affect the activity of immunotherapy in certain tumors. However, little is known if there is universal impact on both the treatment response and adverse effects (AEs) of immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) across multiple solid tumors, and whether such impact can be modulated by common gut microbiome modifiers, such as antibiotics and diet.

Conclusions: Gut microbiome may serve as a novel modifiable biomarker for both the treatment response and AEs of ICIs across various solid tumors. Further study is needed to understand the underlying mechanism, minimize the negative impact of antibiotics on ICIs, and gain insight regarding the role of diet so that this important lifestyle factor can be harnessed to improve the therapeutic outcomes of cancer immunotherapy partly through its impact on gut microbiome.

Immunotherapy such as using immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) targeting PD-1/L1 and CTLA-4 has revolutionized our management of various cancer types including lung cancer (1, 2). However, only a subset of patients derive the benefit, which can be further limited by AEs especially immune-related AEs (irAEs) (3). The gut microbiome, due to its close interaction with immune system, has gained increasing attention for its potential role in cancer immunotherapy (4, 5). This is supported by several preclinical models (6, 7), as well as correlative studies at the human level including ours (8). However, several key questions remain to be addressed: (1) whether there is shared feature of gut microbiome that links to ICI response and AEs across various solid tumors; (2) whether antibiotics can affect cancer immunotherapy. This is important considering there are controversial results (6, 9–11), and antibiotic is such an inevitable gut microbiome modifier in the clinical setting; (3) whether diet, as one of the most important lifestyle factors, will have impact on cancer immunotherapy. We aim to investigate existing evidence that could help address these questions at the human level using a systematic review.

This systematic review focused on bacterial gut microbiome. Different search keywords and their combination were used to extract relevant clinical studies from PubMed to address each proposed question. This was followed by a stringent manual selection to include only relevant studies, including those identified in the references. To explore the relationship between gut microbiome and clinical outcomes from ICIs, we used search keywords “gut microbiome” AND “cancer” AND “immunotherapy.” To determine the impact of antibiotics on ICIs, we used keywords “antibiotics” AND “immunotherapy” AND “microbiome” AND “cancer.” To investigate the impact of diet on gut microbiome, we used “diet” AND “gut microbiome” AND “healthy adult” with series of keyword refinements as detailed below. Only original clinical studies in human subjects written in English, with the publishing date before Apr 1st, 2020 (Supplementary Table 1) were included in this review to draw meaningful conclusion at the human level. Various key information such as gut microbiome data, clinical outcome (e.g., therapeutic response and AEs), timing and duration of antibiotic use, and diet were extracted and used to address separate but coherent questions with details below. Descriptive statistics was used to summarize the study findings. Fisher's test was used for the comparisons between 2 groups, and a P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

Using search keywords “gut microbiome” AND “cancer” AND “immunotherapy,” a total of 240 articles were retrieved from PubMed. With stringent manual screening and inclusion of two additional studies from the references, a total of 12 clinical studies were identified that meet our criteria to study the role of gut microbiome in cancer immunotherapy (Figure 1). The vast majority are prospective studies. Among them, 10 studies (6, 9, 12–19) had response/efficacy data and three studies (17, 20, 21) had AEs data using ICI therapy, and one study had both (17). Of note, the documented AEs in that three studies (17, 20, 21) were virtually all irAEs. The types of solid tumor involved include melanoma, non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), small cell lung cancer (SCLC), renal cell carcinoma (RCC) and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). There were 433 cancer patients (age range, 21-92 years-old) from four countries: USA (four studies), France (three studies), China (two studies), and Japan (one study) included in studies relevant to therapeutic response/efficacy; and 86 subjects (age range, 28-85 years-old) from the countries of USA, France and China included in studies relevant to the AEs of ICI treatment.

However, regarding the potential link of gut microbiome to the AEs from ICIs, we noticed that the enrichment of Firmicutes interestingly correlated to higher incidence of AEs (essentially all irAEs, colored in red). This is reminiscent of clinical observations that patients who develop ICI AEs seem to have better treatment response (22). In contrast, Bacteroidetes, which is believed to be associated with less response, also correlated to less AEs (labeled in green, Figure 3).

Noticing the association of gut microbiome with ICI treatment response, we questioned if antibiotics, as potent modifiers of gut microbiota, could potentially affect the treatment response from ICIs. Using search keywords “antibiotics” AND “immunotherapy” AND “microbiome” AND “cancer,” we identified 17 eligible studies (Supplementary Figure 1) including two prospective (23, 24) and 15 retrospective studies (9–11, 25–36). There were in total 2,593 participants with various solid tumors including lung cancer, melanoma, RCC, HCC, colorectal cancer, head and neck cancer, bladder cancer, gastric cancer, esophageal cancer, cervical cancer, and others. Among them, 29.9% (775) of them received antibiotics treatment, 15 out of 17 received broad-spectrum antibiotics while two did not report the types of antibiotics.

In order to validate this hypothesis, we isolated the effect of the timing and duration of antibiotic exposure from all studies. Supplementary Figure 3 showed individual studies that exhibited either negative (labeled with black bars) or no association (labeled in gray bars) with ICI treatment. Among them, two studies (23, 24) were prospective (labeled with *). Across all studies, it clearly demonstrated that only antibiotic exposure within 2 months prior to the initiation of ICIs universally exhibited negative impact on treatment response of ICIs (Figures 4B,C), except one study (10) (Supplementary Figure 3).

Using search keywords “diet” or “nutrition,” “microbiome,” “cancer” and “immunotherapy,” and their combinations, we were not able to extract sufficient number of clinical studies that directly link diet to cancer immunotherapy, including those published in abstract format (37), which is suggestive of an unmet need in this area. Since gut microbiome impacts cancer immunotherapy, we then investigated whether diet will have effect on gut microbiome that could potentially affect cancer immunotherapy. Based on Figure 2 and published data, here we define “ICI-favoring” diet as those that enrich Firmicutes or Verrucomicrobia, or reduce the abundance of Proteobacteria, or increase α diversity in gut microbiota, and the “ICI-unfavoring” diet as those that have the opposite effects.

Figure 5A in each category, depicts increase or decrease in relative abundance of Firmicutes or Verrucomicrobia or Proteobacteria or α diversity with demonstration of corresponding plant-based diet (labeled as solid dot) and animal-based diet (labeled as hollow circle), respectively. Using above defined “ICI-favoring” and “ICI-unfavoring” criteria, we found that three animal-based diet studies were “ICI-unfavoring” and none were “ICI-favoring.” Among the 12 plant-based diet studies, we found five were “ICI-favoring” and 1 was “ICI-unfavoring.” In summary, plant-based diet is found to be significantly associated with “ICI-favoring” gut microbiome, whereas animal-based diet is the opposite (Figure 5B, p = 0.0476). Diet studies that have mixed association, for example a reduced abundance in both the Firmicutes and Proteobacteria as shown in study n (51) in Figure 5A, were not included in the statistical analysis. We have also looked into various dietary patterns such as Mediterranean diet, Western diet, high-fiber diet, etc., however we were able to identify only very few relevant studies for us to draw meaningful conclusions.

Despite the great success of cancer immunotherapy using ICIs, their therapeutic benefits are limited by either various resistance mechanisms (54) or irAEs (3). Gut microbiome, due to its proven role in cancer development and immune regulation, has gained increasing expectation as a potential armamentarium to further improve cancer immunotherapy. It is speculated that gut microbiota could potentially affect the efficacy of ICIs through the modulation of immune checkpoints expression; dendritic cell function; lymphocyte homing, circulation and recruitment; as well as the production of critical metabolites such as short chain fatty acids (SCFA), etc. (55, 56). Furthermore, gut microbiota could influence host systemic immunity via cytokine secretion, primed lymphocyte circulation and antigen cross-reactivation induced tissue targeting (56). In consistent with this, we have recently shown that certain gut microbiota correlates significantly to ICI response in NSCLC patients (8), which echoes the findings from other groups (9, 15, 16), as well as preclinical mouse models (7). More importantly, a very recent phase 1 trial has demonstrated fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) promoted response in ICI-refractory melanoma patients, which was associated with favorable changes in both the gut and tumor microenvironment (57). However, to better harness gut microbiome for clinical applicability, we need to understand whether there is shared gut microbiome feature across various solid tumors treated with ICIs, and whether common gut microbiome modifiers could have impact on ICI therapy.

This study is based on systematic literature review, and therefore it is retrospective in nature. In addition, it is subject to selection bias, for example only original articles in English that are published on PubMed were used.

There is shared feature of gut microbiome that correlates with the outcome of immunotherapy across various solid tumors, which can be potentially affected by antibiotics and diet. Further mechanistic studies are warranted to clarify their role to better harness gut microbiome for the improvement of cancer immunotherapy.

The raw data supporting the conclusions of this article will be made available by the authors, without undue reservation.

JZ conceived and designed the study, analyzed the data, guided essay writing, and provided critical revisions for this manuscript. CheH conducted database searches, extracted and analyzed the data, drew the figures, and provided the initial draft and prepared the manuscript. ML, BL, and HZ contributed to vital assistance in analyzing data and generating the figures. QD, XF, KM, ChaH, PN, FW, WS, SU, and CZ provided the consultation and critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The handling editor declared a past co-authorship with one of the authors JZ.

Funding. This work was supported by the Affiliated Hospital of Southwest Medical University Doctoral Research Initiation Fund (CheH) (No.19046), the University of Kansas Medical Center Start-up Funds (JZ), the Play with a Pro Lung Cancer Research Fund and the Pilot Grant for Cancer Research of the University of Kansas Cancer Center (JZ).

The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fonc.2021.642110/full#supplementary-material

