A Review of Traumatic Brain Injury and the Gut Microbiome: Insights into Novel Mechanisms of Secondary Brain Injury and Promising Targets for Neuroprotection

The gut microbiome and its role in health and disease have recently been major focus areas of research. In this review, we summarize the different ways in which the gut microbiome interacts with the rest of the body, with focus areas on its relationships with immunity, the brain, and injury. The gut–brain axis, a communication network linking together the central and enteric nervous systems, represents a key bidirectional pathway with feed-forward and feedback mechanisms. The gut microbiota has a central role in this pathway and is significantly altered following injury, leading to a pro-inflammatory state within the central nervous system (CNS). Herein, we examine traumatic brain injury (TBI) in relation to this axis and explore potential interventions, which may serve as targets for improving clinical outcomes and preventing secondary brain injury.

Recent estimates of the magnitude of traumatic brain injury (TBI) suggest that each year, approximately 1.7 million people sustain a head injury in the United States [1]. TBI is the leading cause of death under the age 45 in the Western World and is a contributing factor in 30.5% of all injury-related deaths that occur in the United States, with direct medical expenditures and indirect costs attributable to TBI upwards of $60 billion in the year 2000 [2].

Given the influence of the composition of the gut microbiome on the homeostasis of the CNS, the purpose of this manuscript is to review the literature published on the gut microbiome and its importance in immunity and injury. Furthermore, we discuss the dynamic relationship between the brain-gut axis and brain injury, specifically TBI. By developing an understanding of the role that the brain-gut axis has in potentiating inflammation or protecting against secondary injury, we can enhance patient care, identify therapeutic targets for neuroprotection, reduce morbidity, and improve outcomes.

Composed of trillions of bacteria, the gut microbiome is crucial to human immunity [15]. The gastrointestinal tract consists of about 1013–1014 microorganisms from over 1000 different species, outnumbering the cells in our bodies. The bacterial phyla Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes primarily define the microbiome, with Proteobacteria, Actinobacteria, Fusobacteria, and Verrucomicrobia in lesser prevalence [16]. The composition of the microbiome varies from person to person, with contributing factors including age, diet, behavior, environment, and genetics [17].

Numerous studies involving mouse models have demonstrated a key role of TLRs in the immune system of the gastrointestinal tract [26,27,28,29]. Intestinal epithelial cells express pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) including TLRs [22]. Bacteria possess pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) that can interact with PRRs and induce the innate immune response. Commensal components are recognized by TLRs, and impairment in the interaction between commensal organisms and TLRs has been shown to promote chronic inflammation and tissue damage [20]. TLR2 and TLR5 are regulated by microbiota in the colon. Epithelial cells in germ-free mice have decreased TLR expression, suggesting that the microbiome is involved in PRR expression [25]. The interaction between MyD88, a protein involved in many inflammatory pathways, inclusive of IL-1 and TLR signaling pathways in the innate immune system, and TLRs in gut T cells coordinates germinal center responses including T follicular helper (TFH) cell, and thus IgA secretion and B cell development. TFH development is deficient in germ-free mice but restored by feeding TLR2 agonists [23,30]. Given the prominent role of the gut and its microbiome in relationship with the immune system, it is unsurprising that distortion of microbial homeostasis has been associated with many diseases and conditions. Multiple clinical and pre-clinical studies have linked the gut microbiome to disorders such as obesity, demyelinating disease, and cardiovascular disease [31,32,33,34,35,36,37]. Many inflammatory diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis and inflammatory bowel disease have also been correlated with an altered gut microbiome [38,39,40]. For instance, a recent clinical study has revealed that patients suffering from psoriasis, an inflammatory autoimmune condition, display a very different gut microbiome compared to healthy individuals—every psoriatic patient in this study had an increase in Faecalibacterium and a decrease in Bacteroidetes [41]. Several clinical studies have even shown that changes in the gut microbiota participate in the development of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease and type 1 diabetes [32,42,43,44]. In light of our developing understanding of the role of the gastrointestinal microbiota in an array of inflammatory conditions and diseases, there is abundant opportunity for future therapies to target the gut microbiome.

Changes to the gastrointestinal environment from trauma, burns, sepsis, and surgical injuries trigger bacteria dysbiosis in the gut, which leads to the development of a systemic inflammatory response [45]. This type of response may be due to a catecholamine surge, which in turn leads to problems on the local level. Several groups have found that autonomic nervous system dysregulation and stress response after stroke mediate the relationship between acute brain injury and remote organ dysfunction [46].

Intestinal ischemia-reperfusion has also been implicated in the pathophysiology of changes to the gut microbiome. Damage to the epithelial barrier of the colon directly follows intestinal ischemia-reperfusion and leads to dysbiosis of the gut microbiome. Escherichia coli, Prevotella oralis, and Lactobacilli were found to flourish and induce gut inflammation among other detrimental effects. In particular, Escherichia coli appear to play a central role by effecting changes in tight junction proteins in the intestinal epithelial barrier [61]. These pathophysiologic changes in the gut microbiome then, through various communication pathways such as the brain-gut axis, feed back to the brain and result in changes in the CNS.

The brain-gut axis (BGA), also referred to as the gut-brain axis, is a communication network that links together the CNS and the enteric nervous system (ENS) [21]. This axis functions in a bidirectional manner; thus, each component of the network can influence the other. The downstream communication from the brain to the gut involves vagal pathways that innervate the ENS, which is critical for the function of the GI tract [62,63,64]. From a gut-to-brain viewpoint, numerous factors such as gut lipopolysaccharides, cytokines, neuropeptides, and protein messengers connect the gastrointestinal tract to the brain [65].

TBI also causes increased intestinal permeability secondary to decreased expression of intestinal tight junction proteins ZO-1 and occludin [3]. The consequent disruption of the anatomic and functional integrity of the gut can result in systemic inflammation, bacterial translocation, and sepsis. In addition, Houlden et al. showed that TBI affects the composition of gut microbiota in the caecum and drew a link between TBI severity and changes in the microbiome, specifically, in the composition of Bacteroidetes, Porphyromonadaceae, Firmicutes, and Proteobacteria. The authors hypothesized that these observations may be a result of stress response due to tissue injury, as well as secondary to alterations in brain function. Additionally, these changes also correlated with increased levels of noradrenaline, a known factor in the induction of microbiome dysbiosis [12]. Findings from our laboratory demonstrated that the gut microbiome is altered within two hours following a moderate TBI in rats, with varying trends among the phylogenetic families and loss of species diversity in the absence of other injury patterns or therapeutic intervention. Phylogenetic changes and dysbiosis persisted throughout 7 days. A decrease in relative abundance in traditionally beneficial bacteria was observed, specifically in the families Lachnospiraceae, Mogibacteriaceae, and Ruminococcaceae within the phylum Firmicutes. Conversely, families that contain pathogenic bacteria including Bacteroidaceae in the phylum Bacteroidetes, and Enterobacteriaceae and Pseudomonadaceae in the phylum Proteobacteria were increased. Many of the microbial alterations were observed at three days post-TBI and correlated with peak MRI lesion volume and loss of behavioral function. Moreover, we found that a larger brain lesion was associated with greater decreases in levels of Firmicutes, an exacerbated increase in Proteobacteria, and a significant reduction in α-diversity [13]. While the exact mechanism remains unknown, a feedback loop initiated by TBI with resultant increased pathogenic flora may influence the BGA and potentiate a neuroinflammatory cascade, which then leads to secondary brain injury and influences functional outcome. The death of neuronal cells, ischemia, hemorrhage, and blood brain barrier (BBB) disruption that occurs secondary to TBI may also initially trigger changes at the gut level by affecting the BGA by activating pro-inflammatory cytokine cascades and by impacting enteric glial cell and regulatory T cell activation and differentiation [88,89]. Of particular interest is the suppression of Treg cell differentiation, which may have a profound effect on subsequent intestinal changes and neuroinflammation [82]. The physiologic and clinical implications of TBI-induced changes to the gut microbiome remain unknown. Further investigation of the gut microbiome following TBI has the potential to improve detection of TBI and outcome and serve as a potential therapeutic target.

Investigation into the BGA in the setting of systemic injury and TBI has identified several promising targets for intervention. One possible treatment involves mitigating the gut dysbiosis that results from TBI by attempting to restore the normal gut microbiota. Fecal microbiota transplant (FMT) is one method of addressing this problem and involves taking fecal matter from a donor, mixing it with a solution, and placing the strained fecal solution into a patient to replace the lost beneficial bacteria [90,91]. FMT has been used to successfully treat several conditions including Clostridium difficile infection, irritable bowel syndrome, Crohn’s disease, and ulcerative colitis [91].

In addition, in 2011, the Institute of Medicine recommended that patients with TBI should be given a high level of nutrition for two weeks to curtail inflammation [102]. Dietary treatments in the form of early enteral nutrition and intake of glutamine, arginine, nucleotides, and omega-3 fatty acids are another potential therapy that stimulates immune cells and promotes gut barrier health [106]. Vitamins and minerals such as nicotinamide, zinc, and magnesium have also shown potential in pre-clinical models [107].

Traumatic brain injury is a significant public health problem that can have devastating long-term consequences for patients including severe physical, cognitive, emotional, and/or behavioral disabilities. Clinical management of TBI focuses on prevention of secondary injury, but progression can be difficult to follow clinically. Through disruption of the BGA and the intimate involvement of the GI microbiota, TBI may initiate a feedback loop that potentiates a neuroinflammatory cascade and leads to secondary brain injury. TBI-induced dysbiosis, through its impact on the BGA, may potentiate secondary injury and influence functional outcome.

We believe the relationship between TBI and the gut microbiome represents an area of study that could lead to a wide range of future research in new clinical intervention strategies. Alterations in the gut microbiome could potentially serve as a biomarker to improve detection of TBI and monitor progression or as a therapeutic target to prevent secondary injury in brain-injured patients. Therapeutic strategies such as FMT and probiotics may offer a neuroprotective benefit by targeting the dysregulated gut-microbiota-brain axis and restoring the gut microbiota to a healthier profile. Leveraging knowledge of the gut microbiome in the setting of TBI holds the exciting potential to influence treatment of brain-injured patients and enhance quality-of-life for patients with TBI.

