Emotional well-being and gut microbiome profiles by enterotype

With increasing attention being paid to improving emotional well-being, recent evidence points to gut microbiota as a key player in regulating mental and physical health via bidirectional communication between the brain and gut. Here, we examine the association between emotional well-being and gut microbiome profiles (i.e., gut microbiome composition, diversity, and the moderating role of the enterotypes) among healthy Korean adults (n = 83, mean age = 48.9, SD = 13.2). The research was performed using high-throughput 16S rRNA gene sequencing to obtain gut microbiome profiles, as well as a self-report survey that included the Positive Affect Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS). The cluster-based analysis identified two enterotypes dominated by the genera Bacteroides (n = 49) and Prevotella (n = 34). Generalized linear regression analysis reveals significant associations between positive emotion and gut microbiome diversity (Shannon Index) among participants in the Prevotella dominant group, whereas no such relationship emerged among participants in the Bacteroides group. Moreover, a novel genus from the family Lachnospiraceae is associated with emotional well-being scores, both positive and negative. Together, the current findings highlight the enterotype-specific links between the gut microbiota community and emotion in healthy adults and suggest the possible roles of the gut microbiome in promoting mental health.

Recent findings suggest that the neuroendocrine-immune pathway connects the brain and gut microbiota—known as the brain-gut-microbiota axis. Given that growing evidence points to the substantial relationship between the gut microbiota and a number of complex human behaviors, the gut microorganisms community is emerging as a key mechanism for modulating mental well-being. In fact, emotional disorders—such as depression and anxiety—are frequently accompanied by functional gastrointestinal disorders, suggesting an association between gut function and psychiatric diseases1,2. In addition to these observations, findings from a longitudinal panel further suggest that intestinal infections significantly predict the future onset of anxiety disorder3. Although the mechanisms underlying the association between gut microbiota and mental health are still under investigation, recent rodent studies reveal that alterations in gut microbiota significantly modulate emotional behaviors, such as depression, anxiety, and stress-related behaviors4–6. There is also some clinical evidence indicating the significant links between the gut and emotion; for example, altered gut microbiota composition was reported in patients with major depressive disorder (MDD) in terms of fecal microbial diversity (estimated by the Shannon index) as well as the level of the genus Faecalibacterium7. In healthy adults, favorable personality types (i.e., high in openness and conscientiousness) and self-rated higher quality of life were associated with the composition of certain gut microbiota (i.e., Faecalibacterium, Coprococcus, and Lachnospiraceae) as well as an enriched diversity of the gut microbiota community8,9.

With the expanding interest in the communication between the gut microbiome and mental health, this nascent field still needs to build up empirical evidence. Moreover, although increasing evidence suggests an association between gut microbiome profiles and mental health, evidence to support the link between them, especially regarding the role of enterotypes, is understudied. To this end, this study assesses gut microbiota profiles along with the emotional well-being indicators of healthy Korean adults. We aim to identify whether or not emotional well-being is associated with gastrointestinal microbiota profiles, such as composition and diversity. Moreover, based on recent findings implying differential patterns of mental health by enterotype, we investigate whether the association between gut microbiota profiles and mood state differs by enterotype. In this exploratory study, we hypothesize that the gut microbiome profiles are associated with emotional well-being states, focusing specifically on the differential role by enterotype.

Based on the microbiota composition, principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) revealed two distinct clusters, E1 and E2 (Fig. 1). In cluster 1 (E1) (marked in red in Fig. 1), Bacteroides were significantly more abundant than in cluster 2 (E2) (p < 0.001, Wilcoxon test), whereas in cluster 2 (marked in blue in Fig. 1), Prevotella was significantly more abundant in cluster 1 (p < 0.001, Wilcoxon test). The LEfSe analysis also confirmed the significant differential patterns for gut microbioal abundance in each cluster (Figure S1). Overall, 49 participants were included in the E1 (or Bacteroides group) and 34 participants in the E2 (or Prevotella group), respectively (Table
1). Statistical analysis of group differences revealed that significantly more female participants were present in the Bacteroides group, whereas male participants were more prevalent in the Prevotella Group (Table
1). No statistical differences between the microbiota clusters were found in terms of age, BSS scale, food preference (meat vs. vegetable), or degree of abdominal pain. Importantly, no differences were found between the groups regarding their emotional well-being scores—in terms of both positive and negative affect.

To examine whether the diversity in gut microbiota species (Observed, Chao1, ACE, and Shannon Diversity Index) differ by enterotype, we performed an independent sample t-test, in addition to linear regression. To reduce the skewness in the distribution, Observed, Chao1, and ACE were log-transformed as they did not follow normal distributions. The Prevotella group, when compared to the Bacteroides group, demonstrates significantly higher in terms of the Observed index (t (81) = − 2.12, p = 0.037) as well as marginally higher in Chao1 (t (81) = − 1.94, p = 0.056) and ACE (t (81) = − 1.81, p = 0.074) (Fig. 2). Moreover, the generalized linear model further confirmed that the Prevotella group showed significantly higher species richness scores after controlling for age, sex, and antibiotics use (Chao1: b = 0.14 (reference group = E1), SE = 0.06, p = 0.026; ACE: b = 0.13 (reference group = E1), SE = 0.06, p = 0.031; Observed: b = 0.17 (reference group = E1), SE = 0.07, p = 0.011). However, the Shannon diversity index did not differ across the two enterotypes when using either the independent t-test (t (81) = 1.17, p = 0.24) or linear regression model (b = − 0.12 (reference group = E1), SE = 0.17, p = 0.479).

More importantly, we further examined the association between the gut microbiota diversity and emotional well-being scores measured by PANAS, as well as the moderative role of the enterotype. First, we examined the relationship between emotional well-being (either positive or negative emotion) with the four gut microbiome diversity indices. Among these indices, the Shannon diversity index was significantly associated with the positive affect scores, but not with the negative affect scores (positive affect: b = 0.306, SE = 0.15, p = 0.045; negative affect: b = − 0.114, SE = 0.112, p = 0.312). The remaining three diversity indices did not show any significant association with emotional well-being scores. When we considered the interaction term between the positive affect scores and enterotypes via the linear model, the interaction term and the enterotype became statistically significant (positive affect × enterotypes: b = 0.618, SE = 0.30, p = 0.042; enterotype: b = − 2.08, SE = 0.98, p = 0.037, respectively).

Furthermore, to examine which specific microbial taxa are significantly correlated with mood status, we performed MaAsLin analysis with genus-level taxa present in at least 80% of the participants (the number of the taxa for the analysis = 52). A multivariate generalized linear regression analysis identified distinct sets of gut microbiota related to emotional well-being in the total population. Higher levels of Agathobaculum and Collinsella were inversely associated with the negative affect scores and the positive affect scores, respectively (b = − 0.014, SE = 0.005, p = 0.008, q = 0.23; b = − 0.051, SE = 0.015, p = 0.001, q = 0.095). Moreover, the abundance of PAC001043_g—a novel genus in the Lachnospiraceae family—was significantly associated with the higher positive affect scores and lower negative affect scores (positive affect: b = 0.014, SE = 0.005, p = 0.008, q = 0.214; negative affect: b = − 0.01, SE = 0.004, p = 0.01, q = 0.23) (Fig. 4; Figure S3).

The current study reveals that gut microbiome diversity is related to emotional well-being, and that enterotypes significantly moderate the links between emotional well-being and gut microbiome health (e.g., diversity). The enterotypes, which stratified the participants by gut microbiome profiles, did not alter mood status itself, but moderated the strength of the association between one’s mood and gut microbiome diversity. In the Prevotella-dominant group, emotional status was more closely related to gut microbiota diversity, such that positive affect was associated with increased gut microbiota diversity. However, in the Bacteroides-dominant group, one’s mood status was not significantly associated with gut microbiome diversity. This finding is in line with the results of Tillisch et al.17 in that only the Prevotella-high group displayed an increased response to affective images in the limbic system.

In conclusion, the present study links one’s emotional status to gut microbiome diversity and composition. The results suggest that emotional behavior can be associated with gut microbiota profiles in healthy adults, especially when stratified by enterotype. The enterotype-specific links between emotional well-being and gut microbiome diversity suggest that enterotypes may work as an individually tailored intervention. Further investigations will fill the gap in our understanding of how gut microbiota communicate with the brain to affect emotions—in this case, the feeling of happiness. Moreover, future studies on enterotype-specific mood modulation will evaluate the suitability of the microbiome in offering a new therapeutic paradigm for mood disorders.

The participants were recruited from the Korean Adult Longitudinal Study (KALS), which recruited 561 Seoul residents between from 2017 and 2018 using random-digit-dialing of cell phone numbers with the age, gender, and geographical areas in Seoul equally distributed (Wave 1). A subset of the population (n = 85), who agreed to submit their stool samples, signed the consent form after fully explaining the purpose and procedures of the study. Subsequently, these participants completed the survey which included the Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS) and questionnaires concerning health conditions.

Emotional well-being was measured using the Positive Affect and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS)33. The PANAS contains 20 self-reported emotions: ten positive (e.g., interested, excited; Cronbach’s alpha = 0.86) and ten negative affects (e.g., afraid, nervous; Cronbach’s alpha = 0.92). Participants rated the extent to which they felt each emotion over the preceding week on a 5-point Likert scale (where 1 = “very slightly/not at all”; 2 = “a little”; 3 = “moderately”; 4 = “quite a bit”; 5 = “extremely”). The PANAS scores were obtained simultaneously with the stool collection and compared with the scores about one and a half years ahead of the stool collection.

The participants self-reported their level of abdominal pain (on a scale from 0 = not at all to 10 = severe), their stool forms (Bristol Stool Scale; BSS)34, a 7-step categorical scale: 1 = separate hard lumps to 7 = entirely liquid), and the use of antibiotics in the preceding month. The dietary preference for meat versus vegetables by rating 1 (meat preferred) to 10 (vegetables preferred) was also collected.

Participants collected the stool samples (~ 0.2 g) in SB-01 stool collection kits (ChunLab Inc., South Korea) that contained a lysis buffer (SDS 4%, Tris–HCL 50 mM, EDTA 50 mM, NaCl 500 mM). The samples were stored at room temperature until they arrived at the laboratory, which took less than three days. On arrival, the stool samples were stored in the laboratory at -80 ℃ until required to perform the PCR and further experiment.

After thawing fecal swabs and applying the homogenization process, the fecal suspensions were bead beaten and centrifuged at 14,000 g for 10 min. Supernatants were fused with nuclease-free water, and PCR amplification was performed. DNA amplification targets the V3V4 regions of the bacterial 16S rRNA gene using 341F and 805R primers. PCR products were sequenced using an Illumina MiSeq sequencing system (Illumina, USA) at ChunLab.

Classification and identification of 16S rRNA gene sequences for phylogenetic analysis were processed in EzBioCloud using the MTP (Microbiome Taxonomic Profiling) pipeline provided by ChunLab, Inc.35; the sequence quality was checked and low-quality reads (quality score less than Q25) were filtered out using Trimmomatic ver 0.32. After quality control, paired-end reads were merged using VSEARCH ver 2.13.4, followed by trimming the barcode, primer, and linker sites. Nonspecific sequences that did not encode 16S rRNA were detected using a hmmer in HMMER ver 3.2.1. Redundant reads were clustered after extracting unique reads using VSEARCH. Taxonomic assignment was performed by VSEARCH using a highly curated EzBioCloud DB35, which covers both valid and invalid names (phylotype). Chimeric sequences were detected using a reference-based approach via the UCHIME algorithm, using the non-chimeric 16S rRNA database from EzBioCloud. After taxonomic assigning and chimeric read filtering, reads below 97% similarity with the EzBioCloud database were de novo clustered using VSEARCH.

Among the 85 samples, two samples were excluded because they did not meet the minimum count criteria (n = 10,000). All 83 remaining samples achieved sufficient coverage, as determined by Good’s coverage of > 99%. Copy numbers of the 16S rRNA gene were adjusted, and count normalization was performed with 11,289 (minimum count). The alpha diversity was analyzed with quantitative insights into microbial ecology (QIIME) after importing the species count matrix table, as obtained from the MTP pipeline35,36. The Shannon index measured species evenness, and Observed, Chao1, and ACE species richness estimators were measured. Since Observed, Chao1, and ACE do not follow normal distributions, they were log-transformed to reduce the skewness in the distribution.

To examine the association between gut microbiome composition and emotional well-being, multivariate analysis was performed with the MaAsLin2 R package. Age, sex, and antibiotic use (taking antibiotics during the previous month, if “Yes” coded as “1”, if “No” coded as “0”), were controlled for as potential confounding variables. The resulting p-values were corrected for multiple comparisons using the Benjamini–Hochberg correction (FDR). A p < 0.05 and q < 0.25 (default values of MaAsLin package) were considered statistically significant.

All procedures followed were in accordance with the ethical standards of the 1964 Helsinki declaration and its later amendments. The current study was approved by the Institutional Review Boards of Seoul National University (IRB No. 10-2018-21). Informed consent was obtained from all individual participants included in the study.



Publisher's note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

is available for this paper at 10.1038/s41598-020-77673-z.

