Effects of Life Stage, Site, and Species on the Dragonfly Gut Microbiome

Insects that undergo metamorphosis from juveniles to adults provide an intriguing opportunity to examine the effects of life stage, species, and the environment on their gut microbiome. In this study, we surveyed the gut microbiomes of 13 species of dragonfly collected from five different locations subject to different levels of human impact. Juveniles were collected as nymphs from aquatic habitats while airborne adults were caught at the same locations. The gut microbiome was characterized by next generation sequencing of the bacterial 16S rRNA gene. Life stage was an important factor, with the gut microbiomes of dragonfly nymphs differing from those of adult dragonflies. Gut microbiomes of nymphs were influenced by sample site and, to a lesser extent, host species. Neither sample location nor host species had a strong effect on the gut microbiome of dragonfly adults. Regardless of life stage, gut microbiomes were dominated by members of the Proteobacteria, with members of the Bacteroidetes (especially in adults), Firmicutes, and Acidobacteria (especially in nymphs) also being proportionally abundant. These results demonstrate that different life stages of metamorphosing insects can harbor very different gut microbiomes and differ in how this microbiome is influenced by the surrounding environment.

An animal’s microbiome plays a major role in the health and fitness of the host [1,2]. A healthy microbiome can increase host longevity and reproductive success, while an altered microbiome can increase the likelihood of disease and death. As DNA sequencing methods have become more accessible, microbiome analysis has moved beyond a focus on human health and into other areas of biology, including entomology [3]. The microbiomes of insects have been analyzed for a variety of reasons, including conservation and pest control [4]. More broadly, insects are among the most diverse and abundant animals on Earth and play key roles in many ecosystems [5]. Insects occupy a variety of habitats and the insect microbiome may, at least in part, depend on their surrounding environment [6]. The insect microbiome can also depend on its developmental stage, and insects vary in their lifecycle from holometabolous that completes a full cycle of metamorphosis from an egg to a larva to a pupa to an adult, to hemimetabolous that develops from an egg to a nymph to an adult, skipping the pupal stage [5]. Insects can show gut microbiome profiles that are specific to each developmental stage [6,7], and depending on the particular insect species, developmental stages can inhabit vastly different environments, for example being entirely aquatic as juvenile nymphs and entirely terrestrial as adults. The impacts of these major lifecycle changes on the gut microbiome have rarely been examined.

In this study we surveyed the gut microbiomes of 13 species of dragonfly nymphs and adults collected from five sites in Mississippi and Tennessee, USA. Sites varied in their degree of urbanization, and we hypothesized that dragonfly microbiomes would be more influenced by site than by host species or life stage. Our findings suggest that all three factors have a significant influence on the gut microbiome of dragonflies.

Dragonflies were collected from five sites in north Mississippi and south Tennessee, USA. Sites were selected based on the current and historical land use patterns to reflect different levels of urbanization and potential human impact. The three sites in Mississippi were a vegetated pond with minimal human disturbance and no urbanization at the University of Mississippi Field Station (UMFS; 34°25′05.6″ N, 89°23′32.3″ W), a small lake at Camp Lake Stephens (CLS; 34°18′40.7″ N, 89°28′31.3″ W), a site used for summer youth camps but with only moderate ongoing human impacts, and a former treatment reservoir for a wastewater treatment plant that is close to a highway and agricultural land (Treatment Plant, TP; 34°16′36.7″ N, 89°31′01.4″ W). The two sites in Tennessee were in the city of Memphis; one was a lake downstream of horse barns in Shelby Farms Park (SF; 35°08′32.2″ N, 89°49′17.3″ W), a large urban park subject to much human activity, and the other was a drainage channel downstream of a large hospital within the Wolf River Greenway (WRG; 35°07′40.9″ N, 89°51′11.1″ W) that collects runoff from major roads and residential areas. Thus, sites ranged from WRG>SF>TP>CLS>UMFS in terms of potential human impact.

Dragonflies were measured for their length and weight and then washed in 70% ethanol prior to dissection. The gut tract was removed and vortexed in 1 mL sterile saline (0.8% NaCl) at maximum speed for 10 min. The resulting mixture was centrifuged (10,000× g, 15 min), the supernatant removed, and DNA extracted from the pellet.

DNA was extracted using a DNeasy PowerSoil kit and protocol (Qiagen, Germantown, MD, USA). For microbiome analysis, DNA was amplified with barcoded primers targeting the V4 region of the bacterial 16S rRNA gene [15,16]. Amplification products were normalized using SequencePrep Normalization Plates (Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY, USA) and sequenced with an Illumina MiSeq platform at the Molecular and Genomics Core Facility at the University of Mississippi Medical Center. Extracted DNA was also used to identify dragonfly species. A portion of the CO1 gene was amplified using Odonata specific primers developed by Karthika et al. [17]. Forward primer OdoF1_t15′TGTAAAACGACGGCCAGTATTCAACHAATCATAARGATATTGG3′ and reverse primer OdoR1_t15′CAGGAAACAGCTATGACTAAACTTCTGGATGYCCRAARAAYCA3′ were used in reaction conditions described by Karthika et al. [17]. CO1 amplification products were sequenced through a commercial provider (Functional Biosciences, Madison, WI, USA).

For 16S rRNA gene data, FASTQ files were processed using mothur version 1.40.5 following recommended procedures [15,18,19]. Sequences were aligned to the SILVA database (version 128) and classified according to the Ribosomal Database Project (RDP) database release 16. Sequences identified as unknown, mitochondria, or chloroplasts were removed from the dataset, as were sequences identified as potential chimeras. Sequences were clustered into operational taxonomic units (OTUs) defined by 97% sequence similarity. OTUs with just one or two sequence reads were removed prior to analyses of alpha and beta diversity, and diversity analyses were standardized by subsampling (1000 iterations) to the same number of sequence reads per sample (453 as defined by the number of remaining sequence reads in the lowest sample). Beta diversity was assessed using the abundance-based Bray–Curtis dissimilarity index and ordination through non-metric multidimensional scaling (NMDS). Analysis of similarity (ANOSIM) was used to determine if the composition of the gut microbiome was influenced by sample site, microhabitat, life stage, or species. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) in R version 3.0.2 was used to determine the influence of those variables on species richness (alpha diversity) on the gut microbiome.

Sequence data is available in the NCBI Sequence Reads Archive under Bioproject PRJNA597338.

A total of 100 individual dragonflies were collected, however 13 (three nymphs and ten adults) yielded low numbers of 16S rRNA gene sequence reads and were excluded from the dataset. Of the remaining 87 individuals, CO1 gene sequencing identified them as belonging to 13 species, with eight species represented by both nymphs and adults (Table 1). Three adults showed poor CO1 sequencing and could not be assigned to a species. These adults were excluded from species-focused analyses but were retained for site- or life stage-focused analyses.

1 As determined from partial CO1 gene sequencing.

The number of dragonfly species collected varied by site and life stage and finding a nymph species at a given site did not relate to the later collection of adults (Table 1). Eight different species of adults were collected, and 13 different species of nymphs. One of the more rural sites (Camp Lake Stephens) had the highest number of species collected (eight) with Erythemis simplicicollis and Celithemis elisa being the most common with four individuals of each collected. The Shelby Farms and former Treatment Pond sites yielded the lowest number of dragonfly species (five). Across all sites, E. simplicicollis was the most collected species (19 individuals) followed by Libellula luctuosa (15 individuals) and Pachydiplax longipennis (13 individuals). Only one individual was collected for each Erythrodiplax fusca, Ladonna deplanata, and Tetragoneuria cynosure (Table 1).

The 87 dragonflies retained in the dataset yielded a total of 262,608 bacterial 16S rRNA gene sequences, at a mean of 3018 sequences per individual (range 503–27,053). Of these sequences, 13% could only be identified as unclassified Bacteria whereas 87% represented 33 different bacterial phyla. Four phyla (Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, and Acidobacteria) accounted for 73% of all sequence recovered. Proteobacteria was most commonly the dominant phylum in both adults and nymphs, although the proportions of the different subphyla of Proteobacteria varied between the two life stages (Figure 1). Gut communities of adult dragonflies typically yielded more sequences identified as members of the Gammaproteobacteria than did those of nymphs, especially at the two sites (SF and WRG) more likely to be subject to human impacts, for which Gammaproteobacteria accounted for almost all of the Proteobacteria sequences detected (Figure 1). Nymphs at the SF site also had gut microbiomes dominated by Gammaproteobacteria, while nymphs at other sites typically had higher proportions of Alphaproteobacteria and Betaproteobacteria. The two life stages also showed some differences in the relative abundance of other bacterial phyla, with Firmicutes being the second most abundant phylum in adults and Bacteroidetes generally being the second most abundant phylum in nymphs (Figure 1). Verrucomicrobia, Planctomycetes, Chloroflexi, Acidobacteria, and Actinobacteria were all typically more prevalent in nymphs than adults, and nymphs tended to show more variation in the phyla comprising their gut microbiome (Figure 1).

16S rRNA gene sequences grouped into 8656 OTUs based on a 97% sequence similarity. Of these OTUs, 5571 were represented by just one or two sequence reads and were removed prior to analyses of community similarity and diversity, retaining 3085 OTUs. The four most prominent OTUs were identified as being members of the Gammaproteobacteria, three from family Enterobacteriaceae (accounting for a combined 60% of the sequences recovered from adult dragonflies and 21% from nymphs), and one from genus Aeromonas (accounting for 5% of the sequences from adults and 16% from nymphs; Table 2). Two of the OTUs (01 and 04) identified as members of the Enterobacteriaceae accounted for >50% of the sequences obtained from dragonfly adults but were much scarcer (2.4% of the sequences) in nymphs (Table 2). Other abundant OTUs were identified as belonging to the phylum Firmicutes (represented by the families Peptostreptococcaceae and Clostridiaceae, as well as the genus Lactococcus) and Fusobacteria (genus Cetobacterium). The sixth most abundant OTU identified as a member of the Chlamydiales (phylum Chlamydia), this OTU was largely found in one individual adult where it accounted for almost all of the sequences recovered (Table 2). Overall, the bacterial sequences recovered from dragonfly nymphs grouped into 2336 OTUs while the sequences recovered from adults grouped into 954 OTUs.

1 A single adult dragonfly accounted for 99% of the sequences assigned to OTU06.

In terms of the overall bacterial community composition, the dragonfly gut microbiome separated primarily by life stage with the microbiomes of nymphs and adults clearly separated in NMDS ordinations (Figure 2a; ANOSIM p < 0.001, R = 0.37). Treating each life stage separately, the gut microbiome of adults did not show clear effects of site (Figure 2b; ANOSIM p > 0.05), whereas the gut microbiome of nymphs showed a strong influence of site on its overall composition (Figure 2c; ANOSIM p < 0.001, R = 0.60). Part of the site effect on nymphs was likely driven by habitat differences between sites, as nymphs recovered from leaf litter, littoral vegetation at the edge of the site, or sediment could also be separated by the overall gut microbiome composition (Figure 2d; ANOSIM p < 0.001, R = 0.62). There was a suggestion that dragonfly host species influenced the overall composition of the microbiome in nymphs, but this was not quite significant (Figure 2e; ANOSIM p = 0.056). Host species was not significant in influencing the gut microbiome of dragonfly adults (Figure 2f; ANOSIM p > 0.05).

For patterns of beta diversity, this reduced dataset of five dragonfly species yielded similar patterns to the full dataset (Figure 4). Life stage was still an important factor separating the gut microbiomes of dragonflies, with nymphs having a distinct microbiome from adults (Figure 4a; ANOSIM p < 0.001, R = 0.34). Within each life stage, host species appeared to be more important in separating the gut microbiomes of nymphs (Figure 4b; ANOSIM p = 0.002, R = 0.26) than adults (Figure 4c; ANOSIM p = 0.045, R = 0.16), as was seen with the full dataset. Site also appeared to be a stronger factor influencing the gut microbiome of nymphs (ANOSIM p < 0.001, R = 0.72) than adults (ANOSIM p < 0.001, R = 0.32). However, the effects of site and species are more interlinked in this reduced dataset as with the smaller number of species sampled, there is increased potential for uneven distribution of species across the different sites (i.e., certain dragonfly species are more prevalent at some sites than others; Table 1).

While the number of studies on insect microbiomes is increasing [20,21], few studies have compared the composition of the insect microbiome across life stages. This study is one of the first to investigate the gut microbial communities of dragonfly nymphs and adults, while also characterizing the variation in these gut communities across different environments and between host dragonfly species.

This study is one of few to show how life stage is a major driver of the gut microbiome in insects, and we also found that site, especially in the context of potential impacts based on land use, exerts a strong influence on the microbiome of dragonfly nymphs and less of an effect on aerial adults. Adult dragonflies likely travel over broader ranges than nymphs, potentially lessening the effect of site, and nymphs are also continually exposed to the bacteria surrounding them based on the aquatic milieu they inhabit. Surprisingly, host species did not have as dramatic an effect on the gut microbiome of dragonflies as did life stage or site, but this could be a limitation of the experimental design, which was focused more on the latter two factors. The finding that dragonfly nymphs and adults have substantially different gut microbiomes does bring up questions as to what really is the microbiome of a host that has substantially different life stages. For mammals, there is a tendency to view the adult as having the mature microbiome [43], but in insects such as dragonflies, the adult form may be relatively short-lived compared to the nymph. While the same species, and even the same individual, a dragonfly nymph and the adult it becomes are essentially different holobionts. They inhabit entirely different environments, prey on different food, and, as shown here, have fundamental differences in their gut microbiome and how it is influenced by habitat variability.

