Effects of vancomycin‐induced gut microbiome alteration on the pharmacodynamics of metformin in healthy male subjects

Metformin is a major treatment for type 2 diabetes. This study was conducted to investigate the impact of gut microbiome dysbiosis on the pharmacokinetics and antihyperglycemic effects of metformin. Healthy adult males aged 19–45 years with no defecation abnormalities were recruited for this 4‐period clinical study: baseline; post‐metformin (i.e., multiple oral doses of 1000 mg metformin on days 1–4); post‐vancomycin (i.e., multiple oral doses of 500 mg vancomycin on days 11–17 inducing gut microbiome changes); and post‐metformin + vancomycin (i.e., multiple oral doses of 1000 mg metformin on days 16–19). In each period, serum glucose and insulin concentrations following an oral glucose tolerance test, fecal samples for gut microbiome composition, and safety data were obtained. Following metformin dosing, plasma and urine samples for pharmacokinetics were collected. Nine subjects completed the study. The pharmacokinetics of metformin remained unchanged, and the antihyperglycemic effect was significantly decreased after vancomycin administration (p value = 0.039), demonstrating the weak relationship between the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of metformin. Relative abundances of some genus were changed after vancomycin administration, and tended to correlate with the antihyperglycemic effects of metformin (p value = 0.062 for Erysipelatoclostridium; p value = 0.039 for Enterobacter; and p value = 0.086 for Faecalibacterium). Adverse events occurred in all subjects and were resolved without sequelae. In conclusion, a decrease in the antihyperglycemic effect of metformin was observed after concomitant administration with vancomycin, without changes in metformin pharmacokinetics. The antihyperglycemic effect was tended to correlate with the relative abundance of several genus, suggesting that the effect of metformin is partly attributable to the gut microbiome (ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT03809260).



Metformin is the most widely used drug for type 2 diabetes (T2D). Metformin reduces intestinal glucose absorption and hepatic glucose production via inhibition of the mitochondrial isoform of glycerophosphate dehydrogenase (mGPDH) and enhances peripheral glucose uptake and utilization through activation of AMP‐activated protein kinase (AMPK). Metformin is also known to decompose free fatty acids by activating AMPK. 1 , 2 Recent studies have reported that metformin has a potential intestine‐mediated effect. 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 In one study, 18F‐labeled fluorodeoxyglucose accumulated markedly in the colon after metformin administration, demonstrating that the drug affects glucose handling in the colon. 3 In another study, metformin was administered to human subjects alone or with pyrimethamine, a potent inhibitor of transporter that mediates renal elimination of metformin, and with the combination of pyrimethamine, systemic exposure of metformin increased significantly by ~ 2.6‐fold, although the antihyperglycemic effect decreased. 4 In a clinical trial in which healthy subjects received a low or high dose of metformin, the antihyperglycemic effect was found to be inverse to systemic exposure, suggesting that the effect of metformin occurs through a nonabsorbed portion as well as systemic absorption. 5 Furthermore, a previous study comparing intravenous metformin infusion and placebo reported no difference in acute effects on glucose control between the groups, suggesting that the chronic persistent effect is more important than is the plasma concentration or acute effect of metformin. 6

The objective of this study was to assess the effect of vancomycin‐induced gut microbiome alterations on the pharmacokinetics and antihyperglycemic effect of metformin.

This study aimed to enroll 10 subjects. Healthy adult male subjects who were 19–45 years old, weighed between 50.0 and 100.0 kg, and had a body mass index of 18.0–28.0 kg/m2 at the screening visit were included. Subjects with an active or a history of clinically significant diseases of the digestive, renal, and endocrine systems were excluded; subjects with a history of gastrointestinal disorders or surgery that might affect the absorption of investigational drugs were also excluded. Subjects with defecation less than five times a week or more than three times a day or who had excessively hard or soft stools were also excluded, as were subjects whose estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) calculated by Modification of Diet in Renal Disease (MDRD) was less than 80 ml/min/1.73 m2. The study was conducted according to Korea Good Clinical Practice and the ethical guidelines of the Declaration of Helsinki and with approval of the institutional review board of Seoul National University Bundang Hospital (B‐1809‐492‐003) and Korea Ministry of Food and Drug Safety (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT03809260).

The study was conducted using an open‐label, single‐arm design. The study consisted of four periods, which were baseline (day −1 or 1; baseline of post‐metformin period), post‐metformin (day 4), post‐vancomycin (day 15 or 16; baseline of post‐metformin + vancomycin period), and post‐metformin + vancomycin (day 19), according to the treatment given in each period (Figure S1).

Subjects provided written consent to the prohibition of eating foods containing lactic acid bacteria, grapefruit, and caffeine during the entire study duration. In addition, subjects were provided with a normal diet not containing those components and were asked to eat the full amount of the meal during the hospitalization. Any diet other than the provided meal was prohibited during the hospitalization.

Plasma samples for pharmacokinetic evaluation were collected at 0 (predose), 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5, 3, 4, 6, 8, and 12 h post‐metformin and post‐metformin + vancomycin dose.

Baseline corrected parameters, which are ΔAUGC, ΔGmax, and ΔHOMA‐IR, after metformin administration were defined by subtracting the baseline values from the post‐metformin period (i.e., AUGC at post‐metformin period – AUGC at baseline), and subtracting the post‐vancomycin values from the post‐metformin + vancomycin period. Smaller ΔAUGC, ΔGmax, and ΔHOMA‐IR values (i.e., larger absolute values of the three parameters), were interpreted as greater effects of the metformin treatment. Differences in pharmacodynamic parameter values and changed percentages between the post‐metformin period and post‐metformin + vancomycin period were presented.

The Wilcoxon signed rank test was performed for comparison of pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic parameters including baseline values for glycemic response to OGTT, with the significance level of 0.05.

The relationship between pharmacokinetics (Cmax and AUClast) and pharmacodynamics (ΔAUGC, ΔGmax, and ΔHOMA‐IR) was evaluated through Spearman correlation analysis for each of post‐metformin period and post‐metformin + vancomycin period, respectively. The statistical analysis was performed using SAS version 9.4 (SAS Institute).

Taxonomic profiling was carried out using a module of marker data profiling of MicrobiomeAnalyst. 15 Alpha‐diversity was calculated using the Shannon index, and the Kruskal‐Wallis test was performed for comparison between periods. Beta‐diversity was assessed using Bray‐Curtis dissimilarity and represented by a principal coordinates analysis (PCoA) plot, and permutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) was used to compare beta‐diversity between periods. Distinct bacterial taxa between periods were identified by linear discriminant analysis (LDA) effect size (LEfSe) analysis. Data were normalized by the total sum scaling method for LEfSe. By dividing each feature count by the total library size, this yielded a relative proportional value for each feature, which eliminated the bias related to different sequencing depths. 16 The cutoffs for the false‐discovery rate (FDR) adjusted p value and log LDA score were 0.05 and 2.0, respectively. Changes in the gut microbiome caused by vancomycin administration were assessed through post‐metformin versus post‐vancomycin, post‐metformin versus post‐metformin + vancomycin, and baseline versus post‐vancomycin comparisons; similarly, changes in the gut microbiome by metformin administration were identified through baseline versus post‐metformin and post‐vancomycin versus post‐metformin + vancomycin comparisons. Considering the washout period after metformin administration and the drug administered within the closest period of post‐vancomycin, the change between baseline versus post‐vancomycin was considered to be caused by vancomycin.

Spearman correlation analysis between ΔAUGC and the relative abundance of the microbiome was performed for genera with differences between the two periods (baseline vs. post‐metformin, post‐metformin vs. post‐vancomycin, post‐metformin vs. post‐metformin + vancomycin, and baseline vs. post‐vancomycin) in LEfSe analysis using SAS version 9.4, with a p value cutoff of 0.1. In addition, Spearman correlation analysis using the relative abundance values of the genera at post‐metformin and post‐metformin + vancomycin periods paired with the ΔAUGC of each corresponding period was performed. The exploratory correlation analysis considering the small number of subjects was conducted separately for the two periods, with a p value cutoff of 0.1. For a negative Spearman’s correlation coefficient (rho), it was interpreted that the relative abundance of genera is positively correlated with the antihyperglycemic effect. For LEfSe and correlation analyses, only taxa with relative abundance greater than or equal to 0.01 (1%) at least once during the compared periods are presented. The datasets generated and analyzed during the current study are available from Supplementary Material (dataset).

All subjects were examined for vital signs, physical examinations, and clinical laboratory tests. All symptoms and signs observed by the investigator or reported by the subject from the time of obtaining written consent to the time of completion of the clinical trial were collected as adverse events (AEs). Each AE was classified based on the first dose at each period. For example, AEs that occurred after the first administration of metformin and before the first administration of vancomycin were classified as AEs of post‐metformin period. All AEs were monitored and reviewed by the investigators to determine their severity and relationship to the study drug.

A total of 15 participants were enrolled in this study. One of them dropped out due to an adverse reaction, 3 withdrew their consent, and 2 dropped out for other reasons. Thus, nine subjects received the study drug at least once, and fecal samples were all obtained for 4 periods. In a total of 3 subjects, metformin dose was reduced to 500 mg once in each subject due to gastrointestinal adverse events on day 17 or 18. Because all dose reductions were only once in each subject and occurred on days without pharmacokinetic, pharmacodynamic sampling, including baseline, the effect of this on several evaluations was assessed to be limited. The mean age of the 9 subjects was 25.8 years (range: 19–33 years), with a mean body mass index of 24.3 kg/m2 (range: 19.2–27.6 kg/m2). As some pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic samples of one subject were not collected, eight subjects completed the study. However, the analysis to detect changes in the microbiome according to the designated periods was performed on all nine subjects, including one subject whose pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamics samples was not complete and whose microbiome profile was similar to other eight subjects. In contrast, the pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic analysis and correlation analysis between pharmacodynamics and the microbiome were performed on eight subjects who completed the study.

Overall, the pharmacokinetic profiles of post‐metformin and post‐metformin + vancomycin periods were similar to each other (Figure 1), and Tmax and t1/2 were similar. There were no statistically significant differences in systemic exposure represented by Cmax and AUCs between post‐metformin and post‐metformin + vancomycin periods. In addition, there were no statistically significant differences in Ae, Fe, and CLR (Table 1).

All data are presented as arithmetic mean ± SD, except for Tmax, which is presented as median (minimum – maximum). AUCinf, area under the plasma concentration curve from time 0 to infinity; AUClast, area under the plasma concentration curve from time 0 to last measurable timepoint; AUC% extrapolated, percentage of AUCinf due to extrapolation from time of last measurable observed concentration to infinity; CLR, renal clearance; Cmax, maximum plasma concentration; t1/2, elimination terminal half‐life; Tmax, time to reach Cmax.

Data presented as arithmetic mean ± standard deviation. AUGC, area under the glucose concentration curve from time 0 to 2 h; Gmax, maximum glucose concentration; HOMA‐IR, homeostatic model assessment of insulin resistance.

Although the administration of vancomycin did not influence the pharmacokinetic properties of metformin, the antihyperglycemic effect was partially affected; hence, the relationship between the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics was weak, as confirmed by Spearman correlation analysis (Figure 1, Figure S2). Except for one case, all p values and absolute values of Spearman’s rho were greater than 0.05 and less than or equal to 0.55, respectively. Only the results of correlation analysis for AUClast and ΔHOMA‐IR during the metformin + vancomycin period showed p values of 0.0003 and Spearman’s rho of 0.95, respectively (Figure S2).

Overall, a substantial change in the diversity and composition of the microbiome was observed before and after vancomycin administration. Alpha‐diversity, representing bacterial diversity, was estimated at the genus level for all periods using the Shannon index. The Shannon index was generally greater in the period before than after vancomycin administration, suggesting that vancomycin treatment decreased microbial diversity. Moreover, there was a significant difference between baseline and post‐vancomycin period (p value = 0.0019) and between post‐metformin and post‐metformin + vancomycin periods (p value = 0.0012; Figure 2a, Table S2).

Abbreviations: LDA, linear discriminant analysis; LEfSE, linear discriminant analysis effect size.

There were some differences in the taxa changed by metformin compared to vancomycin. Comparisons between baseline versus post‐metformin and post‐vancomycin versus post‐metformin + vancomycin showed taxa with altered relative abundance due to metformin administration. Post‐metformin, the relative abundance of the phylum Proteobacteria was increased and Bacteroidetes decreased compared to baseline; the relative abundance of the genus Escherichia was increased and that of Parabacteroides decreased post‐metformin compared to baseline. No species were changed between post‐vancomycin and post‐metformin + vancomycin periods at either the phylum or genus level (Table 3).

Because of a difference in the antihyperglycemic effect before and after vancomycin administration, we investigated the relationship between this effect and genera with altered relative abundance before and after vancomycin administration. The antihyperglycemic effect tended to correlate with the relative abundance of some genera (Figure 4).

According to the exploratory Spearman correlation analysis, negative Spearman’s rho, that is, positively correlated tendency between antihyperglycemic effect (absolute value of ΔAUGC) and the relative abundance of genera was found in two genus. These were Escherichia (p value = 0.071, Spearman’s rho = –0.67) and Erysipelatoclostridium (p value = 0.062, Spearman’s rho = –0.68) in post‐metformin. In addition, there was a positively correlated tendency between antihyperglycemic effect and the relative abundance of Escherichia (p value = 0.071, Spearman’s rho = –0.67) in post‐metformin + vancomycin. In addition, there was a negatively correlated tendency between antihyperglycemic effect and the relative abundance of Enterobacter (p value = 0.039, Spearman’s rho = 0.73) and Faecalibacterium (p value = 0.086, Spearman’s rho = 0.64) in post‐metformin. These results were deemed exploratory, not indicating formal statistical significance.

Safety assessment was performed on the nine subjects who received the study drugs at least once. There were no AEs collected at baseline, although 28 AEs in 8 subjects occurred post‐metformin. Of these, 16 AEs were gastrointestinal disorders. There was one case of diarrhea and one of vomiting evaluated as moderate AEs and one case of vomiting evaluated as a severe AE. A total of 2 AEs in 2 subjects occurred post‐vancomycin, all of which were assessed as mild. In addition, 20 AEs in 9 subjects occurred post‐metformin + vancomycin. Of these, 15 were gastrointestinal disorders, with 1 moderate case of nausea. Of the total 50 AEs, all except 2 were revealed to have a relationship with the study drug. All AEs were resolved without sequelae.

This study explored the effect of gut microbiome alteration on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of metformin in healthy adult men. This study reports for the first time that the antihyperglycemic effect of metformin decreased significantly after vancomycin administration, with the substantial change of gut microbiome caused by vancomycin administration. On the other hand, the systemic exposure of metformin remained unchanged regardless of gut microbiome alteration. The correlated tendency between the antihyperglycemic effect and gut microbiome change, with little correlation between the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of metformin, suggest the possibility that the antihyperglycemic effect of metformin is partially mediated by the gut microbiome, independent of the systemic exposure of metformin. Four genera, Escherichia, Erysipelatoclostridium, Enterobacter, and Faecalibacterium showed a correlated tendency with antihyperglycemic effects. Additional studies with larger subject number are needed to support the results of this study. The gut microbiome may have a key role in improving the clinical efficacy of metformin treatment in patients with T2D.

Considering that the antihyperglycemic effect of metformin and oral vancomycin‐induced gut microbiome changes are a phenomenon occurring both in healthy individuals and in various patient groups, 2 , 13 , 14 the correlated tendency between antihyperglycemic effects and the relative abundance of some gut microbiome identified in this study may be extrapolated to the use of metformin in patients with T2D. However, because the underlying gut microbiome status may differ depending on the subject’s condition, 32 additional studies in the patient group would be necessary.

All authors declared no competing interests for this work.

E.K., A.H.K., Y.L., K.‐S.Y., and J.‐Y. Chung wrote the manuscript. E.K., A.H.K., and J.‐Y. Chung designed the research. E.K., A.H.K., Y.L., S.C.J., and J.‐Y. Cho performed the research. E.K., A.H.K., and J.‐Y. Chung analyzed the data. A.H.K., Y.L., and S.C.J. contributed new reagents/analytical tools.

This study was funded by National Research Foundation of Korea (No. NRF‐2018R1D1A1B07044406), Seoul, Republic of Korea.

