The Human Gut Microbiome as a Potential Factor in Autism Spectrum Disorder

The high prevalence of gastrointestinal (GI) disorders among autism spectrum disorder (ASD) patients has prompted scientists to look into the gut microbiota as a putative trigger in ASD pathogenesis. Thus, many studies have linked the gut microbial dysbiosis that is frequently observed in ASD patients with the modulation of brain function and social behavior, but little is known about this connection and its contribution to the etiology of ASD. This present review highlights the potential role of the microbiota–gut–brain axis in autism. In particular, it focuses on how gut microbiota dysbiosis may impact gut permeability, immune function, and the microbial metabolites in autistic people. We further discuss recent findings supporting the possible role of the gut microbiome in initiating epigenetic modifications and consider the potential role of this pathway in influencing the severity of ASD. Lastly, we summarize recent updates in microbiota-targeted therapies such as probiotics, prebiotics, dietary supplements, fecal microbiota transplantation, and microbiota transfer therapy. The findings of this paper reveal new insights into possible therapeutic interventions that may be used to reduce and cure ASD-related symptoms. However, well-designed research studies using large sample sizes are still required in this area of study.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a complicated neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by decreased verbal and social interactions, limited interests and activities, and repetitive behaviors [1,2]. Along with these significant conditions, ASD regularly co-occurs with other clinical symptoms, including gastrointestinal disturbances (up to 70%), motor deficits (79%), sleep problems (50–80%), and intellectual disability (45%) [3].

The methods of this review article were based on the utilization of virtual databases, including PubMed and Science Direct, to search for all related published studies, whereas the statistics of the prevalence of ASD were taken from the website of Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). All studies included in this review were published from 2003 to 2021. The selection was based on the keywords “ASD“, “autism”, “gut” “microbiome”, “microbiota”, “gut-brain axis” “probiotics”, and “fecal transplantation”. Nearly 235 articles were found, and those examining the gut microbiota and general neurodegenerative disorders—particularly autism spectrum disorder—were included in this review article.

Human beings have co-evolved with a massive number of microorganisms that colonize almost every part of the body, particularly the skin, eyes, respiratory pathway, urogenital pathway, and intestine [21]. These microorganisms include bacteria, fungi, viruses, archaea, and protozoa [22]. The community of these microbes is called the microbiota, where the term microbiome indicates the genomes of these microorganisms [23]. It is believed that a series of microbial establishment events in the gut starts during the prenatal period, as proposed by the existence of microbes in the placenta, amniotic fluid, meconium, and the blood of the umbilical cord [24]. Interestingly, the significant periods of alteration in the evolving microbiota overlap partly with the timespan for the development of the brain [25]. The colonization of the newborn baby gut begins during birth—e.g., the newborn infant born through the vagina becomes covered with the mother’s vaginal microbes, or of the mother’s skin in the situation of a cesarean delivery (C-section) [26]. About 75% of the feces microbiota of vaginally born babies were found to be related to their mothers’ fecal microbiota, whereas, in C-section babies, this percentage decreases to ~41% [27].

Since mammals cannot synthesize many vital nutrients, the gut microbes perform essential functions for the host, delivering necessary nutrients by digesting dietary compounds, protecting against opportunistic microbes, and contributing to the integrity of intestinal epithelial barriers [19]. Based on all these features, the complex human–microbiota interconnection can be considered an existent superorganism whose disturbance could lead to disease onset [39]. As a result, this path may help us to develop beneficial microbiota-associated therapies in the upcoming years.

There are many reasons why researchers link ASD symptom development with the gut microbial composition. For example, in 2019, Sharon and colleagues reported that germ-free (GF) mice display ASD-like behavior after being colonized with fecal microbiota from children with ASD. In this study, gut microbiota were transplanted to GF mice from human donors with autism, or from their typically developing (TD) siblings as a control. Mice colonized with ASD microbiota displayed more autistic behaviors compared to the TD mice. The team also found that the ASD group had a different abundance of Clostridiaceae, Lactobacillales, Enterobacteriaceae, and Bacteroides in comparison with the TD group. They also observed that mice that were treated with gut microbiota from ASD patients displayed an alternative splicing of many ASD-related genes in the brain. Moreover, some metabolite profiles were detected to be decreased in the ASD group—particularly 5-aminovaleric acid (5AV) and taurine [40] (Table 1).

GF—germ-free mice; TD—typically developing; MIA—maternal immune activation; PAA—propionic acid; BBB—blood–brain barrier; GABA—γ-aminobutyric acid; CRH—corticotrophin-releasing hormone; ACTH—adrenocorticotropic hormone; BDNF— brain-derived neurotrophic factor; SPF—specific pathogen-free.

This area of research is still growing, so more studies with large sample sizes of autistic and neurotypical children who are not treated with antibiotics are needed in order to detect the specific function of gut microbiota dysbiosis in the onset of autism spectrum disorder.

The gut–brain axis refers to a bidirectional connection between the gut and the brain. It can also extended to involve the microbiota as an essential part of this triangle dialogue [21]. This bidirectional pathway consists of both efferent and afferent signals. Afferent signals transmit from the gastrointestinal tract to the brain and involve the enteroendocrine system, cytokines, metabolites, gut products, and neuroactive molecules. Efferent signals start from the brain to the gut wall and include neuroendocrine and autonomic regulation [20,62]. In this pathway, 90% of vagal fibers between the brain and gut are afferent, suggesting that the intestine is more of a transmitter than a receiver [63,64,65]. This bidirectional link comprises one or more of the following avenues (Figure 3).

The microbiota and its metabolite products modulate the function and integrity of the gut epithelium barrier. Therefore, a change in gut microbial diversity can influence the gut barrier integrity, potentially resulting in the “leaky gut” condition [66]. Indeed, an impaired gut barrier can increase the levels of gut microbial components (e.g., lipopolysaccharide (LPS)) in the blood; trigger the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis; and stimulate immune responses, producing cytokines such as interferon-γ (IFN-γ), tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), interleukin-1β (IL-1β), and IL-4. These immune cytokines can circulate and cross the blood–brain barrier (BBB), inducing systemic and CNS inflammation [67,68]. The serum level of LPS was found to be significantly increased in ASD individuals compared to healthy controls. This may be linked to a worse social communication score, which has been noticed in ASD patients [69]. In physiological states, LPS can enter the brain, possibly through a lipoprotein transport mechanism [70], and elicit neural impairment, behavioral alteration, and neuroinflammation by triggering the Nuclear Factor Kappa B (NF-kB) signaling pathway, which is related to microglia stimulation and neuronal cell loss [71]. The everyday injection of pregnant rats with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) resulted in ASD-like behavior in offspring, involving hyperlocomotion and social defects [72].

In comparison with the above-mentioned studies, others have shown no changes in gut permeability in autistic children, demonstrating that the disruption of the intestinal barrier is not always a symptom of autism, but this primarily occurred in ASD children with intestinal abnormality [76,77]. Thus, additional studies with an increased sample size of ASD patients with and without intestinal abnormality are necessary to confirm and understand the connection between gut permeability and increased symptoms of autism.

Immunological pathways have a vital function in the bidirectional connection between the microbiota, gut, and brain, allowing the gut and brain to influence each other. Gut microbial composition is an essential part of regulating immune hemostasis, since gut mucosal surfaces are constantly exposed to beneficial and pathogenic microorganisms and can trigger an immunological response [21,25]. In addition, the mucosal surface layers of the gut contain different types of immune cells involving gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT) [78]. GALT utilizes lymphocytes to produce immunoglobulins (IgA) [79]. IgA can modify the innate immune response once microbial cells come into contact with dendrites in the ENS. In some studies, a high level of IgA was recognized in ASD patients [77].

Moreover, in the Hsiao et al. study, an increased level of IL-6 was detected in the adult offspring of a maternal immune activation (MIA) mouse model. Interestingly, the supplementation of MIA offspring with Bacteroides fragilis NCTC 9343 restored microbiota composition, IL-6 levels, and the integrity of the intestinal permeability [55]. Several cytokines, including IL-6, were found to adjust the tight junction transcription level and intestinal barrier integrity by modulating the levels of CLDN 8 and 15. Therefore, this report proposes that the B. fragilis-mediated restoration of IL-6 levels might underpin the role of IL-6 in gut permeability [55].

The gut microbiota generates various metabolites that can travel across the systemic circulation and contact the host immune cells, impact the metabolism, and/or influence the ENS and afferent signaling pathways of the vagus nerve that send signals directly to the CNS [83]. The metabolites that are derived from the microbiota include multiple products, such as short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), phenolic compounds, and free amino acids (FAAs) [17]. Butyric acid (BA), propionic acid (PAA), and acetic acid (AA) are all types of short-chain fatty acids that result from the anaerobic fermentation of indigestible carbohydrates [84]. SCFAs play a vital function in the body such as in the homeostasis of energy, in the enhancement of glucose metabolism, in lowering body weight, and in reducing the chance of colon cancer [85]. Additionally, SCFA is implicated in the regulation of the immune response by modulating the secretion of T-cell cytokines [86].

Collectively, all these previous studies are consistent with the emerging theory of disruption of excitatory/inhibitory neuronal function in ASD [99].

The microbiota of the gut can produce molecules such as serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT), γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), and acetylcholine, which can act as typical neurotransmitters influencing ENS and CNS activity [100]. Serotonin is one of the essential brain neurotransmitters that have a crucial function in regulating mood and GI activity [101]. About 95% of total serotonin in the human body is formed by enterochromaffin cells (Ecs) in the GI tract, while around 5% of the remaining serotonin is found in the brain [102]. Interestingly, gut microbes such as Escherichia spp., Enterococcus spp., Streptococcus spp., and Candida spp. have been shown to be engaged in the production of serotonin [103]. The production and secretion of 5-HT by Ecs have been suggested to be affected by the gut microbial composition [104]. For example, the depletion of the gut microbiota by antibiotics in mice was found to be associated with impaired learning and elevated depression-like behaviors. This occurred with changes in the levels of CNS 5-HT concentration, as well as with alterations in the mRNA levels of corticotrophin-releasing hormone receptor 1 and the glucocorticoid receptor [61]. Moreover, a positive relationship was detected between the level of 5-HT in the blood and the severity of gastrointestinal symptoms [105].

Together, these outcomes emphasize the essential function of the gut microbiota in the communication pathways between the gut microbiota and the brain, suggesting that bacteria may prove to be a beneficial treatment.

The hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis is another pathway by which the brain can control the activity of intestine effector cells, gut permeability, motility, mucus, and immunity, causing the translocation of gut microbial constituents. Under stress conditions, corticotrophin-releasing hormone (CRH) is released from the hypothalamus and causes the pituitary gland to secrete adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). ACTH then regulates the adrenal glands to produce and secrete hormones, such as cortisol and glucocorticoids, into the blood, which affect many bodily organs including the brain [67,100]. This initial study demonstrated that the gut microbiota can directly affect the host HPA axis. GF mice that have been exposed to restraint stress showed an increased serum concentration of the two commonly associated stress hormones ACTH and CRH. However, the colonization of young mice with Bifidobacterium infantis reversed hormonal abnormalities [60]. In the same study, the expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor was also reduced in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus of GF mice, influencing the expression and release of CRH and thereby altering the HPA axis function [60]. Several studies, particularly those carried out in individuals with ASD, have found altered levels of mRNA in the glucocorticoid receptor and CRH receptor 1 [111], which basically indicates the modification of this pathway.

In the last few decades, the rapid rise in the rate of ASD has demonstrated that autism cannot be caused only by genetics. Therefore, scientists have examined the relationships between genetics and the environment, especially studying the role of epigenetics in causing ASD [8]. Epigenetics investigates the ways in which environmental and lifestyle factors influence DNA expression without changing the DNA sequence, which can be transmitted from one generation to another via germline cells. These epigenetic modifications can control when, or even if, a specific gene turns on and off in a cell or organism [112,113].

Based on the above-mentioned findings regarding the involvement of epigenetics in ASD, one can assume that dysbiosis in the gut microbiota composition, particularly in the early periods of development, could directly switch a specific gene on or off. In this situation, the excessive use of antibiotics may affect microbial diversity and turn on a particular gene related to autism.

There is no current reliable therapy for treating patients with ASD. However, because of the increasing amount of data regarding the role of gut microbial dysbiosis in ASD, researchers are currently focusing on strategies for treating such a disease by modulating the gut microbial community as a potential therapeutic approach. This approach involves oral prebiotic, probiotic, dietary, and/or fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) as well as microbiota transfer therapy (MTT; Figure 4 and Table 2).

Mounting evidence from human and animal studies suggests that gut microbial-targeting therapy may be beneficial as a new and safe method for treating ASD patients. Antibiotics have been used as a possible treatment for ASD patients, but antibiotics influence gut homeostasis by targeting pathogens and commensal bacteria. Thus, antibiotics are not a possible option for long-term therapy for ASD. Probiotics can colonize the gut and restore the composition of bacterial populations, which, in turn, has been found to reduce autism-related symptoms. Though probiotics are commonly safe to use, a study by Rondanelli et al. [131] advises that individuals with serious underlying medical illnesses or weakened immune systems should not take probiotics, since some individuals with these circumstances were found to have bacterial or fungal infections as a consequence of probiotic intake [131]. Prebiotics serve as food for commensal bacteria, so they stimulate an increase in beneficial bacteria that are found naturally in the body and improve digestive health. Studies on ASD patients using prebiotics are limited, and there is a lack of available solid data [88]. Multiple studies have shown that ketogenic diets (KD), gluten-free and casein-free (GFCF) diets, and supplementation with omega-3-fatty acids have beneficial effects on the health of children with ASD, but the evidence available is limited and weak. Marí-Bauset et al. found some possible side effects of the GFCF diet, such as calcium deficiency and a lack of essential amino acids, resulting in decreased bone density and frequent bone fractures. Moreover, ASD patients who followed the GFCF diet needed more supplementation with vitamin D [123]. Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) can modify the gut microbiota composition by transplanting fecal microbiota from healthy donors to ASD patients [132]. FMT has emerged as a safe and promising therapeutic approach and can restore metabolites and immune function. However, FMT could have future unexpected health effects, since there are many microbes in the gut that have not been determined yet which may introduce pathogenic bacteria into the host’s intestinal system. Therefore, to obtain the most benefit from fecal transplantation, further strict donor screening is needed to minimize the risk of FMT. Microbiota transfer therapy (MTT) was found to reduce gut and ASD-like symptoms and regulate the gut microbiota of autistic individuals [124].

Probiotics are a group of living microorganisms that are well known for improving health conditions by re-establishing the gut microbial composition [132]. Although the mechanism involved is yet to be identified, it has been reported that probiotics may lower gut inflammation by decreasing the intestinal barrier permeability and reducing the inflammation produced by cytokines and other immunomodulatory effects [133]. Grossi and others introduced a case study in which ASD patients with serous cognitive impairment were treated for four weeks with the supplementation of VSL#3 (a combined mixture of live cells of 10 different probiotics). The treatment markedly alleviated autistic symptoms and relieved the severity of gastrointestinal symptoms. Furthermore, four months of daily supplementation with three probiotics containing Lactobacillus strains, two Bifidobacterium strains, and a Streptococcus strain normalized the ratio of Bacteroidetes/Firmicutes and decreased the abundance of Bifidobacterium sp. and Desulfovibrio spp. in the feces of autistic children [125]. Additionally, probiotic supplementation significantly reduced levels of TNFα. This study suggests that probiotic supplementation alters the gut microbial composition in ASD children [44]. Another study reported lower amounts of D-arabinitol in the urine of ASD children who received oral supplementation with an L. acidophilus strain, and it enhanced their ability to follow instructions [134]. These studies assumed that the appropriate use of probiotics could reduce autism-related symptoms, but additional studies are needed.

Prebiotics are non-digestible oligosaccharides that stimulate an increase in beneficial bacteria found naturally in the body, especially lactobacilli and bifidobacteria. In general, the bacterial fermentation of prebiotics produces SCFAs, which are linked to their health benefits [121,135]. In an in vitro study on a gut model, the analysis of feces samples from children with ASD and non-autistic children showed that the prebiotic Galacto-oligosaccharide (B-GOS) raises the abundance of Bifidobacterium spp. [88]. Although probiotic treatments have been shown to relieve GI symptoms and regulate the gut microbiota, studies on ASD patients using prebiotics are limited and there is a lack of available solid data [88,104].

According to the findings of many studies, autistic children strongly prefer starchy foods, snacks, and processed foods. Additionally, they consume fewer fruits, vegetables, and proteins than typical non-autistic children [136]. In addition, it is recognized that most ASD children are underweight because they ingest lower daily levels of vitamins, dietary fibers, calcium, and potassium [41]. In both human and animal models, research has demonstrated that ketogenic diets (KD) have some potential positive effects on the performance and symptoms of autistic patients. KD with a high-fat content (65–90%) is commonly used to lower ASD symptoms [41]. Other than KD, vitamins, minerals, omega-3-fatty acids, and antioxidants are thought to have beneficial effects for ASD. For example, the treatment of ASD patients with omega-3 fatty acids for 12 weeks enhanced their social behavior dramatically [126]. Multiple studies have shown that a gluten-free and casein-free (GFCF) diet is beneficial for the health of children with ASD [41]. However, in 2015, a study found that a GFCF diet plan had side effects due to calcium deficiency and a lack of essential amino acids, resulting in decreased bone density and frequent bone fractures. Moreover, ASD patients who followed a GFCF diet were found to need more vitamin D supplementation [123].

Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) modifies the gut microbiota composition by fecal transplantation from healthy donors to the patient [137]. FMT was developed to treat inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) patients based on the theory that it could help with constipation symptoms [138,139]. As a result, researchers are keen to investigate the use of FMT to cure ASD children. However, because some adverse effects, such as diarrhea, abdominal pain, bloating, and transitory low-grade fever have been recorded, the safety of FMT should be considered further [140].

Microbiota transfer therapy (MTT) is similar to FMT. Nevertheless, MTT involves two weeks of antibiotic treatment, a bowel cleanse, a stomach acid suppressant, and a fecal microbiota transplant with a high starting dose for 7–8 weeks. MTT has been found to reduce gut and ASD-related symptoms and regulate the gut microbiota of autistic individuals [124].

The increased rate of ASD shows an urgent need to detect the etiology and pathogenesis of autism. In the last few decades, accumulating evidence has implicated gut microbial dysbiosis in the etiology of ASD, as it has an essential role in various important body functions involving the development of the central nervous system (CNS) and neuropsychological homeostasis, in addition to the health of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. There are several pathways by which the microbiota of the gut or their components affect the brain. A deeper understanding of these pathways could open up novel avenues that allow the beneficial treatment of ASD patients, reducing ASD-related symptoms and improving patients’ quality of life.

To deeply examine the role of intestinal microbes in ASD, additional studies should focus on another unexplored area that can help identify the distinctive ASD microbiome. For example, current studies have mostly explained changes in gut bacteria—only a few studies have focused on fungi, and no studies have been carried out on other gut microbiota, such as protozoa, viruses, and archaea. Likewise, the application of multi-omics approaches in future research is highly recommended in order to gain more conclusive outcomes.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

