The human gut microbiome in early-onset type 1 diabetes from the TEDDY study

Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is an autoimmune disease that targets pancreatic islet beta cells and incorporates genetic and environmental factors1, including complex genetic elements2, patient exposures3 and the gut microbiome4. Viral infections5 and broader gut dysbioses6 have been identified as potential causes or contributing factors; however, human studies have not yet identified microbial compositional or functional triggers that are predictive of islet autoimmunity or T1D. Here we analyse 10,913 metagenomes in stool samples from 783 mostly white, non-Hispanic children. The samples were collected monthly from three months of age until the clinical end point (islet autoimmunity or T1D) in the The Environmental Determinants of Diabetes in the Young (TEDDY) study, to characterize the natural history of the early gut microbiome in connection to islet autoimmunity, T1D diagnosis, and other common early life events such as antibiotic treatments and probiotics. The microbiomes of control children contained more genes that were related to fermentation and the biosynthesis of short-chain fatty acids, but these were not consistently associated with particular taxa across geographically diverse clinical centres, suggesting that microbial factors associated with T1D are taxonomically diffuse but functionally more coherent. When we investigated the broader establishment and development of the infant microbiome, both taxonomic and functional profiles were dynamic and highly individualized, and dominated in the first year of life by one of three largely exclusive Bifidobacterium species (B. bifidum, B. breve or B. longum) or by the phylum Proteobacteria. In particular, the strain-specific carriage of genes for the utilization of human milk oligosaccharide within a subset of B. longum was present specifically in breast-fed infants. These analyses of TEDDY gut metagenomes provide, to our knowledge, the largest and most detailed longitudinal functional profile of the developing gut microbiome in relation to islet autoimmunity, T1D and other early childhood events. Together with existing evidence from human cohorts7,8 and a T1D mouse model9, these data support the protective effects of short-chain fatty acids in early-onset human T1D.

Recent literature has linked several facets of gut health with the onset of T1D in humans and rodent models4,6,10. Altered intestinal microbiota in connection to T1D has been reported in Finnish7,8,11,12, German13, Italian14, Mexican15, American (Colorado)16 and Turkish17 children. Common findings include increased numbers of Bacteroides species, and deficiency of bacteria that produce short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs)7,8 in cases of T1D or islet autoimmunity (IA)8,11,15,18. Corroborating these findings, decreased levels of SCFA-producing bacteria were found in adults with type 2 diabetes (T2D)19. In addition, increased intestinal permeability14 and decreased microbial diversity12 after IA but before T1D diagnosis have been reported. Studies using the nonobese diabetic (NOD) mouse model have determined immune mechanisms that mediate the protective effects of SCFAs9 and the microbiome-linked sex bias in autoimmunity20. NOD mice fed specialized diets resulting in high bacterial release of the SCFAs acetate and butyrate were almost completely protected from T1D9. A study in a streptozotocin-induced T1D mouse model demonstrated that bacterial products recognized in pancreatic lymph nodes contribute to pathogenesis21.

Future targeted approaches to identify subject-specific connections between the gut microbiota and T1D pathogenesis may be beneficial, particularly given the apparent population-level heterogeneity revealed here. For example, laboratory experiments involving dietary factors that have been associated with the onset of T1D3 may reveal biochemically specific signals that are mediated by the microbiome. Different endotypes of disease, such as differences in the first appearing autoantibody (IAA versus GADA), the number of appearing autoantibodies, the time from seroconversion to T1D diagnosis, genetic host risk alleles and ethnic backgrounds, may be characterized by distinct microbial configurations (Supplementary Note 6). Finally, components of the microbiome that were poorly measured in these data may also have crucial roles: viruses, fungi, microbial transcription or small-molecule biochemistry. By surveying these additional molecular activities by cross-sectional analysis and in more detailed longitudinal populations, this study lays the foundation to identify further gut microbial components that are predictive, protective or potentially causal in T1D risk or pathogenesis.

TEDDY is a prospective cohort study funded by the National Institutes of Health with the primary goal to identify environmental causes of T1D. It includes six clinical research centres—three in the United States (Colorado, Georgia/Florida, Washington) and three in Europe (Finland, Germany and Sweden). Detailed study design and methods have been previously published28,41,42. Written informed consents were obtained for all study participants from a parent or primary caretaker, separately, for genetic screening and participation in a prospective follow-up. The TEDDY study was approved by local US Institutional Review Boards and European Ethics Committee Boards in Colorado’s Colorado Multiple Institutional Review Board, Georgia’s Medical College of Georgia Human Assurance Committee (2004–2010), Georgia Health Sciences University Human Assurance Committee (2011–2012), Georgia Regents University Institutional Review Board (2013–2015), Augusta University Institutional Review Board (2015–present), Florida’s University of Florida Health Center Institutional Review Board, Washington state’s Washington State Institutional Review Board (2004–2012) and Western Institutional Review Board (2013–present), Finland’s Ethics Committee of the Hospital District of Southwest Finland, Germany’s Bayerischen Landesärztekammer (Bavarian Medical Association) Ethics Committee, Sweden’s Regional Ethics Board in Lund, Section 2 (2004–2012) and Lund University Committee for Continuing Ethical Review (2013–present). The study is monitored by External Advisory Board formed by the National Institutes of Health.

A priori power calculations using discrete Cox’s proportional hazards regression44 for the matched IA case–control study estimated 80% power, α = 0.01, two-sided test to detect an odds ratio > 3 for an exposure with 5% prevalence, to an odds ratio > 1.8 for an exposure with 20% prevalence. The experiments were not randomized, and investigators were not blinded to allocation during experiments and outcome assessment.

Samples were metagenomically sequenced as one library each multiplexed through Illumina HiSeq machines using the 2 × 100-bp paired-end read protocol. Samples with limited DNA quantity and/or too few high-quality reads were filtered out, resulting in a discrepancy of sample frequencies between the metagenomic data and the 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing data analysed in the companion paper30. Casava v1.8.2 (Illumina) output initial FASTQ files from the resulting data were processed using cutadapt v1.9dev2 for adaptor removal, Trim Galore v0.2.8 (Babraham Bioinformatics) for removing low-quality bases and PRINSEQ v0.20.345 for sample demultiplexing. Bowtie2 v2.2.3 was used to map reads to the human genome for decontamination before subsequent analysis.

Taxonomic profiling of the metagenomic samples was performed using MetaPhlAn246 v2.6.0, which uses a library of clade-specific markers to provide pan-microbial (bacterial, archaeal, viral and eukaryotic) quantification at the species level. MetaPhlAn2 was run using default settings.

Functional profiling was performed with HUMAnN247 v0.9.4. For an input metagenome, HUMAnN2 constructs a sample-specific reference database by concatenating and indexing the pangenomes of species detected in the sample by MetaPhlAn2 (pangenomes are pre-clustered, pre-annotated catalogues of open reading frames found across isolate genomes from a given species48). HUMAnN2 then maps sample reads against this database to quantify gene presence and abundance in a species-stratified manner, with unmapped reads further used in a translated search against UniRef9049 to include taxonomically unclassified but functionally distinct gene family abundances. Finally, for community-total, species-stratified, and unclassified gene family abundance, HUMAnN2 reconstructs metabolic pathway abundance based on the subset of gene families annotated to metabolic reactions (based on reaction and pathway definitions from MetaCyc50). Enzyme (level-4 Enzyme Commission (EC) categories) abundances were further computed by summing the abundances of individual gene families annotated to each EC number based on UniRef90-EC annotations from UniProt51.

This study includes extensive collection of clinical covariates that cover several aspects of common and rare life events in early childhood from infancy up to five years of age. In these analyses, we used information that is, according to the literature, of high relevance in terms of gut microbiome development. Information about mothers, pregnancy and birth was collected during the three-month clinic visit by questionnaire and included the mode of birth (vaginal birth versus caesarean section), gestational age, infant’s 5-min Apgar score, information about maternal diabetes (T1D, T2D or gestational diabetes) and maternal insulin and medication use (antibiotics, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, metformin, glyburide, antihypertensives) during pregnancy. Dietary information used in these analyses includes the start (and end) date for the following dietary compounds: breastfeeding, baby formula, cow’s milk, gluten, cereals, meat, vegetables and fruits. The start of solid food (anything other than breast milk or cow’s milk) was also analysed separately. The T1D-associated autoantibodies IAA, GADA and IA2A were analysed from serum samples collected at each clinic visit. In addition to IA, defined as persistent, confirmed autoantibody seropositivity, we analysed the data in terms of the persistency and cumulative frequency of autoantibodies (single or multiple autoantibodies). In TEDDY, all prescribed antibiotic courses are recorded. We further stratified these data by the type of antibiotic in five categories: amoxicillin, penicillin, cephalosporins, macrolide and other antibiotics. Information about probiotics covered the dates for starting and stopping probiotic supplementation, but not the specific types of probiotics used. In addition, sex, information about whether first degree relatives in family had T1D, and HLA haplotypes of the subjects were used in these analyses. Subjects screened from the general population were identified with high-risk alleles (89%) including: DRB1*04-DQA1*03-DQB1*03:02/DRB1*03-DQA1*05-DQB1*02:01 (DR3/4), DRB1*04-DQA1*03-DQB1*03:02/DRB1*04-DQA1*03-DQB1*03:02 (DR4/4), DRB1*04-DQA1*03-DQB1*03:02/DRB1*08-DQA1*04-DQB1*04:02 (DR4/8) and DRB1*03-DQA1*05-DQB1*02:01/DRB1*03-DQA1*05-DQB1*02:01 (DR3/3), plus six genotypes specific to first-degree relatives28.

The association between T1D case–control outcome and microbial alpha diversity in individual clinical centres was tested using a linear mixed-effects model (glmmPQL function in MASS R package) on samples 730 days or less before T1D diagnosis. In the model, the age at stool sample collection and T1D case–control outcome were used as fixed effects, and subject ID was used as a random effect.

Variance analysis was conducted using the adonis function in the vegan R package given a Bray–Curtis dissimilarity matrix of the taxonomic profiles and all TEDDY clinical metadata listed above. In brief, adonis conducts multivariate ANOVA using the dissimilarity matrix (that is, partitions the sums of squares) given the metadata as covariates. Statistical significance of the fit was assessed using permutation tests.

The HMO gene cluster homologues between B. longum subsp. infantis and multiple taxa were analysed as follows. UniRef90 gene families corresponding to the protein sequences in the B. longum subsp. infantis HMO gene cluster39 (protein sequences Blon_2331-Blon_2361 in NCBI protein sequence database) were identified by translated BLAST search against ChocoPhlAn pangenome collection48 used by HUMAnN2. Identified hits were further filtered by requiring ≥50% alignment identity and ≥80% mutual coverage. Combining this information with HUMAnN2 species-stratified UniRef90 gene family quantification enabled calling these genes present given that they had sufficient read coverage, here defined as log10(counts per million) > 0.1 in at least 50 samples collected during breastfeeding. Differential gene prevalence during breastfeeding was tested using the samples in which the carrier species had >1% relative abundance. Testing was conducted using the test of equal or given proportions (prop.test function in R) and by comparing the prevalence (proportion of the samples for which the species in question harboured the gene according to the metagenomic data) of the gene in samples collected during breastfeeding with the samples collected after weaning. P values were adjusted for multiple testing by Benjamini–Hochberg method (p.adjust function in R). All homologues together with their BLAST search metrics, prevalence in the metagenomic data and corresponding B. infantis HMO gene are reported in Supplementary Table 5.

Bifidobacterium bifidum strain RJX-1201, Bifidobacterium breve RJX-1202 and Bifidobacterium longum RJX-1203 were streaked on brain heart infusion agar (BD) supplemented with 1% vitamin K/hemin solution (BD; sBHI), and incubated for 48 h in a vinyl anaerobic chamber (Coy Laboratory Products) containing 5% CO2, 5% H2 and 90% N2 and maintained at 37 °C. Cells were transferred to sBHI liquid medium (BHI broth, BD, supplemented as above) and grown for 24 h in anaerobic conditions. Cultures were washed twice with PBS and optical density at 600 nm (OD600) was measured using a BioTek PowerWave 340 plate reader. OD600 was normalized to 0.2 for all strains and 5 μl bacteria inoculum was added to a final volume of 200 μl containing 10% sBHI and 125 mM carbon source (glucose, fucose, galactose or lactose) in a 96-well plate. OD600 was measured in the plate reader every hour for 48 h with 5 s of medium shaking before each measurement. All of the measurements were normalized to a medium-only blank. Experiment was repeated three times (n = 3) in triplicate and one representative experiment is shown. Error bars are s.d. of three technical replicates.

Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this paper.

Code for Random Forest case–control comparisons and cohort wide MaAsLin association analyses in Supplementary Table 4 has been made publicly available at https://github.com/tvatanen/broad_teddy_microbiome_analyses. Other analysis software including quality control, taxonomic, and functional profilers is publicly available and referenced as appropriate.

Any methods, additional references, Nature Research reporting summaries, source data, statements of data availability and associated accession codes are available at 10.1038/s41586-018-0620-2.



Nature thanks K. Aagaard, C. Lozupone and L. Wen for their contribution to the peer review of this work.





Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

These authors jointly supervised this work: Curtis Huttenhower, Ramnik J. Xavier

is available for this paper at 10.1038/s41586-018-0620-2.

is available for this paper at 10.1038/s41586-018-0620-2.

