Circulating microbiome in patients with portal hypertension



Portal hypertension (PH) in liver cirrhosis leads to increased gut permeability and the translocation of bacteria across the gut–liver axis. Microbial DNA has recently been detected in different blood compartments; however, this phenomenon has not been thoroughly analyzed in PH. This study aimed to explore circulating bacterial DNA signatures, inflammatory cytokines, and gut permeability markers in different blood compartments (peripheral and hepatic veins) of patients with cirrhosis and PH. The 16S rRNA blood microbiome profiles were determined in 58 patients with liver cirrhosis and 46 control patients. Taxonomic differences were analyzed in relation to PH, liver function, inflammatory cytokines, and gut permeability markers. Circulating plasma microbiome profiles in patients with cirrhosis were distinct from those of the controls and were characterized by enrichment of Comamonas, Cnuella, Dialister, Escherichia/Shigella, and Prevotella and the depletion of Bradyrhizobium, Curvibacter, Diaphorobacter, Pseudarcicella, and Pseudomonas. Comparison of peripheral and hepatic vein blood compartments of patients with cirrhosis did not reveal differentially abundant taxa. Enrichment of the genera Bacteroides, Escherichia/Shigella, and Prevotella was associated with severe PH (SPH) in both blood compartments; however, circulating microbiome profiles could not predict PH severity. Escherichia/Shigella and Prevotella abundance was correlated with IL-8 levels in the hepatic vein. In conclusion, we demonstrated a distinct circulating blood microbiome profile in patients with cirrhosis, showing that specific bacterial genera in blood are marginally associated with SPH, Model for End-Stage Liver Disease score, and inflammation biomarkers; however, circulating microbial composition failed to predict PH severity.

Portal hypertension (PH) is a common hemodynamic abnormality in cirrhosis that is associated with the development of severe complications, including variceal bleeding, ascites, and hepatic encephalopathy.1,2 PH leads to increased gastrointestinal permeability, translocation of bacteria, and endotoxin levels and is associated with infection risk, which remains the major cause of mortality for patients with cirrhosis.3–5 Diminished clearance by cirrhotic liver and portosystemic shunting can further activate inflammatory cascades, both in the liver and systemically.6,7

Our aim in the current study was to use 16S rRNA sequencing of plasma specimens to determine the circulating microbiome signatures in different blood compartments of patients with cirrhosis and PH. We also wanted to determine whether circulating bacterial DNA levels and specific bacterial taxa were correlated with the degree of PH, liver function tests, inflammatory cytokines, and gut permeability markers. In addition, we aimed to assess whether the circulating microbiome profile in peripheral blood could be used as a noninvasive biomarker for the prediction of PH severity.

Compositional analysis revealed that the circulating microbiome in the peripheral circulation comprised four phyla in healthy controls and patients with cirrhosis, with Proteobacteria being the most dominant, followed by Bacteroidetes, Actinobacteria, and Firmicutes (Figure 1(a)). The relative abundance of Firmicutes was increased in patients with cirrhosis compared to that in healthy individuals (9.7% vs. 5.8%, p = .034), while the relative abundance of Proteobacteria (49.2% vs. 55.9%), Bacteroidetes (29.1% vs. 25%), and Actinobacteria (12% vs. 13.3%) showed no significant differences between the groups. Compositional variation at the phylum level of the circulating microbiome in individual patients with cirrhosis and controls is presented in Supplementary Figures S1 and S2. Bacterial diversity (α-diversity), as assessed by the Shannon diversity index, did not reveal significant differences between patients with cirrhosis and healthy controls (Figure 1(b)). However, significant blood microbial community clusters (β-diversity), as assessed by the Bray-Curtis dissimilarity index, were identified (p < .001; Figure 1(c)).

Bacterial community clustering between patients with cirrhosis and healthy controls could be explained by the significant differences in the circulating microbiome composition. Compared to the controls, patients with cirrhosis showed an increase in the relative abundance of Enterobacteriaceae, Methylococcaceae, and Prevotellaceae and a decline in abundance of members of the families Burkholderiaceae, Cytophagaceae, Comamonadaceae, Coriobacteriaceae, Nocardiaceae, and Pseudomonadaceae. At the genus level, patients with cirrhosis had higher relative levels of Cnuella, Comamonas, Dialister, Escherichia/Shigella, and Prevotella and lower levels of Bradyrhizobium, Curvibacter, Diaphorobacter, Pseudarcicella, and Pseudomonas (Figures 1(d-e)). These results indicate a distinct circulating microbiome profile for patients with cirrhosis. Abundance levels of the differentially abundant genera in the peripheral veins of patients with cirrhosis and the controls are shown in Supplementary Figure S3.

We analyzed the circulating microbiome in the hepatic veins of patients with cirrhosis. The same four phyla of the peripheral circulation microbiome comprised the hepatic vein microbiome, with Proteobacteria at 44%, Bacteroidetes at 27.7%, Actinobacteria at 18.4%, and Firmicutes at 9.9% (Figure 2(a)). There were no significant differences in the within-sample diversity (α-diversity) or community structure (β-diversity) between the hepatic vein blood and peripheral vein blood compartments (Figures 2(b-c)). Pairwise differential abundances between the different compartments of the study patients showed a tendency or the genera Acidovorax and Microbacterium to be enriched in the peripheral veins and Alpinimonas, Polynucleobacter, Prevotella, and Undibacterium to be enriched in the hepatic veins of patients with cirrhosis; however, these findings did not withstand multiple testing corrections (Figure 2(d)).

Expression levels of the gut permeability marker fatty acid-binding protein 2 (FABP2) were higher in the peripheral veins of patients with cirrhosis than in those in the healthy controls (Supplementary Figure S4). Moreover, peripheral levels of FABP2 were correlated with HVPG values (Supplementary Table S1). To assess whether intestinal permeability affected the circulating microbiome composition, we evaluated correlations between FABP2 and the circulating microbiome members; however, none of the genera demonstrated significant associations FABP2 expression (Figures 3(a-b)). Moreover, we did not identify any significant correlations between the circulating taxa and HVPG values in any compartment that withstood multiple comparison testing (Figures 3(c-d)).

While we did not identify any correlations between HVPG values and the circulating microbiome taxa, we proceeded with differential abundance testing between groups of patients with different PH severity. Most differentially abundant genera failed to withstand multiple comparison testing. However, in the comparison of patients with clinically significant portal hypertension (CSPH) and non-significant PH, Bacteroides, Escherichia/Shigella, Prevotella, and Tepidimonas in hepatic veins and Bacteroides, Enhydrobacter, Escherichia/Shigella, and Prevotella in peripheral veins all withstood multiple comparison testing with the genera being more abundant in the patients with severe portal hypertension (SPH) (Figure 4). Moreover, Bacteroides Escherichia/Shigella, and Prevotella were enriched in both compartments of patients with a Model For End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD) score >15. However, after multiple comparison corrections, the results remained significant only in the hepatic vein blood (Figure 5). Abundances of Bacteroides, Escherichia/Shigella, and Prevotella in subgroups of patients with different PH severity and MELD scores in the different compartments are shown in Supplementary Figure S5.

To assess the ability of the circulating microbiome to discriminate patients with CSPH or SPH, we performed receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis based on the relative abundances of the differentially abundant genera. This sub-analysis revealed no statistically significant differences, giving an area under curve (AUC) of 0.586 (95% CI: 0.435–0.736, p = .44) for CSPH and an AUC of 0.583 (95% CI: 0.432–0.734, p = .17) for SPH, indicating a limited potential for using the circulating microbiome to predict PH in patients with cirrhosis (Figure 6).

To assess the relationship between members of the circulating microbiome and systemic inflammation, we measured the levels of lipopolysaccharide (LPS), interleukin (IL)-6, and IL-8 in both compartments of patients with cirrhosis and in the peripheral veins of the healthy controls. Levels of LPS, IL-6, and IL-8 were higher in patients with cirrhosis than in the healthy controls. Furthermore, IL-6 and IL-8 levels in the peripheral blood were correlated with MELD and Child-Pugh-Turcotte (CTP) scores (Table 1 and Table 2, Supplementary Figure S4). We identified no significant correlations between circulating microbiome genera and cytokines in the peripheral veins; however, the relative abundance of Alistipes, Barnesiella, Coprobacter, Escherichia/Shigella, Faecalibacterium, Fusicatenibacter, Parasutterella, Prevotella, Roseburia, Ruminococcus, and Satturella was correlated with IL-8 levels in the hepatic vein (Figures 3(a-b)).

SD – Standard deviation; HCV – Hepatitis C virus; MELD – Model of End-Stage Liver Disease; HVPG – Hepatic venous pressure gradient; NCSPH – Not clinically significant portal hypertension; CSPH – Clinically significant portal hypertension; SPH – Severe portal hypertension; PPI – Proton pump inhibitors; FABP2 – Fatty acid-binding protein 2; LPS – Lipopolysaccharides; IL- Interleukin.

All of the included patients were on a regular diet. None of the patients with alcohol-induced cirrhosis were active drinkers for at least one month prior to the inclusion in the study. Previous history of cirrhosis-related events represents events in the last six months; none of the included patients had any cirrhosis-related events for at least a month prior to inclusion in the study.

Wilcoxon ranked-sum and Chi square tests were used to compare groups.

SD – Standard deviation; MELD – Model of End-Stage Liver Disease; HVPG – Hepatic venous pressure gradient; PPI – Proton pump inhibitors; FABP2 – Fatty acid-binding protein 2; LPS – Lipopolysaccharide; IL – Interleukin.

Wilcoxon ranked-sum and Chi square tests were used to compare groups.

In this study, we aimed to evaluate circulating bacterial DNA signatures, inflammatory cytokine levels, and gut permeability markers in different blood compartments of patients with cirrhosis and PH. We identified significant clustering of circulating microbiome profiles between patients with cirrhosis and those of healthy controls. The differences could be explained by the differential abundance of several families and genera of bacteria, indicating a circulating microbiome shift in patients with cirrhosis. The relative abundance of Escherichia/Shigella and Prevotella was discriminant for liver cirrhosis versus that of the healthy controls, and together with Bacteroides, they were more abundant in patients with MELD scores >15 and in those with SPH. However, we did not find significant differences between the hepatic vein blood and peripheral vein blood microbiome profiles. Escherichia/Shigella and Prevotella showed significant correlations with clinical parameters and IL-8 concentrations in the hepatic vein. The circulating microbiome profile could not predict CSPH or SPH in our cohort of patients with cirrhosis.

In conclusion, we demonstrated a distinct circulating blood microbiome profile in patients with cirrhosis. We also showed that specific bacterial genera in the blood were marginally associated with SPH, MELD score, and inflammatory biomarkers. However, circulating microbial composition did not predict the severity of PH and probably will not be an efficient noninvasive marker for detecting CSPH or SPH.

The study included 58 consecutive outpatients with stable hepatitis C or alcohol-induced cirrhosis who were scheduled for a HVPG measurement. In addition, 46 healthy individuals were enrolled as controls. Demographic and clinical characteristics of the patients with cirrhosis, including CTP scores, MELD scores, PPIs, and lactulose use are shown in Table 1 and Table 2. All patients with cirrhosis underwent a scheduled HVPG measurement at the Department of Gastroenterology at the Lithuanian University of Health Sciences from September 2014 to December 2019. None of the patients with alcohol-induced cirrhosis had been active drinkers for at least 1 month prior to inclusion in the study. Cirrhosis was diagnosed according to standard clinical, laboratory, and radiologic criteria. Exclusion criteria for patients with liver cirrhosis were as follows: the presence of any other medical condition, including diabetes mellitus, cardiovascular disease, neurodegenerative conditions, acute kidney injury, hepatorenal syndrome, or cancer; active infection, including spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (SBP); portal vein or hepatic vein thrombosis; current use of beta-blockers or other vasoactive drugs; and use of antibiotics within 1 month prior to inclusion. Healthy control individuals were free of any chronic medical condition and had not received any medications during the previous 3 months prior to inclusion in the study. Demographic data, clinical parameters, liver function tests, and clinical chemistry data were collected from all participants at the time of inclusion in the study. The study protocol was approved by the Kaunas Region Biomedical Research Ethics Committee (2015–08-24, No. BE-2-28, Kaunas, Lithuania). All participants provided written informed consent prior to participating in the study. The study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. A schematic of the workflow of the study is shown in Figure 7.

All HVPG measurements were performed by the same experienced interventional radiologist according to the protocol described by Groszmann and Wongcharatrawee.61 At least three repeated measurements were performed for each patient to determine free and wedged hepatic vein pressures. HVPG values of 1–5 mmHg were considered to represent normal portal pressures, whereas PH was diagnosed at an HVPG ≥ 6 mmHg. An HVPG ≥ 10 mmHg was considered to be CSPH and an HVPG ≥ 12 mmHg was considered to be SPH.

Peripheral blood samples were drawn from all subjects at the time of enrollment in the study. Blood samples were collected from the hepatic vein during the HVPG measurement procedure. Within 1 hour after drawing, the blood samples were placed at −80°C and stored until further processing.

Circulating nucleic acids were extracted from blood plasma using a column-based QIAamp Circulating Nucleic Acid Isolation Kit (55114; Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Specific primer pair sets 27 F and 338 R targeting the hypervariable region V1-V2 were used in the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) process. Sequencing of the 16S ribosomal RNA gene was performed using the Illumina MiSeq platform (Illumina Inc.) and a dual-indexing approach. The acquired sequencing data were assigned into amplicon sequencing variants and taxonomically annotated against the RDP v16 database using the ‘dada2’ software package in R. A detailed description of the methods used for quantification of the FABP2, IL-6, IL-8, LPS, and 16S rRNA gene sequencing is provided in the Supplementary Materials.

All statistical analyses were performed using the R programming environment. Nonparametric tests, including the Wilcoxon rank-sum test and the Kruskal-Wallis test, were used for routine statistical analysis where appropriate. Specific statistical analysis of the microbiome data was performed using freely accessible R packages, including phyloseq, vegan, DESeq2, and zinbwave.62–65 Only taxa meeting the criteria of a minimum abundance of two in one sample and present in at least 10% of the samples were included in the downstream analysis. The taxa present at >20% were included in differential abundance analysis. The Shannon index was used to measure α-diversity. Permutational analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) using the vegan package was used to detect significant changes in Bray-Curtis dissimilarity, as a measure of β-diversity. Differential abundance analysis was performed using the DESeq2 package, incorporating zero-inflation weights assessed by the zinbwave package. The results were controlled for age and gender as covariates. The discriminative power of the circulating microbiome profile was assessed using ROC curve analysis. Correlations between taxa abundances, clinical parameters of cirrhosis, inflammatory cytokines, and intestinal permeability markers were evaluated using Spearman’s correlation test. P-values were adjusted for multiple testing following the Benjamini–Hochberg procedure and p-values <0.05 were considered statistically significant.

PH – portal hypertension

FABP2 – Fatty acid-binding protein 2

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).

Rolandas Gedgaudas: Conceptualization; Data curation; Formal Analysis; Investigation; Visualization; Writing – original draft.

Juozas Kupcinskas: Conceptualization; Funding acquisition; Project administration; Writing – original draft; Writing – review and editing.

Illumina reads of the 16S rRNA gene amplicon that support the findings of this study are available from the Open Science Framework repository at https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/T2ED7.

Supplemental data for this article can be accessed on the publisher’s website

