A Comprehensive Review of the Current and Future Role of the Microbiome in Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma

This review summarizes the current literature related to the microbiome and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). The aim of this review is to explore the current role of the microbiome in the disease process, screening/diagnostics and to postulate the future role with regards to therapeutic strategies including chemotherapy, immunotherapy and surgery. We further explore the future of microbiome modulation (faecal microbiome transplants, bacterial consortiums, anti-microbials and probiotics), their applications and how we can improve the future of microbiome modulation in a bid to improve PDAC outcomes.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is expected to become the second most common cause of cancer death in the USA by 2030, yet progress continues to lag behind that of other cancers, with only 9% of patients surviving beyond 5 years. Long-term survivorship of PDAC and improving survival has, until recently, escaped our understanding. One recent frontier in the cancer field is the microbiome. The microbiome collectively refers to the extensive community of bacteria and fungi that colonise us. It is estimated that there is one to ten prokaryotic cells for each human somatic cell, yet, the significance of this community in health and disease has, until recently, been overlooked. This review examines the role of the microbiome in PDAC and how it may alter survival outcomes. We evaluate the possibility of employing microbiomic signatures as biomarkers of PDAC. Ultimately this review analyses whether the microbiome may be amenable to targeting and consequently altering the natural history of PDAC.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is expected to become the 2nd most common cause of cancer death by 2030 in the USA. Progress in improving PDAC survival continues to lag behind that of other cancers. In the USA, 5-year survival was 2% of cases diagnosed in 1975–1977, progressing to 4% (1987–1989), 6% (2003–2009) and 9% in 2009–2015 [1,2]. This poor prognosis relates to the relatively late stage at which PDAC is first diagnosed, with most cases presenting with locally advanced or metastatic disease [3]. Currently in the UK, only 7% survive to 5 years, with just 25% managing to survive to 1-year [4]. Despite improvements in surgical techniques, perioperative care, chemotherapy, and radiotherapy, there has been little progress in improving survival outcomes. Nevertheless, a minority of patients do manage to survive to, and beyond, 5-years after surgical resection. The tumour genome, however, does not seem to explain the improved survival in this subset of patients [5]. This suggests an alternative explanation for the survival difference. A better understanding of this difference is fundamental to improving PDAC outcomes.

The microbiome has been recognised as playing a pivotal role in influencing the immune system, interactions with cancer therapeutics and outcomes in PDAC and other cancers [10,13,14,15,16,17]. In this review, we provide an overview of recent studies that have added to our understanding of the microbiome, and the role it plays in the current and future management of PDAC. We summarise the relevance of anatomically specific microbiome profiles in PDAC, including the oral, duodenal, biliary, pancreatic, and faecal microbiomes. Additionally, we consider the potential role of bacterial extracellular vesicles (BEVs) and bile acids in PDAC. We address the influence of the microbiome with therapeutic strategies targeting PDAC, including chemotherapy, immunotherapy, and surgical intervention. Finally, we consider future applications of microbial therapies, such as antibiotics, probiotics and faecal microbiota transplants (FMT). Ultimately, we propose that there is the potential to harness the microbiome to advance therapeutics, diagnostics, and/or prognostic tests to improve survival outcomes in PDAC.

As the field of microbiome research evolves, our consensus on definitions have evolved, too. The microbiome was eloquently described by Whipps et al. in 1988 as a “characteristic microbial community occupying a reasonably well-defined habitat which has distinct physico-chemical properties. The term thus does not only refer to the microorganisms involved but also encompasses their “theatre of activity” [18]. The theatre of activity refers to the entire spectrum of molecules produced by microorganisms (living or non-living), encompassing structural elements, metabolites, and molecules produced by co-existent hosts, all of which are structured by surrounding environmental conditions. Recently, Berg et al. have added to this definition, proposing that the microbiome forms “a dynamic and interactive micro-ecosystem prone to change in time and scale, is integrated in macro-ecosystems including eukaryotic hosts, and here crucial for their functioning and health” [19].

Bacterial taxonomy has facilitated our understanding of the bewildering diversity of the microbiota. In bacterial taxonomy, any given bacterium is collected into homogenous taxonomic groups, based on shared phenotypic or genotypic characteristics. These characteristics are assessed, and bacteria are subsequently grouped up the taxonomic ladder. All bacteria are organised in ascending levels as follows: species, genera, family, order, class, phylum, and domain; where species is the smallest unit, and domain the largest. Advances in technology have allowed us to gain efficient and comprehensive knowledge of the human microbiome. In fact, the human body harbours about one prokaryote for every human somatic cell, with a great and diverse variety in the over 1000 distinct species that colonise us [22,23,24]. This results in a wide array of genetic variability. We are gaining an extensive catalogue of genera and species that reside on and in us, with potential functional importance at both the individual microorganism and the community level [25]. A comprehensive explanation of the categorisation of bacteria is beyond the scope of this review.

Recent research has uncovered the presence of clinically relevant populations of bacteria within the pancreas, biliary tree, and bowel in patients with PDAC [26,27,28,29,30,31]. There is growing evidence that: specific bacteria are present in PDAC [16,21,26,30,31,32,33,34,35,36]; the pancreatic intra-tumoural microbiome may have shared characteristics with the intestinal microbiome; and the PDAC microbiome is clearly distinct to that of normal pancreatic tissue [16,21,30,31,32,34]. Indeed, bacterial classes classically found in the duodenum, such as Gammaproteobacteria, are commonly found in human PDAC tissue samples [26,30,32,33,34,35]. There is likely a relationship between duodenum, gut, and pancreatic tumour microbiomes; however, the route(s) underlying colonisation of the pancreas remain debated [13,37]. A growing body of evidence suggests that one such route is translocation from the gut, specifically from the duodenum retrograde up the bile and pancreatic ducts, thereby, allowing colonisation of the pancreatic microenvironment [13,21,32,34,38].

Neoantigen targeting vaccines have been shown to induce T-cell responses, in melanomas and other immunogenic tumours [53]. PDAC is not as immunogenic [54]. Using a neoantigen-based vaccine (PancVAX), in combination with the STING adjuvant, transient tumour suppression has been demonstrated in a mouse model. Addition of anti-PD-1 immunotherapy and an agonist antibody to OX40 gave rise to a durable anti-tumour response and a survival benefit in mice [52,53]. The depletion of CD8+ T-cells in these mice led to the complete loss of anti-tumour response, while only partial loss was observed with CD4+ T-cell depletion [52]. Crucially, the addition of OX40 agonist antibodies gave rise to a change in the CD4+ T-cell repertoire, shifting away from the T-reg phenotype (FoxP3+ CD4+) towards one expressing interferon gamma, promoting cytotoxic responses [52]. This raises prospects for PDAC patients in the future, with novel vaccine therapies potentially around the corner.

It has recently become apparent that the fungal community may also have a role in the PDAC TME. Using fluorescent in situ hybridisation staining with 28S rRNA probes, one group demonstrated a distinct composition of fungi in human and mouse PDAC models [21]. Another group has shown duodenal fluid aspirates in PDAC patients contain higher fungal DNA levels compared to healthy controls [55]. Interestingly, PDAC is associated with a three-thousand-fold increase in density of fungal species, compared to normal pancreata [21]. Alpha and beta diversity indices show distinct fungal composition in PDAC compared with that of the gut, with Malassezia spp. found in abundance in both KC mice and patients. Additionally, human PDAC bears a distinct fungal community to that found in healthy pancreata. Ablation of the fungal community in KC mice with amphotericin B produced smaller tumour weights, lower fractions of fibrosis and higher fractions of preserved acinar area. This suggests some fungal communities influence tumour growth. The pathways by which this is achieved have been interrogated [21].

MBL (mannose binding lectin) recognises fungal pathogens and binds fungal wall glycans in order to activate the lectin pathway of the complement cascade, triggering C3 convertase which cleaves C3, releasing subunit C3a, which interacts with C3a receptors found on tumour cells and, in doing so, promote tumour growth [56,57,58]. It has been shown that MBL expression is associated with reduced survival in human PDAC and that deletion of MBL protects against tumour growth in mice models [21]. It may be that translocation of fungi from gut mycobiome to the PDAC TME causes activation of MBL and subsequent complement cascade, which ultimately causes C3 associated tumour growth. This hypothesis is supported by evidence that recombinant C3a accelerates tumour growth in vivo. Moreover, the knockdown of the C3a receptor protects against tumour growth, but also abrogates the tumour suppressive effect of anti-fungal therapy, further strengthening the MBL-C3 axis hypothesis [21]. The fungal and bacterial constituents of the microbiome are in continual interaction [59]. We propose that the two should be considered in concert when targeted. Experimental data examining the possible synergistic effects of simultaneously ablating both compared with either strategy in isolation in animal models of PDAC are urgently required.

There has been significant study of the microbiome in various disease states. Microbiomic differences have been demonstrated to predispose and contribute to a variety of disease states, including obesity, type-2 diabetes, cardio-metabolic disease, and non-alcoholic liver disease via systemic metabolic shifts [60]. Equally, metabolic dysfunction can induce changes in the microbiome, suggesting dynamic communication between host and microbiome [11,61]. Riquelme and colleagues used the Kyoto Encyclopaedia of Genes and Genomes’ (KEGG) pathway maps and modules to model the metabolic pathways present in the microbiomes of LTS and STS PDACs tumours [16]. Analysis showed differential clustering between LTS and STS, suggesting distinct pathways represented in the two groups. LTS microbiomes showed enrichment in the metabolism of amino acids, xenobiotics, lipids, terpenoids and polyketides, in addition to other cellular functions. The enrichment of xenobiotic biodegradation and lipid metabolism pathways correlated with better patient survival outcomes (hazard ratios 5.198 and 4.528 respectively). Meanwhile, STS demonstrated upregulation of protein synthesis and processing, genetic information processing, energetic and nucleotide metabolism, DNA replication, and repair pathways. These findings suggest a difference in the metabolic profile of the microbiome within the PDAC tumours of LTS and STS. Other work has shown PDAC Basal-type to be associated with increased levels of metabolism, energy production, conversion, replication, defense mechanisms and cell membrane/envelope biogenesis [36]. The microbial genu associated with Basal-type PDAC have been shown to positively correlate with some of these functions, such as DNA replication and Kras signalling and other pancreatic cancer related pathways. Furthermore, Basal-type PDAC has been shown to be associated with microbial abilities of metabolic activity, cell motility and antibiotic resistance [36]. Such a hostile microbial environment associated with aggressive phenotypes must be considered as we explore the role of microbiome-modulating therapeutics and their clinical application. The interaction between microbiome, its metabolic products (metabolome) and the changes these induce in the host are a field of active study.

Indeed, in colorectal cancer, models of bacterial interactions in colorectal pathogenesis have been proposed. It has been postulated that “driver” microbes that initiate colorectal cancer development are followed by “passenger” microbes, which have a growth advantage in the environment established by the drivers [8,73,74]. This suggests that disease initiation changes the TME, consequently changing the microbial community, promoting tumour progression. Some have proposed that driver bacteria may function at the initiation stage, and passengers may be essential contributors to the promotion or progression stage [8,75]. We imagine, given the role that the microbiome plays in PDAC outcomes, that similar models would apply to PDAC and warrant investigation in this context, as well as in colorectal cancer. Indeed, Pushakar et al. [34] serially analysed the faecal bacterial profiles of KC mice compared with WT controls over time. In the early murine life, bacterial profiles were similar; however, diverging bacterial profiles eventually declared themselves, with growing divergence over time. Changes were also associated with disease progression, in keeping with previous work [21]. The temporal basis of these changes suggests a stepwise change that permits invasion by other species as new niches are generated in the gut by tumour associated changes. Further studies examining temporal changes in the pancreatic microbiome in animal models, as well as factors produced by potential ‘driver’ candidates, would be of significant interest to the PDAC field. It also raises the prospect of identifying pre-malignant states by screening for microbiomic changes.

Conventional cancer immunotherapy targets tumour-promoting inflammation and immune evasion by targeting immune checkpoint blockade, enhancing tumour-specific T-cell activity and anti-tumour T-cell education. Common immune checkpoint inhibitors include nivolumab, pembrolizumab, and pidilizumab (targeting programmed cell death protein-1, PD-1), atezolizumab (programmed cell death protein ligand-1, PD-L1), and ipilimumab and tremelimumab (cytotoxic T-lymphocyte–associated antigen 4, CTLA-4) [76]. These exhibit demonstrable efficacy in treating several solid organ malignancies and are widely employed [77]. Unfortunately, targeting T-cell immune checkpoint receptors or their cognate ligands have failed in PDAC clinical trials to date [78].

Dendritic cells (DC) are antigen-presenting cells (APCs) that can generate tumour-protective T-cells within the TME. Sivan et al. investigated melanoma growth in mice [62] and showed that oral administration of Bifidobacterium improved tumour control to the same degree as PD-L1-specific antibody therapy, and that combination therapy nearly eradicated tumour outgrowth [94]. This effect was mediated by augmentation of DC function, enhancing CD8 T-cell priming. However, in PDAC DC, numbers are likely too small to replicate such a response in adaptive immunity within the PDAC TME. Hedge et al. identified that DC dysfunction in PDAC, both systemically and in tumour-draining lymph nodes, contributes to impaired T-cell priming [95]. CD40 is a costimulatory receptor that is expressed by myeloid cells in the TME. CD40 agonists potentiate the immunogenicity of DCs, convert TAMs to a tumoricidal phenotype and reverse tumour-associated fibrosis [96]. Long et al. recently illustrated enhanced chemotherapy efficacy in PDAC with the use of CD40 agonists [97]. Another tactic is to combine T-cell targeted treatments with agents that can reverse immunosuppressive myeloid cells produced by tumour cells via stopping receptor–ligand interactions [98].

It has been suggested that the presence of gut or intra-tumoural microbiota may modulate the host response to chemotherapy treatment. It may be that we can target specific microbiomic constituents to improve chemotherapeutic efficiency or use microbial biomarkers to predict treatment response.

As we unearth the bacteria and fungi involved with drug disposition, action, and toxicity, we may be able to inactivate/activate them in order to potentiate chemotherapy, alter toxicity or alter the progression of disease. However, this research is very much in its early stages. Choy et al. have expressed caution that experimental models exploring the link between microbiome and chemoresistance may not be generalisable [110]. It is suggested that, in order to target the microbiome in future chemotherapeutic approaches, we must first understand the influence of host, environmental and local tumour tissue factors on microbiome composition and function [14,64,110]. There is a need to develop more robust evidence, specifically in PDAC, on the clinical application of chemotherapeutics co-administered with antibiotics and/or antifungals, assessing their impact on cancer outcomes. As we begin to understand the host, environmental and tumour specific influences on the TME, we may be able to explore individualised pharmaco-microbiomics and treatment strategies based on biomarkers and patient demographics. In Figure 3, we portray current and future strategic avenues for the microbiome in PDAC chemotherapeutic strategies, as well as barriers to success.

If the constituents of the gut microbiome can affect the colonisation of the PDAC tissue [21,32,34,38], we must ponder altering gut microbiome in order to modify the tumour microbiome. It has been shown that microbiota from human faecal microbial transplants (FMT) administered to murine PDAC models can be detected in the PDAC microbiome post transplantation, albeit in small quantities of less than 5% [16]. Nonetheless this suggests that, similar to the host gut microbiome, transplanted microbiota can translocate into the PDAC tumour or cross talk and alter the TME. In fact, FMT yielded from PDAC LTS transplanted into murine PDAC models has been shown to significantly reduce tumour growth [16]. This positive effect of FMT with LTS material was then lost with antibiotics. Furthermore, after FMT, there were clear differences in the tumour microbiome between the antibiotic treated and antibiotic untreated mice. These differences also translated into changes in tumour immune cell infiltrates, with the non-antibiotic treated LTS FMT group showing a CD8+ T-cell rich environment, whilst the STS and healthy control FMT groups demonstrated increased numbers of CD4+FOXP3+ T-regs and myeloid derived suppressor cells, both of which are associated with dampening of immune responses, thereby permitting tumour growth [16]. Interestingly, when comparing the tumour microbiomes in mice receiving FMT from either LTS or STS and healthy controls, they found the gut and tumour microbial beta-diversity in all three mice groups differentially clustered. Moreover, mice with STS FMT possessed larger tumours than their healthy control FMT counterparts, further suggesting that the PDAC-associated gut/tumour microenvironment may hold a tumour-promoting effect.

We must continue to investigate the trends in the specific microbial constituents of FMT, gut and tumour samples, determining which promote an antitumor or protumour effect, as well as the specific biochemical and cellular mechanisms by which they do so. Through this we may be able to stratify donors and hosts by their bacterial profiles, establish a microbial consortium with pre-defined microbial parameters and target underlying mechanisms. If FMT is a proven therapeutic avenue for PDAC, investigating these trends would be of great value in identifying predictors of treatment success, whether that be an assay of host tumour, bile, or stool microbiota or microbiomic markers, in order to further profile both donor and recipients for matching. We imagine a future where we possess such a deep understanding of the host and recipient microbiota that we can exploit the host microbiome with therapies that are so personalised that they may exert opposing effects from one patient to the next. However, we must continue to explore a separate vein of study into the shared and consistent characteristics of the PDAC tumour microbiome between individuals, which may allow for the widespread use of strategies. Either way, with the microbiome increasingly recognised as a source of discrepancy in PDAC survival, the further investigation of the interplay between the host, tumour and microbiomic factors deserves urgent study [89,120].

We know that higher alpha diversity in the stool of long term PDAC survivors transplanted into PDAC-bearing mice is associated with tumour regression [16]. Interestingly a recent meta-analysis investigating FMT in inflammatory bowel disease has shown that the pooling of stool from multiple donors increases microbial diversity and is associated with enhanced remission rates [117]. We must investigate whether donor pooling to increase diversity correlates with improved outcomes in PDAC. Furthermore, short term specific engraftment of the pancreatic tumour with oral delivery of bacteria/faecal microbiome has been demonstrated in mice models [16,34]. However, we have not proven long term colonisation of the pancreatic tumour nor long term tumour response in murine models nor a role for FMT in PDAC human subjects. One study in metabolic syndrome has shown that the long term (3 months) engraftment of donor bacterial strains with FMT can co-exist with recipient bacterial strains [115]. We must investigate the temporal changes of the pancreatic tumour microbiome composition shifts over time following transplantation of FMT and whether one course of FMT exerts long lasting effects on the PDAC tumour. A recent meta-analysis investigating the role of FMT in recurrent Clostridioides difficile infection found that the effect of FMT on clinical outcomes significantly increases with repeated administrations of FMT [121]. Whilst FMT in PDAC is in its infancy, to date there are no comparative animal studies in FMT for PDAC exploring the impact of donor pooling, dosing, or regimen intensity.

Furthermore, only a minority (5%) of FMT donor bacteria are detected in the PDAC tumour microbiome post transplantation in murine models [16]. Whilst this was enough to evoke a tumour response, to guide future practice related to FMT, future work should investigate how tumour microbiota populations with variable proportions of donor FMT correlate with outcomes. Another question to answer is: what is the minimum quantity of specific microbes or composition of microbiota that are required to evoke a positive tumour response? Through this understanding, we may be able to provide the most appropriate FMT regimen and composition, whilst minimising any adverse effects associated with its administration.

In addition to the hypothesis that gut bacteria translocate into or remotely affect the tumour microbiome, it has also been suggested that the lower GI tract and mesenteric nodes may serve as sites for bacterial seeding to the pancreas [13]. Of great interest is FMT via the colonic route, and whether this holds implications on the PDAC microbiome. If so, this may provide an alternative route of administration that can be employed depending on patient needs. We also know that instrumentation of the pancreatic duct may affect the tumour microbiome [26,32,38,122]. From this, we hypothesize that direct delivery of microbiota with proven anti-tumour affects through endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) may play a role in future modulation of the PDAC microbiome and may improve on the fraction of transplanted microbiota present in the TME compared to other routes of administration. Modulation of the microbiome directly via the biliary tract, whether that be through the delivery of microbiota transplants or local antibiotics, is likely to limit undesired off-target effects.

The faecal microbiome make-up may change with the course of PDAC tumourigenesis [21,34]. If FMT from PDAC donors is the therapeutic avenue we pursue as a novel treatment option or research focus, the evidence that the faecal bacterial profile evolves with the disease process draws into question at what stage in the disease should PDAC FMT patient donors provide a stool donation and how does FMT yielded from patients at different linear stages in disease correlate with outcomes in FMT transplanted patients? Can we reliably repeatedly use the stool of one donor consistently over time or must we carry out an assessment of donor stool composition each time a donation is given? It might be that we can administer a defined bacterial isolate or a specific microbial composition with the ideal characteristics that is not necessarily derived from a donor but rather cultivated in a laboratory setting, in order to circumvent such a hurdle. Additionally, as our understanding of the temporal relationship of faecal/gut bacterial profiles and PDAC disease progression evolves, we may be able to use this information to develop a screening tool for PDAC. Work to date on stool biomarkers is discussed further below.

From a clinical perspective, donor selection and screening would be key to the implementation of FMT in PDAC. In one study, two immunosuppressed patients developed bacteraemia with an antibiotic resistant strain of E coli (ESBL) following the administration of FMT capsules derived from a single donor, with one associated mortality [123]. Furthermore, there is a concern that SARS-CoV-2 may be transmitted by FMT; additional safety precautions should account for this in future studies and clinical practice [124]. We are still a long way away from clinical implementation in PDAC; however, the safety profile of FMT should be carefully considered in future clinical trials. In addition to vigorous screening of donors, we must be prudent in FMT recipient selection, paying due regard to co-morbidity, immunosuppression and, as discussed above, the host microbiome.

Another clinical consideration is the impact of antibiotics in patients being treated with FMT. It does seem counterintuitive to use antibiotics in patients with FMT; however, it is well known that cancer patients are prone to infection that may require treatment. In PDAC murine models treated with FMT from long term human survivors with no evidence of disease, post FMT short-term antimicrobial therapy results in larger tumours than FMT-treated models without antibiotics [16]. Indeed, the reduction in the bacterial tumour environment may weaken the impact of FMT. Subgroup analysis of those who do and do not receive antibiotics in human trials investigating FMT in PDAC would provide valuable insight. Pre-treatment of patients with antibiotics prior to FMT may enhance FMT efficacy in other diseases; it has been postulated, though not proven, that antibiotics eliminate competition from host microorganisms [125]. Interestingly, Pushalkar et al. [34] showed that bacterial ablation in recipient mice improved colonisation by the donor stool microbiome. Antibiotics may serve to eradicate possible competition between host and donor microbiota.

The research available to date is in its infancy and there is a paucity of data and knowledge on the role of FMT in PDAC. We must be cautious in the conclusions we draw from the limited evidence currently available. Preliminary studies are promising; we must begin considering the clinical application of FMT in PDAC. Robust large-scale studies will allow for more subtle relationships to be identified, as the relationship between gut microbiome, tumour microbiome and FMT is intricate, and modulation may have effects on a wider scale throughout the body. There is also great variability in the methodology underpinning the administration of FMT in the few studies on PDAC, and they are not entirely representative of clinical practice. Furthermore, studies performed in mice may not be relevant to human physiology, as only 4% of the bacterial metagenome is shared between mice and humans [126]. We must remember that much of the gut microbiota is affected by environmental factors, including murine housing conditions and genetic background. Further research is, of course, warranted to consolidate the evidence base of FMT in PDAC. Figure 4 below outlines the barriers to future implementation of FMT that future trials must consider, as well as the proposed mechanisms by which outcomes are affected by FMT.

The role of antibiotics in disrupting dysbiosis in PDAC merits further investigation, as a growing body of preclinical evidence suggests a role for antimicrobials in PDAC. Thomas et al. assessed the pathological grades of pancreata harvested from genetically engineered PDAC mouse models (KrasG12D/+, PTENlox/+ and Pdx1-Cre) treated with either a control or a cocktail of broad-spectrum antibiotics eradicating the intestinal and pancreatic microbiota. Statistically significant differences between groups were identified, with both a greater number of malignant pancreatic lobules and a higher degree of poorly differentiated PDAC identified in the control-treated group [40].

Whilst evidence suggests that antibiotics may play a beneficial role in PDAC treatment, that exact role and how it translates into clinical practice remains to be determined. As our understanding of the specific effects of microbiomic constituents grows, we may be able to modulate the microbiota with precision, either through systemic therapeutics or local delivery devices, circumventing offsite side-effects. For example, recent pre-clinical work in mice has alluded to the possibility of delivering antibiotics into tumours through the implantation of microdevices capable of releasing microdoses of therapeutics [32]. As we accumulate data on the microbiota and its relationship with many disease states, we could see a future wherein a patient is screened for a multitude of biomarkers; screening for and identifying patients who may harbour risk-associated or disease-defining microbiomic markers. This would allow for early disease identification and prevention. In doing so, we may also be able to plan therapies accordingly, targeting specific microbial constituents in specific sites, minimising collateral damage.

Surgical intervention for PDAC carries a notoriously high morbidity rate. We may be able to identify microbiota associated with poor outcomes in order to mitigate this risk. The advantages of this are twofold. Firstly, we may be able to prevent complications, although there are many variables to consider with regards to the aetiology of operative complications beyond the microbiome. Secondly, it may be possible to identify patients at risk of complications in order to strategize their pre- and post-operative care appropriately. This may provide huge benefits in patient care and cost containment.

To date, studies have mostly focused on identifying bacteria associated with operative complications. Of equal importance, however, is the identification of bacteria that promote healing and operative success. This would further the application and relevance of therapies like FMT and probiotics and help guide antibiotic choices in the perioperative surgical patient. Blind eradication or promotion of the microbiome would be most unwise. We keenly await the results of the PANDEMIC study (NCT04274972), a prospective, observational, cohort study currently underway, assessing the qualitative and quantitative analysis of the pancreatic microbiome in human patients with PDAC undergoing pancreaticoduodenectomy and intraoperative lesion sampling. Outcomes to be assessed include correlations between bile, oral and rectal microbiome samples and the correlation between the pancreatic microbiome and development of post-operative complications [139].

The work into microbial biomarkers in PDAC is very much in its infancy; however, studies to date are encouraging and hint towards various possible applications in PDAC, in a bid to improve outcomes (Figure 5). We will discuss below the association between site specific microbiota and PDAC, as revealed in current studies.

The oral cavity contains an abundance of different types of bacteria, viruses and fungi [140]. When composition of the oral microbiome changes, it can become pathogenic and be associated with diseases like PDAC and others [39,141]. A recent meta-analysis of eight studies suggested a significant link between periodontal disease and risk of PDAC [142]. They have suggested that this link may be associated with the oral microbiome. Independent risk factors for PDAC included poor oral health, periodontal disease and tooth loss [143,144,145]. Some suggest that this may be via translocation from mouth to gut to pancreatic tissue [39].

As discussed above, bacteria introduced orally can influence the pancreas TME [21,34,39]. There is likely a complex and dynamic relationship between environmental risk factors for PDAC, such as smoking, obesity and diabetes and the microbiome in various sites, including that associated with PDAC. These factors may aggravate disease initiation and progression through specific changes in microbiota compositions in the oral cavity, as well as other anatomical sites.

Investigating the source of bacterial translocation, Fritz et al. found the small bowel to be a major source of enteral bacteria in infected pancreatic necrosis in mice [152]. Helicobacter pylori, a familiar bacterium that colonizes the human stomach, has now come under scrutiny as a cause of PDAC. One hypothesis proposes that H.pylori causes a surge in hyperchlorhydria that increases the release of secretins, in turn promoting pancreatic hyperplasia [153]. Another thought is that hyperchlorhydria leads to atrophic gastritis, which leads to bacterial overgrowth and increasing carcinogenic levels of N-nitrosamines [154]. Mei et al. detected higher duodenal levels of H. pylori in PDAC patients compared to controls [28].

Evidence to date suggests several routes by which microbiota can affect PDAC. There is likely a network of interactions between microbiota at anatomical specific sites that individually or collectively may protect or exacerbate the initiation or progression of disease in PDAC. The relationships between site specific microbiomes are dynamic in nature and influence each other to produce temporal changes with disease. Site specific microbial biomarkers in the future may serve in screening, strategizing therapeutics and prognostic aids.

Bactibilia is defined as microbes within bile. Maekawa et al. discovered the major microbes present in bile fluid of PDAC patients were Enterobacter and Enterococcus spp. [157]. They discovered E. faecalis in chronic pancreatitis and PDAC patients, as well as serum antibodies to E. faecalis in patients with chronic pancreatitis. They showed that pancreatic cells expressed pro-fibrotic cytokines when exposed to enterococcus lipoteichoic acid. Concluding infection with E. faecalis may facilitate the progression of chronic pancreatitis, ultimately leading to the development of PDAC. Serra et al. found that within head of pancreas tumours there was a negative correlation with Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas spp., whereas Klebsiella spp. was a positive predictor [158].

Shrader et al. explored how contaminated bile effects survival of PDAC cells. Human PDAC cells were treated for 24 h with sterile (non-stented) bile, contaminated (stented) bile, and sterile bile pre-incubated with Enterococcus faecalis or Streptococcus oralis. Bile samples were obtained from patients undergoing a Pancreaticoduodenectomy. All sterile bile (n = 4) reduced PDAC cell survival in vitro, while contaminated bile samples exhibited a reduced anti-tumour effect [160]. Conversely, pre-incubation of sterile bile with live bacteria altered the antitumor effect of sterile bile [160]. This study showed that a change in the biliary microbiome through stenting directly impacts PDAC cell survival in vitro. Rogers et al. studied 50 patients who underwent pancreaticoduodenectomy, comparing bacterial communities (faecal, pancreatic, bile and jejunal microbiome profiles) and their clinical variables [27]. Comparison of the microbial communities showed that PDAC faecal samples were clustered together, clearly separated from bile, pancreas and jejunum samples. Similar communities were found within the pancreas, bile and jejunum of PDAC patients. We wonder whether bile microbial communities could be used as surrogate for pancreatic microbial communities in a bid to aid diagnosis and screening.

Considerable effort is being invested in investigating the stool microbiome in PDAC in a bid to tackle the poor survival rate of PDAC through early detection with biomarkers or a screening tool. However, work to date has fallen short of expectations.

Another aspect of the stool signature we must understand is the changes it may undergo during the course of disease and the functional implications of this. Two preclinical studies have longitudinally analysed the faecal microbiota profile in premalignant PDAC KC (Ptf1aCre, LSL-KrasG12D) mouse model compared to WT controls has already been discussed above [21,34].

Among pancreatic cystic neoplasms (PCN), intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMN) are the most common and are characterised by varying degrees of cellular dysplasia, from low-, to intermediate- and high-grade dysplasia and finally IPMN with an associated invasive carcinoma [162]. Whilst IPMN is often a precursor of PDAC, the preoperative prediction of IPMN is poor and the diagnosis is difficult without surgical intervention [66,163,164,165,166,167,168]. Given early pancreatic cystic lesions have been described to possess bacterial DNA, recent focus has turned to analysis of the microbiome in various anatomical sites, in search for a marker of IPMN [122,169]. Unfortunately, a pilot study investigating the oral microbiota for makers differentiating between controls, IPMN and PDAC did not demonstrate any positive results, with results generally similar between PDAC and IPMN cases [170].

Furthermore, 15 bacterial genera have been found to be differentially abundant dependent on lesion classification as low-grade, high-grade or cancer, and the identification of specific bacterial markers, such as F. nucleatum in the cyst fluid of IPMNs, may be indicative of high-grade disease [122]. It may be that specific bacteria are found to be “driver” species leading to carcinoma or simply may serve as a biomarker to discriminate or stratify disease severity prior to surgical intervention or provide a means for surveillance in patients in whom reoccurrence following resection is possible or progression in conservatively managed patients is possible. This is, of course, dependent on validation in larger populations and case control studies. For now, the exact role bacteria play in IPMN is intriguing, yet not clear.

Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are nano-sized membrane-bound vesicles released from cells, capable of transporting cargo. Cargo can include nucleic acids, proteins, lipids, amino acids, and metabolites. All cells, prokaryotic and eukaryotic release extracellular vesicles, with their significance a source of ongoing exploration. So far, they have been identified to have roles in immune responses, viral pathogenicity, pregnancy, cardiovascular diseases, central nervous system related diseases, and cancer progression [172].

It is apparent that, as we begin to appreciate the microbiome and its impact on gut health as well as wider human health, how the microbiome exerts these effects is also under investigation. BEVs entering the circulation and accessing distant organs is one means by which this occurs. Crucially, the genetic cargo of BEVs can give an insight into the composition of the microbiome via peripheral blood samples. As we begin to understand how BEVs may impact the organs that they arrive at, it may be that we no longer consider an isolated gut microbiome, or tumour microbiome, but a complex and dynamic super-organism, composed of various microbial cells and human somatic cells in a constant state of cross talk and feedback via distant messenger vehicles such as BEVs. This, however, remains hypothetical at this present juncture, with further investigation of BEVs in the next few years likely crucial to the development of this theory.

Microbial communities are in constant communication and states of feedback between site specific microbial communities within the host. This state of communication can have implications on the local tumour microbiome, as well as distant microbiomes; they are all likely influenced by the host’s environmental factors.

Recent advances in advanced sequencing methods have facilitated our understanding of the microbiota associated with PDAC TME. This technology, in combination with research initiatives, should revolutionise the study of human subjects. Several human trials are currently underway to explore the therapeutic potential for microbiome modulation in PDAC. Whilst we hope to gain more information through these trials, we must remain aware that the microbiome of the host is likely a super-organism in a constant state of attempted balance and communication through various conceptual axis which have systemic influences that may alter the balance between distant site-specific microbiomes. We should aim to capture this systemic state of play in future studies and create a road map of the body’s anatomical microbiota to guide future work, as the imbalance invoked by microbiome modulation may result in subsequent undesirable disease states. Studies should have an appreciation for the collateral damage that may ensue. While a large amount of our understanding is derived from animal models, the lack of progress in the field of PDAC suggests a need for bold rethinking when considering PDAC therapy and the need to make a start in applying these in human trials.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

