Gut microbiota from androgen‐altered donors alter pulmonary responses to ozone in female mice



In mice, both androgens and the gut microbiota modify pulmonary responses to ozone. We hypothesized that androgens affect gut microbiota and thereby impact pulmonary responses to ozone. To address this hypothesis, we transferred cecal microbiota from male castrated or sham castrated C57BL/6J mice into female germ‐free recipient C57BL/6J mice. Four weeks later mice were exposed to ozone (2 ppm) or room air for 3 hr. The gut microbiomes of castrated versus sham castrated donors differed, as did those of recipients of microbiota from castrated versus sham castrated donors. In recipients, ozone‐induced airway hyperresponsiveness was not affected by donor castration status. However, compared to mice receiving microbiota from sham castrated donors, mice receiving microbiota from castrated donors had elevated numbers of bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) neutrophils despite evidence of reduced lung injury as measured by BAL protein. Serum concentrations of IL‐17A and G‐CSF were significantly greater in recipients of castrated versus sham castrated microbiota. Furthermore, BAL neutrophils correlated with both serum IL‐17A and serum G‐CSF. Our data indicate that androgen‐mediated effects on the gut microbiota modulate pulmonary inflammatory responses to ozone and suggest a role for circulating IL‐17A and G‐CSF in these events.

While sex differences in ozone‐induced airway hyperresponsiveness (AHR) are apparent in mouse models, the role of androgens in ozone‐induced AHR have not been examined. Our data confirm previous reports that gut microbiota have the potential to impact host inflammatory responses to ozone and indicate that effects of these microbiota on systemic inflammation may contribute to responses to ozone. A better understanding of the mechanisms by which sex hormones manipulate the gut microbiome may ultimately lead to improved treatment of lung diseases such as asthma.

Ozone (O3) is a trigger for asthma. Both emergency room visits and hospital admissions for asthma increase on days with high ambient O3 concentrations (Fauroux, Sampil, Quenel, & Lemoullec, 2000). Inhaled O3 causes airway epithelial damage, release of acute‐phase cytokines and chemokines, and recruitment of neutrophils and macrophages into the lungs (Devlin et al., 1991; Holtzman et al., 1979; Kasahara et al., 2015; Michaudel et al., 2018; Mumby, Chung, & Adcock, 2019). O3 also causes symptoms of asthma (Goodman et al., 2018), declines in lung function (Yang et al., 2005), and airway hyperresponsiveness (AHR), a defining feature of asthma (Alexis et al., 2000; Bell, Dominici, & Samet, 2005; Holtzman et al., 1979). Interestingly, asthmatics differ in their susceptibility to O3 (Vagaggini et al., 2010). Understanding the factors that contribute to this susceptibility may ultimately prove important for the prevention or treatment of O3‐induced lung dysfunction.

While we have established that androgens augment the pulmonary response to O3 (Osgood et al., 2019), the mechanistic basis for the role of androgens remains to be established. The purpose of this study was to determine how androgen‐altered microbiota might modify pulmonary responses to O3. Analyses leveraged conventional cecal donor microbiota from castrated or sham castrated male mice that were gavaged into female GF mice. Four weeks following gavage, responses to O3 were assessed in the recipient females. We used female rather than male GF recipients to reduce the impact of the recipients’ own androgens on the gut microbiome as it established in recipients.

This study was approved by the Harvard Medical Area Standing Committee on Animals. For cecal transfer studies, donor male C57BL/6J mice were purchased from The Jackson Laboratories. Removal of the gonads by castration was performed at 4 weeks of age. Controls underwent sham castration surgery. Unlike humans, mouse adrenal glands do not produce peripheral androgens (van Weerden, Bierings, van Steenbrugge, de Jong, & Schroder, 1992). Thus, androgen‐induced influences on gut microbiota in donor castrated mice should be low. Each of the donors, whether castrated or sham castrated was housed in the same room at the Jackson Laboratories. No antibiotics were used during recovery from surgery. These donor mice were transferred to our vivarium at 5 weeks of age and housed until 10 weeks of age at which time cecal contents were harvested. Briefly, whole cecum was removed and transferred to large cryovials for flash freezing in liquid nitrogen until use. Frozen materials were thawed in a Coy anaerobic chamber in 50 ml conical tubes with 5 ml of sterile, pre‐reduced PBS supplemented with 0.05% cysteine and homogenized. Female C57BL/6J recipient GF mice were obtained from the gnotobiotic breeding colonies maintained at the Massachusetts Host Microbiome Center. Recipient mice were gavaged with cecal contents from the male donors at 10 weeks of age. All mice were housed under a 12/12 hr light/dark cycle, fed regular mouse chow, and housed with at least two mice per cage.

Experiments were replicated with five cohorts of recipient mice. Each cohort consisted of eight mice—four received the cecal contents of a single castrated donor mouse and four received the cecal contents of a single sham castrated donor mouse. Half of each group was exposed to air and half to O3.

During exposure to O3 (2 ppm, 3 hr) or room air, female recipient mice were placed in individual wire mesh cages within a stainless steel and Plexiglas chamber. Food and water were removed during exposure and mice were returned to clean cages with food and water immediately following exposure (Lu et al., 2006). In mice, exposure to an O3 concentration of 2 ppm for 3 hr results in an O3 dose that is equivalent to that used in human chamber studies in which subjects are exposed to a 0.4 ppm O3 for 2 hr with intermittent exercise (Hatch et al., 1994; Watkinson, Highfill, Slade, & Hatch, 1996). This latter exposure regimen produces AHR in human subjects (Seltzer et al., 1986).

Following exposure to room air or O3, mice were anesthetized with pentobarbital and xylazine, intubated with a tubing adaptor, and ventilated (flexiVent, SCIREQ) as previously described (Cho, Abu‐Ali, et al., 2019; Cho et al., 2018). A common volume history was established by three volume excursions to total lung capacity (30 cm H2O trans‐respiratory system pressure). Next, measurements of total respiratory system resistance (R RS) were obtained after the administration of an aerosol of PBS and after the administration of increasing concentrations of aerosolized methacholine chloride (1–100 mg/ml). After each measurement of (R RS), total lung impedance (ZL) was measured and partitioned into components representing Newtonian resistance (Rn), reflecting the conducting airways, and the coefficients of respiratory system tissue damping (G) and respiratory system tissue elastance (H), reflecting the lung tissue and peripheral airways. At each dose, the three highest values of R RS, Rn, G, and H measured in the 3 min period after aerosol administration were averaged to construct dose‐response curves.

Following measurement of airway responsiveness, blood was collected from the right ventricle via cardiac puncture with a 12‐gauge needle for the preparation of serum. To isolate serum, blood was placed in BD Microtainer Blood Collection Tubes (#365967) and allowed to clot for at least 30 min before the centrifugation and isolation of serum per kit instructions. Mice were then euthanized and the lungs were lavaged with two 1 ml of aliquots of PBS. BAL fluid was combined and centrifuged to separate supernatant and cells. Total BAL cell counts were counted with a hemacytometer and cell differentials were determined by centrifuging BAL cells onto glass slides and staining with a Hema3 Stain kit. At least 300 cells were counted. The BAL supernatant was frozen at −80°C until analyzed for protein content by the Thermo Scientific Pierce BCA protein assay kit. The BAL supernatant was concentrated 8‐fold (Amicon Ultra—0.5 ml centrifugal filters, Millipore) before cytokines and chemokines were assayed by the multiplex assay (Mouse Cytokine Array/Chemokine Array 31‐Plex [MD31], Eve Technologies). Reported values are those present in the original unconcentrated samples. BAL IL‐17A was measured by enzyme‐linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) following the manufacturer's instructions (BioLegend, #43250). Serum was prepared and stored at −80°C until the analysis of cytokines and chemokines by the multiplex assay (Eve Technologies).

Analysis of serum sex hormones by ELISA was conducted at the University of Virginia Ligand Core. Commercial kits were used for the measurement of progesterone (IBL America, #IB79183), estradiol (Calbiotech, #ES180S‐100), and testosterone (IBL America, #IB79174). Mouse LH was measured using an in house method at the University of Virginia Ligand Core with an assay sensitivity of 0.04 ng/ml. (https://med.virginia.edu/research‐in‐reproduction/contact‐us/ligand‐assay‐analysis‐core/assay‐methods). Due to limited serum, testosterone was only measured in air‐exposed mice.

Fecal pellets were collected from female recipients of sham or castrated cecal contents immediately before O3 or room air exposure. All fecal pellets were stored at −80°C until DNA was isolated. The All Prep Power Viral DNA/RNA Kit (Qiagen) was used to isolate fecal DNA. 16S rRNA gene sequencing over the V4 region by MiSeq (Illumina) was performed by the Massachusetts Host‐Microbiome Center at Brigham and Women's Hospital as described (Bucci et al., 2016). Microbiome data analysis was performed using the Nephele pipeline. This pipeline includes analysis with Qiime software using the Greengenes 99 database (Caporaso et al., 2010; Weber et al., 2018). In all cases, differential abundance and association with experimental variables were assessed using Multivariate Association with Linear Models (MaAsLin) statistical framework (Morgan et al., 2012). A q‐value of ≤0.25 (p‐value corrected using the Benjamini‐Hochberg correction method) and p‐value of <.05 was considered significant.

Except for 16S rRNA sequencing analysis (see above), significant differences between groups were assessed using Factorial ANOVA combined with LSD Fisher post hoc analysis (Statistica Software) using fecal donor status (sham castrated or castration) and exposure (air or O3) as the main effects, except where only two groups were compared (e.g., BAL cytokines, body weight). A p < .05 (two‐tailed) was considered significant. Values are expressed as mean ± SE.

16S rRNA raw sequencing files (fastq) were uploaded to the NIH Sequence Read Archive (SRA) (entry PRJNA558992). The Nephele pipeline used for 16S sequencing analysis can be found at https://nephele.niaid.nih.gov. MaAsLin analysis was conducted using galaxy at http://huttenhower.org/galaxy.

To examine the impact of androgen‐exposed microbiota on O3‐induced AHR and pulmonary inflammation, we gavaged GF female mice with cecal contents from sham castrated or castrated male mice as detailed in Figure 1. 16S rRNA gene phylotyping analyses of taxon abundance at both the phylum and genus level indicated differences between recipients of the cecal contents of the sham castrated versus the castrated donors (Figure 2a,b). At the phylum level, Actinobacteria and Bacteroidetes were lower and Firmicutes and Proteobacteria were higher in the recipients of castrated versus sham castrated donors (Figure 2a; Table
1). At lower taxonomic classification, Adlercreutzia was the dominant signature of Actinobacteria, S24–7 dominated Bacteroidetes, Lactobacillus dominated Firmicutes, and Sutterella dominated Proteobacteria (Figure 2b; Table
1). Other Firmicutes that were significantly affected by castration status but that constituted <1% of taxon abundance are listed in Table
1. Statistical analysis with MaAsLin confirmed the statistical significance of these changes and identified several less abundant taxa that were also significantly different in recipients of sham castrated versus castrated cecal contents (Table
1). These data indicate distinct differences in the gut microbiomes of the two groups of recipient mice.

Principal coordinate analyses of microbiome datasets from the two groups of male donors and the two groups of female recipients indicated separate grouping of both donors and their respective recipient mice (Figure 3). Thus, while there were some similarities (Table
1), the gut microbiomes of the female recipients of sham castrated or castrated cecal contents were not identical to the gut microbiomes of their sham castrated or castrated donors. Similar results have been reported by others with respect to the transfer of a male microbiome into female mice (Fransen et al., 2017; Markle et al., 2013). For comparison, we also included our data from previously published female mice that had been transplanted with cecal contents of female mice (Tashiro et al., 2019). These mice were grouped separately from either the donor or recipient groups. Notably, the female mice transplanted with cecal contents of female mice (orange circles in Figure 3) grouped closer to the female mice transplanted with cecal contents of male sham castrated mice (green circles) than to those transplanted with cecal contents of castrated male mice (purple circles), indicating greater similarity of their microbiomes. Because the female mice transplanted with cecal contents of female mice were not administered O3 at the same time as the other mice in this study, they are not included in the analysis below.

Four weeks after gavage with the cecal contents from sham castrated or castrated mice, female mice were exposed to room air or O3. Female mice gavaged with cecal contents from sham castrated mice weighed significantly more than mice gavaged with cecal contents from castrated mice (Figure 4a). In air‐exposed mice, airway responsiveness assessed using R RS was lower in the mice that received cecal contents from castrated versus sham castrated mice, an effect that reached statistical significance at the 10 mg/ml of dose of methacholine and near significance (.05 < p < .06) at the 30 mg/ml of dose of methacholine (Figure 4b). While O3 exposure increased airway responsiveness in both groups of recipient mice, there was no significant difference in airway responsiveness of O3‐exposed recipients of sham versus castrated cecal contents (Figure 4b). Similar results were obtained using Rn, G, or H as the outcome index (Figure 5).

Fecal gavage of male feces into conventional female mice increases serum testosterone (Markle et al., 2013). To test the effect of the cecal transfer on sex hormone concentrations, we measured serum concentrations of estradiol, progesterone, LH, and testosterone. Serum estradiol was measured following both air and O3 exposure, but concentrations were below the limit of detection in most samples similar to our previously published data (Cho, Abu‐Ali, et al., 2019). After O3 but not air exposure, mice gavaged with cecal contents from castrated mice had significantly less serum progesterone and more LH than mice gavaged with cecal contents from sham castrated mice (Figure 6a,b). In air‐exposed mice, testosterone was unchanged (Figure 6c). Due to limited serum, testosterone was only measured in air‐exposed mice.

Compared to air‐exposed mice, exposure to O3 increased BAL neutrophils and macrophages in both groups of recipient mice (Figure 7a,b). While there was no effect of donor status on BAL macrophages in O3‐exposed mice, BAL neutrophils were greater in mice receiving castrated than the sham castrated donor microbiota. O3 exposure increased BAL epithelial cells in both groups of mice (Figure 7c), consistent with O3‐induced damage to airway epithelial cells and subsequent sloughing of these cells. O3 also increased BAL protein in both groups of mice (Figure 7d). O3‐induced increases in BAL protein reflect damage to the alveolar/capillary barrier and subsequent leak of plasma protein into the lungs (Bhalla, 1999). However, compared to recipients of cecal contents from sham castrated mice, recipients of cecal contents from castrated mice had fewer epithelial cells and less protein in BAL fluid (Figure 7c,d), indicating reduced lung injury. Compared to O3‐exposed mice that were recipients of cecal contents from sham castrated mice, recipients of cecal contents from castrated mice had greater levels of BAL CCL3 (Figure 7e) and CCL4 (Figure 7f) but reduced CXCL2 (Figure 7g) and CCL11 (Figure 7h). Both CCL3 and CCL4 have neutrophil chemotactic activity (Bless et al., 2000; Shanley, Schmal, Friedl, Jones, & Ward, 1995), suggesting that increases in neutrophil recruitment observed in the recipients of cecal contents from the castrated mice might the result of effects on CCL3 and CCL4. Other BAL cytokines and chemokines including IL‐17A, G‐CSF, TNFα, IL‐6, IL‐9, CCXL9, IL‐5, and CCL5 were not affected by cecal transplant (Figure 8).

Certain gut microbiota induce intestinal inflammation, causing an increase in gut permeability and subsequent leak of bacterial products such as endotoxin into the circulation (Cani et al., 2008). This leak can induce systemic inflammation and impact other health outcomes (Cani et al., 2008). Fransen et al (Fransen et al., 2017) reported that compared to the fecal transplant of GF female mice with normal female feces, fecal transplant with normal male feces results in gut inflammation. Consequently, we considered the possibility that there were differences in systemic inflammation in mice that were transplanted with sham versus castrated cecal contents and that these differences might contribute to the augmented neutrophil recruitment observed in mice that were recipients of the castrated cecal contents (Figure 7a). Factorial ANOVA indicated the effects of castration status on certain serum cytokines and chemokines. Compared to recipients of sham cecal contents, recipients of castrated cecal contents had greater serum IL‐17A (Figure 9a), G‐CSF (Figure 9b), TNFα (Figure 9c), IL‐6 (Figure 9d), and IL‐9 (Figure 9e) either after air exposure, after O3 exposure, or after either exposure. There were also effects of O3 exposure on serum cytokines. Serum G‐CSF (Figure 9b), IL‐6 (Figure 9d), and CCL11 (Figure 9f) were reduced by O3 in recipients of castrated cecal contents and serum CXCL9 (Figure 9g) was reduced by O3 exposure in both the castrated and sham castrated groups. In contrast, serum IL‐17A (Figure 9a), TNF‐α (Figure 9c), IL‐5 (Figure 9h), and CCL5 (Figure 9i) were increased following O3 exposure either in recipients of castrated cecal contents, in recipients of sham cecal contents, or in both groups.

It is conceivable that these microbiota‐induced changes in serum cytokines and chemokines contribute to differences in BAL neutrophils observed in recipients of sham versus castrated cecal contents (Figure 7a). Indeed, in O3‐exposed mice we observed a significant correlation between serum IL‐17A and BAL neutrophils (r 2 = .76, p < .0002) (Figure 10a) and between serum G‐CSF and BAL neutrophils (r 2 = .72, p < .0004) (Figure 10b). There was also a significant albeit less robust correlation between serum IL‐9 and BAL neutrophils (r 2 = .41, p < .02) (Figure 10c). Neither serum TNFα nor serum IL‐6 correlated with BAL neutrophils.

As described above, there were differences in the gut microbiomes of mice transplanted with cecal contents of castrated versus sham castrated mice (Figures 2 and
3) as well as differences in the subsequent responses of these mice to O3 (Figure 7). To determine which affected microbiota might be contributing to observed differences in BAL neutrophils and cytokines (Figure 7), we correlated the relative abundances of taxa identified as significantly different in recipients of sham castrated versus castrated donors with BAL neutrophils, BAL CCL3, and BAL CCL4 measured in the O3 exposed mice. We observed significant inverse correlations between Oscillospira and BAL neutrophils (r 2 = .38, p < .004) (Figure 11a), BAL CCL3 (r 2 = .28, p < .01) (Figure 11b), and BAL CCL4 (r 2 = .34, p < .008) (Figure 11c). Oscillospira abundance is associated with overall health (Konikoff & Gophna, 2016) and is found in lower abundance in patients with inflammatory syndromes (Walters, Xu, & Knight, 2014). We also observed significant correlations between Sutterella and BAL neutrophils (r 2 = .35, p < .006) (Figure 11d), BAL CCL3 (r 2 = .33, p < .009) (Figure 11e), and BAL CCL4 (r 2 = .37, p < .005) (Figure 11f). Greater intestinal Sutterella abundance is observed with children with food allergies (Zimmermann, Messina, Mohn, Finlay, & Curtis, 2019).

Compared to female mice, males have increased O3‐induced AHR (Birukova et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020; Cho, Abu‐Ali, et al., 2019; Kasahara et al., 2019). In male mice, both castration and flutamide treatment attenuate O3‐induced AHR (Osgood et al., 2019). Others have demonstrated that the transfer of male donor microbiota to a female mouse can also transfer sex‐associated phenotypes (Markle et al., 2013). Thus, the goal of this study was to test the hypothesis that androgens modify pulmonary responses to O3 by altering the gut microbiota. To do so, we transferred cecal contents from either sham castrated or castrated male mice to naïve conventional GF female mice. However, transfer of the cecal contents of sham castrated versus castrated male donors into GF females did not alter O3‐induced AHR, although it did affect innate airway responsiveness (Figure 4b). Surprisingly, we also observed greater increases in BAL neutrophils in the mice that received the cecal contents of castrated versus sham castrated donors (Figure 7a), even though castration per se reduces BAL neutrophils in O3‐exposed male mice (Osgood et al., 2019). The changes in neutrophil recruitment (Figure 7a) correlated with the effects of the transplanted microbiota on systemic inflammation (Figures 9 and
10). The data confirm the ability of gut microbiota to alter O3‐induced inflammation in the lung and suggest that androgen‐altered gut microbiome may be necessary, but is not sufficient to alter O3‐induced AHR.

Our data confirm previous reports that gut microbiota have the potential to impact host inflammatory responses to O3 and indicate that effects of these microbiota on systemic inflammation may contribute to responses to O3. A better understanding of the mechanisms by which sex hormones manipulate the gut microbiome may ultimately lead to improved treatment of lung diseases such as asthma.

The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.

R.S.O., H.T., D.I.K., Y.V., L.B., and S.A.S. conceived and designed the experiments. R.S.O. performed the experiments and analyzed the data. V.Y. and L.B. performed and interpreted the 16S rRNA sequencing. R.S.O wrote the paper. R.S.O., H.T., D.I.K., Y.V., L.B., and S.A.S. reviewed, revised, and approved the final version of the manuscript.

This study was approved by the Harvard Medical Area Standing Committee on Animals.

