Intercontinental Gut Microbiome Variances in IBD

The development of biomarkers for inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) diagnosis would be relevant in a generalized context. However, intercontinental investigation on these microbial biomarkers remains scarce. We examined taxonomic microbiome variations in IBD using published DNA shotgun metagenomic data. For this purpose, we used sequenced data from our previous Spanish Crohn’s disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC) cohort, downloaded sequence data from a Chinese CD cohort, and downloaded taxonomic and functional profiling tables from a USA CD and UC cohort. At the global level, geographical location and disease phenotype were the main explanatory covariates of microbiome variations. In healthy controls (HC) and UC, geography turned out to be the most important factor, while disease intestinal location was the most important one in CD. Disease severity correlated with lower alpha-diversity in UC but not in CD. Across geography, alpha-diversity was significantly different independently of health status, except for CD. Despite recruitment from different countries and with different disease severity scores, CD patients may harbor a very similar microbial taxonomic profile. Our study pointed out that geographic location, disease activity status, and other environmental factors are important contributing factors in microbiota changes in IBD. We therefore strongly recommend taking these factors into consideration for future IBD studies to obtain globally valid and reproducible biomarkers.

Inflammatory bowel diseases (IBDs), which include Crohn’s disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC), are multifactorial, chronic conditions of the gastrointestinal tract that have been associated with gut microbiome alterations [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9]. Reduced microbial community richness and diversity, as well as reduction of beneficial microbes and expansion of a variety of potentially harmful bacterial species, have been consistently reported in IBD, particularly in CD patients. However, diet, drugs, ethnicity, geography, and a multitude of lifestyle or environmental variables may confound the interpretation and replication of microbiome studies. This is particularly problematic with small cohort size studies in which these covariates may mask the disease effect. The importance of geography and related environmental exposure has been well-illustrated in migration studies, where a strong association between microbiome diversity and migration was clearly demonstrated [10,11]. Vangay et al. [11] performed 16S and deep shotgun metagenomic sequencing on stool samples collected from individuals living in Thailand and the USA, including first- and second-generation immigrants before and after immigration. Intriguingly, USA immigration was found to be associated with significant alterations in the gut microbiome, including loss of diversity, bacterial strains, fiber degradation functions and a shift from Prevotella to Bacteroides strains.

In the present study, we aimed to investigate microbiome variations in IBD across countries using published DNA shotgun metagenomic data. Our results highlight the clinical, anthropometric, and demographic data that were commonly available and have allowed us to perform association analysis with microbiome variations to elucidate how these covariates may impact on taxonomic variations. We also emphasized the lack of standardized clinical data that has prevented us from integrating cohorts into this intercontinental study or has limited the interpretation of the results. Our findings also demonstrated that, despite recruitment from different countries and with different disease severity scores, CD patients may harbor a very similar microbial taxonomic profile.

To evaluate microbiome variation across countries, we compared our partially published Spanish IBD cohorts [23,24] with the USA [14] and Chinese [25] published cohorts. Characteristics of the cohorts are described in Table 1. For the Spanish and Chinese cohorts, we generated taxonomic and functional profiles from the shotgun metagenomic sequence reads; for the USA cohort, we downloaded these profiles from the inflammatory bowel disease multi-omics database (see Methods section). In total, 1470 fecal samples were included, 625 from patients with CD, 384 from patients with UC, and 461 from HC (or non-IBD) (Table 1).

L1: terminal ileum, L2: colon, L3: ileocolon, L4: upper GIT (gastrointestinal tract).

For the whole dataset (n = 1470), the most commonly reported variables from the published metadata included country, age, disease activity index, body mass index (BMI), and gender. To evaluate the impact of these covariates on microbiome variation, we applied the PERMANOVA method (adonis function) to the unweighted and weighted UniFrac distances between samples. While country and disease activity status contributed to most of the microbiome variations, the remaining covariates also showed a significant impact (Figure 1).

For the HC group, available covariates included country, age, gender, and BMI; for CD, disease localization, country, age, gender, BMI, and Harvey Bradshaw index (HBI); and for UC, country, age, gender, BMI, and colitis activity index (CAI) (Table 1, Supplementary Table S1). For HC and UC, country appeared to be the most significant explanatory variation factor, whereas for CD, disease localization (based on the Montreal classification system) explained most of the variation (Figure 1). Both CAI (in UC) and HBI (in CD) indices had a significant effect on microbiome variation, however, CAI appeared to have a higher impact than HBI. Gender, BMI, and age presented a much lower effect than country and disease. As all these covariates had a significant impact on microbiome composition, they were taken into account for the differential abundance analysis described below.

In this study, dysbiosis is defined as a deviation from a healthy microbiome composition at the alpha- and beta-diversity levels. To assess alpha-diversity, we calculated the Chao1 and Shannon indices [14,26,27]. The Chao1 richness estimator gives weight to the low-abundant species as it only accounts for singletons and doubletons, whereas the Shannon index accounts for both the abundance and evenness of the species present. The dysbiosis score is defined as the median weighted or unweighted UniFrac distance of any given sample against a reference set built using samples from HCs [24].

To compare the degree of dysbiosis related to disease phenotype across countries, we calculated the ratio of median CD dysbiosis scores over that of HC. This analysis, using unweighted UniFrac dysbiosis scores, revealed a higher dysbiosis level in the Chinese (ratio of 1.84) followed by the Spanish (ratio of 1.79) and the USA (ratio of 1.17) cohorts (Figure 5A). This ratio, using weighted UniFrac dysbiosis scores, followed the same trend (ratio of 1.329 for China; ratio of 1.315 for Spain; ratio of 0.957 for the USA). The latter result indicated a lack of difference between CD and HC in the USA cohort (pval > 0.05).

The taxa were classified at the species level and filtered by achieving at least 0.1% of total abundance in at least 10% of the samples in order to remove outlier taxa with very low abundance and prevalence. Mixed-effects linear models, as implemented by MaAsLin2, were used to determine differences between CD, UC, and HC taxonomic profiles, as well as between countries with the same disease phenotype.

To reveal bacterial species associated with relapse or remission status in CD and UC, we split the CD and UC cohorts into two groups. The remission state consisted of 444 CD samples with HBI < 4 and 295 UC samples with CAI < 4 and the relapse state encompassed 119 CD samples with HBI ≥ 4 and 89 UC samples with CAI ≥ 4. In neither the CD nor UC group did disease activity status associate with specific bacterial species using MaAsLin2.

Country-wise analysis between Spain and the USA showed that four species were differentially abundant in HC samples (n = 67 Spain, n = 342 USA) (Supplementary Table S3, MaAsLin2 results for HC/country group), eight species in UC (n = 65 Spain, n = 319 USA) (Supplementary Table S4), and no species achieved significance in CD (n = 57 Spain, n = 506 USA) (using age, gender, and BMI as fixed effects while subject ID, HBI or CAI, and country as random effects using MaAsLin2).

Interestingly, we did not find any species associated with disease severity for both CD (when using HBI as a possible explanatory variable) and UC (when using CAI as a possible explanatory variable) for both the Spanish and the USA cohorts.

The relationship between microbiota and IBD pathogenesis is well established, but there is still limited information regarding the influence of geography and its related environmental impact on IBD microbiota composition. To our knowledge, this is the first study that compares gut microbiome variances in IBD patients across three continents using DNA shotgun metagenomics.

In conclusion, geographic location, disease activity status, and other environmental factors appear to influence microbiota changes in IBD. In the case of CD, we are inclined to believe that these factors have a lower impact on microbiome composition, even though dysbiosis was greater in CD than in UC. We strongly recommend taking into consideration all possible environmental and host factors, as well as the implementation of standardized extraction methods, when conducting microbiota studies in order to obtain globally valid and reproducible findings. Finally, as IBD is a multifactorial disorder, to acquire better insights into the ethology of IBD, future ideal study design should integrate mucosal shotgun metaomic techniques, host genetics and clinical phenotypes, lifestyle, and dietary habits.

Shotgun metagenomic sequencing data generated from 329 public human fecal samples were downloaded from NCBI SRA [40] (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra/, accessed on 14 September 2022). The 329 public human metagenomic data were derived from two unique bioprojects, one of which was published in our previous studies (PRJEB1220, 212 samples, Spanish cohort), and the other was from the PRJEB15371 bioproject (117 samples, Chinese cohort). The taxonomic and functional profiling of HMP (NIH Human Microbiome Project, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1238-8, accessed on 14 September 2022), which includes 1,639 samples, were downloaded from the IBDMDB (The Inflammatory Bowel Disease Multi-Omics Database, https://ibdmdb.org/, accessed on 14 September 2022) [14]. The metadata for all the human metagenomic data can be found in Supplementary Table S1 and contains available information such as country, disease localization, gender, age, BMI, dysbiosis index, and severity scores. The taxonomic profiles from the HMP data were obtained using the MetaPhlAn 3.0 tool and provided relative abundances [41].

All metagenomic datasets were filtered based on metadata information to perform a homogenized meta-analysis. We removed samples from (1) HC without body-mass indexes (BMI), age, or gender information; (2) from CD without disease localization defined by the Montreal classification method [42], Harvey-Bradshaw index (HBI) [43] (Harvey and Bradshaw 1980), gender, age or BMI information; and (3) from ulcerative colitis (UC) without Colitis Activity Index (CAI) [44], gender, age or BMI information. The taxonomic profiling tables were further filtered by criteria of species with less than 0.1% abundance [2] and samples with zero species abundance were removed. The Chinese cohort was included in the alpha-diversity, beta-diversity, and dysbiosis analyses, but was excluded from the analysis of multivariate association between covariates and microbiome features using MaAsLin2 because information on disease localization was not based on the Montreal classification method, in contrast to the other two cohorts, and HBI information was not available (Supplementary Table S5).

For the Spanish and Chinese cohorts, the KneadData v0.7.4 pipeline (https://huttenhower.sph.harvard.edu/kneaddata, accessed on 14 September 2022) was used to trim the reads with lengths below 50% of the total input read length and to remove reads that mapped to the human genome. Taxonomic and functional profiling was performed by the HumanN3 pipeline [41] against the built-in database of Metaphlan3 and the UniRef90 database with default parameters.

Statistical analyses were performed using R (version 4.0.3). Alpha-diversity was assessed using Shannon [27] and Chao1 metrics [26] indices, while beta-diversity was estimated by calculating the weighted and unweighted UniFrac distances between samples [45]. The dysbiosis score was calculated as previously defined [14,24], using weighted and unweighted UniFrac distances. Healthy controls from each country were set as the reference group for each cohort. Alpha-diversity and dysbiosis scores between groups were compared using the Mann-Whitney U test. The contribution of clinical, anthropometric, and demographic factors to the effect size was estimated using permutational analysis of variance (PERMANOVA), as implemented in the adonis2 function of the vegan R package (https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/vegan/index.html, accessed on 14 September 2022) using weighted and unweighted UniFrac distance metrics.

UniFrac distances were calculated as implemented in the phyloseq R package [46]. Differential abundance analysis of the taxonomic profiles was performed using the R version of the MaAsLin2 tool [47], which implements linear mixed-effects models that are useful for multivariable association discovery in population-scale microbiome studies.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

