Contrasting Strategies: Human Eukaryotic Versus Bacterial Microbiome Research

Most discussions of human microbiome research have focused on bacterial investigations and findings. Our target is to understand how human eukaryotic microbiome research is developing, its potential distinctiveness, and how problems can be addressed. We start with an overview of the entire eukaryotic microbiome literature (578 papers), show tendencies in the human‐based microbiome literature, and then compare the eukaryotic field to more developed human bacterial microbiome research. We are particularly concerned with problems of interpretation that are already apparent in human bacterial microbiome research (e.g. disease causality, probiotic interventions, evolutionary claims). We show where each field converges and diverges, and what this might mean for progress in human eukaryotic microbiome research. Our analysis then makes constructive suggestions for the future of the field.

SO far, most wide‐ranging discussions of human microbiome research have focused on bacterial findings to gain insight into how the field is developing. Eukaryotic microbiome research is growing rapidly but has important differences from bacterial approaches. These differences may stimulate new trajectories of research development and also suggest how to overcome challenges inherent in microbiome research. We compare human bacterial and eukaryotic microbiome literature, particularly to find out whether the interpretive challenges that exist in human bacterial microbiome research are occurring in human eukaryotic microbiome research. These problems have to do with diversity descriptions and disease associations, potential treatments, and the evolutionary and ecological status of microbiota in relation to their human hosts. Our findings suggest that these issues play out somewhat differently in human eukaryotic microbiome publications, due to basic ecological properties of eukaryotic microbiota. We conclude with reflections on whether human eukaryotic microbiome research will follow the same trajectory of development as human bacterial microbiome research.

Anyone thinking about microbiology these days is likely to consider it as occurring within “the Age of the Microbiome” (Suhr and Hallen‐Adams 2016, p. 1057). This informal historical label describes a context in which high‐throughput sequencing methods enable culture‐independent approaches to learn about microbial diversity. These investigations target an extensive range of microbial communities and environments, including those in and on host bodies. Unsurprisingly, the host–microbe relationships that have had the most scientific and popular attention involve humans, for whom health often seems to be a microbiome matter. This marriage of medical interests and microbiome methods is still in its honeymoon phase, but has contributed to quantitative leaps in the amount of microbiome literature in publication databases (Fig. 1).

Although studies of human microbiomes sometimes target viral and archaeal members of microbial communities (e.g. Minot et al. 2011; Moissl‐Eichinger et al. 2018), or at least mention “nonbacterial” taxa (e.g. Heintz‐Buschart et al. 2017; Koenig et al. 2011; Yatsunenko et al. 2012), the primary focus of both the literature and patents is indeed bacteria. Viruses, Archaea, protists, and other microbes have until recently been minority interests (see Rowan‐Nash et al. 2019, for a comprehensive list of such studies). There are practical methodological reasons for this privileging of bacteria (i.e. sheer abundance, relevant tools, genome structure), as well as more substantive justifications. Bacterial genes vastly outnumber eukaryote genes in communities (Qin et al. 2010) and bacteria predominate in the mass production of metabolites known to have immune and other effects (Levy et al. 2016; Postler and Ghosh 2017). Conversely, the functional impact of eukaryotic microbes has primarily been detected in cases of active pathogenicity. In most human microbiome research, therefore, it was not unreasonably assumed that eukaryotic microbes would be unimportant in terms of microbial community analysis because of being too low in abundance (except for standard pathogenic outcomes for the host). Our discussion will address the growing body of eukaryote‐focused microbiome research, with a focus on studies in humans, and whether there are meaningful differences between human bacterial and eukaryotic microbiome research.

Despite limited attention during the early phases of microbiome research, scrutiny of eukaryotic microbiomes has surged in recent years. In this article, we define eukaryotic microbiomes as consisting of unicellular organisms, which means we exclude macroparasites such as helminths despite their important immunomodulatory interactions with human hosts (e.g. Maizels and McSorley 2016; Parker and Ollerton 2013). We present first a quantitative bibliometric sketch of the literature, and then home in on some key historical papers that have helped set the agenda for the development of human eukaryotic microbiome insights.

Human microbiome sites include the gut, mouth, skin, lungs, vagina, nasal cavities, and wounds. All the main eukaryotic supergroups have been detected in these human‐based investigations, even plants (Hamad et al. 2016; for discussion, see below). However, fungal microbiome (“mycobiome”) papers comprise more than 80% of the total human eukaryotic microbiome papers. A “disease‐centric” focus, rather than biodiversity or health, is particularly common in human gut mycobiome research (Huseyin et al. 2017; Nash et al. 2017). Why is there so much work on the fungal microbiome? Probably because fungi are the most abundant eukaryotic microbes in the gut and thus the easiest to detect (Hamad et al. 2016). Although all eukaryotic microbiome studies in our large sample of texts analyse microbial communities with tools derived from bacterial microbiome research, these methods have had to be adapted for eukaryotic genomes and still require development (Huseyin et al. 2017; Nilsson et al. 2019).

Human bacterial microbiome studies began to gain traction in the early to mid‐2000s (Eckburg et al. 2005; Zoetendal et al. 2001). Although human eukaryotic microbiome research is less prominent and prolific, a number of formative studies were published not many years later. One of the earliest examined fungal microbiota from healthy and diseased (psoriatic) human skin via PCR of 18S ribosomal genes, which are biomarkers commonly used for eukaryotes (Paulino et al. 2006). The main finding was that both skin states host large numbers of Malassezia (a yeast).

This is the issue that motivates us. Our key question is whether eukaryotic microbiome research strategies are actually different, or whether they primarily follow bacterial microbiome approaches. Our focus is not basic methods (although we mention them), but the assumptions that drive study designs and the interpretations that are made of eukaryotic microbiome findings in human niches. We target human gut microbiome studies because of the abundance of attention given to this body site due to the systemic effects of gut processes.

Bacterial human microbiome research has several broad strategies: it describes taxonomic composition, finds associations rather than causes and mechanisms, often makes “dysbiosis” claims about normal or “imbalanced” compositions (Table 3), and might then invoke probiotics or microbiota transplants as microbiome‐remediating treatments (O'Malley and Skillings 2018). We explain all these aspects as we show whether and how these features appear in eukaryotic microbiome research.

Descriptive studies begin and end with a catalogue of organisms inferred from sequence. Human bacterial microbiome research began with this descriptive aim, and eukaryotic microbiome analyses also commonly focus on diversity metrics, sometimes with very limited samples. For instance,

On top of persistence issues, there are also some very interesting distribution patterns in eukaryotic microbiomes that call out for explanation. In bacterial microbiome succession, as humans mature from infant to adult, there is believed to be a fairly straightforward pattern of more organisms, more diversity, and more stability over time (Costello et al. 2012; Koenig et al. 2011). But if there really are “no clear successional patterns” in the eukaryotic microbiomes of infants (Wampach et al. 2017, p. 14; Ward et al. 2018), what are the implications? Might the apparent variability and low stability of eukaryotic microbiota patterns indicate different ecological processes, or are such findings merely artefacts of small populations, limited sampling, and transience? There are no answers yet to such questions, but they immediately indicate that careful ecological analyses are required to understand eukaryotic microbiome patterns. We consider this an asset rather than a liability for the field and elaborate further on this point below.

Bacterial microbiome research has very commonly made a move from diversity analysis to establishing disease associations (e.g. between phyla proportions and obesity). Eukaryotic microbiome researchers have also seen the attractions of identifying such connections. For example,

Despite such warnings, human eukaryotic microbiome research now increasingly makes connections between diversity and host health, and may even argue for a “colonization deficit” of eukaryotic microbes in Western populations (e.g. Laforest‐Lapointe and Arrieta 2018). This has been an influential claim in human bacterial microbiome research (e.g. Sonnenburg et al. 2016). Even though attempts to identify a “core microbiome” and a “healthy baseline microbiome” have so far failed in bacterial microbiome research (Lloyd‐Price et al. 2016), such states are now being eagerly sought in eukaryotic microbiome studies, especially fungal ones (Nash et al. 2017; Wheeler et al. 2016). Might it be more feasible to achieve such baselines with fewer taxa and lower abundance in eukaryotic microbiota? Statistically, this seems unlikely, especially if the majority of detected fungi and other eukaryotes are not colonizing the gut and merely passing through.

Bacterial microbiome research is currently reaping the harvest of a slew of study design problems. Small sample sizes mean studies are statistically underpowered. The association/correlation focus means that there is little that can be said about causation. Prediction is also limited, partly because of sample size and partly because of unknown causal structure. Genuine explanation of cause–effect relationships is unlikely without mechanisms, which if articulated at all tend to be highly speculative. Finally, ecological modelling is still a minority achievement in the vastness of human bacterial microbiome literature.

However, there are major problems now identified in bacterial microbiome findings about obesity. Despite early promising findings of clear associations between weight and bacterial microbiome composition (Ley et al. 2006), and transfer of phenotype via microbiota (e.g. Turnbaugh et al. 2006), meta‐analysis shows that phyla supposedly associated with obesity correlate with weight increase or decrease, and that experimental replications of transfer‐of‐phenotype studies are contradictory (Fleissner et al. 2010; Harley and Karp 2012; Sze and Schloss 2016; Walters et al. 2014). There is a loss of effect due to sample sizes being too small, plus dietary confounders in the experiments that obscure causal pathways and their directionality. Following this approach to try to establish causal relationships might not be the best way to develop eukaryotic microbiome investigations of obesity and other conditions. Moreover, bacterial microbiome research has additional problems that accompany health/illness association claims.

“Dysbiosis” is a very common term in bacterial microbiome research, where it vaguely describes a microbiome with any kind of variation that might be associated with illness (see Hooks and O'Malley 2017; Table 3). This loose, circular use of the term has many problems. First and foremost, even if dysbiosis exists, it is not known whether it is a cause or consequence of the disease. If it is somehow causal, is it whole‐community causation or are there just some key causal members of the microbiota? At best, dysbiosis is a suggestion that something may have changed in the microbiota, and that this change might be connected to the disease; at worst dysbiosis “obscures mechanisms” (Olesen and Alm 2016). Dysbiosis claims usually say nothing about function, and they talk about balance without quantification. “Normal” microbiome compositions are asserted as the nondysbiotic state, but there is no way to index “normality” except in contrast to compositions associated with extremely disease‐specific conditions. Illness‐associated microbiome indices at best confirm diagnoses of disease (Gevers et al. 2017; Hooks and O'Malley 2017).

We draw attention to the last quote in Table 4, which says dysbiosis can be a cause and a consequence. Normally, we expect causes to produce effects (even though effects can be part of a positive feedback loop, sequential causal steps can still be specified). But in most cases when dysbiosis is mentioned in eukaryotic (and bacterial) microbiome research, nobody has a clue what the cause or effect is (Arrieta et al. 2018). Most dysbiosis statements are bet‐hedging, as captured by the quote in Table 4: “dysbiosis” might be a cause, but then again it might be a consequence. Usually, if we find something is a cause and a consequence, we know there is a problem. It is probably too late for any field of microbiome research to reverse this compulsion to discuss findings in terms of dysbiosis, but perhaps there is still a chance that eukaryotic microbiome research can be more careful about how the term is applied.

If dysbiosis exists, so apparently must its opposite, often called “homoeostasis” (Table 3). What can be done to turn a supposedly dysbiotic microbiota into a hypothetically homoeostatic one? In most bacterial microbiome research in medical contexts, probiotic interventions and faecal microbiota/matter transplants (FMTs) are the main “microbiome” treatment. It is often suggested that bacterial probiotics such as lactobacilli or bifidobacteria can revert the microbiota to a healthier state for the human host (e.g. Libertucci and Young 2019; Rauch and Lynch 2012; Walsh et al. 2014). Many contested claims are made about probiotics, and despite some consistent findings in mouse studies, human probiotic meta‐analyses and systematic reviews are at best “ambiguous” about probiotic benefits for most illnesses (see Marchesi et al. 2016; Suez et al. 2019). Nevertheless, the majority of so‐called bacterial “microbiome” patents are for probiotics (Hooks et al. 2018; Supplementary Material). Does this trend have any parallels in eukaryotic microbiome research?

FMTs are the other main intervention and treatment in human bacterial microbiome research. Although there are no exclusively eukaryotic microbiota transplants (single or a few microbes introduced into a host are better described as probiotics), there has been a little attention to how eukaryotic microbes work in FMT treatments. Some of the existing scrutiny is negative: if Blastocystis and other protists are found in donor stools for FMTs, that stool sample is often excluded from the treatment (Stensvold and van der Giezen 2018). Fungal contributions to general FMTs are just beginning to be assessed. One recent study found intriguing relationships between the bacteria and fungi in FMTs, with different correlations between fungi and bacteria apparently having different therapeutic effects on hosts (Zuo et al. 2018). “Cross kingdom” interactions in general are an emerging and very promising emphasis in eukaryotic microbiome literature, and may indicate a fruitful divergence point from existing trends in bacterial microbiome research.

Despite the very basic descriptive focus of most eukaryotic microbiome studies so far, some interesting findings are already emerging about so‐called cross kingdom relationships (aka “interkingdom” or “transkingdom”; see Table 3). These labels usually refer to interactions between different domains of life (see Rowan‐Nash et al. 2019) and we will refer to them as such. This attention to eukaryotic–prokaryotic–viral interplay (or the potential of it) is at least partly due to the low abundance of eukaryotic microorganisms, with mass effects not being expected (unlike in bacterial microbiome research). Researchers instead have to probe more deeply for hypotheses about the feasible effects of eukaryotic microbes on the host, both directly but increasingly indirectly, as a result of interactions within the entire microbiota between eukaryotes, prokaryotes and viruses.

Interesting as this finding is, it is not clear that fungi should be conceptualized as functional replacements for bacteria. The apparent benefits of fungi can be explained somewhat differently. Tso et al. (2018) found that mice with an “intact” or “unperturbed” microbiota (i.e. not antibiotic‐treated; the actual community composition was not analysed) were able to control C. albicans growth so that it lived as a commensal and did not take its pathogenic form (with hyphae). In the process, exposure to C. albicans conferred resistance on the mice to other pathogens (Tso et al. 2018). The authors saw this experimentally evolved process as the beginning of a mutualistic relationship, which is an interpretation that requires more careful evolutionary‐theoretic consideration.

An underlying assumption of much medically oriented bacterial microbiome research is that there is a coevolved mutualistic relationship between human hosts and microbiota. For instance,

Perhaps, but we may also overestimate the beneficial roles of eukaryotic microbiota “at our peril,” especially when genuine colonization is unclear, let alone strong functional effects with evolutionary implications. Should we expect mutualistic interactions between eukaryote microbiota and human hosts? So far, little evidence is available to enable the evaluation of mutualistic relationships between humans and eukaryotic microbes (Bär et al. 2015; Huffnagle and Noverr 2013). In some cases when mutualism is posited, the relevant organism both benefits and harms. For example, in mouse intestines the protist Tritrichomonas musculis (a parabasalid) increases host immune responses to pathogens while making the mice more prone to colitis and cancer (Chudnovskiy et al. 2016). And on the other hand, there are analyses showing potentially positive interactions between a range of microbial groups that are disadvantageous for the host (e.g. Ghannoum 2016; Liguori et al. 2016). Not only may host‐directed mutualism and cooperation not be the most appropriate expectation of host–microbiota relationships, but also any codependencies may change radically over time and context. “Conditional mutualism” (Table 3) occurs when there are fluctuating benefits that are dependent on context (Bronstein 1994; Cushman and Whitham 1989), and this might be a more appropriate term for any benefit‐producing relationships between eukaryotic and bacterial microbiota and hosts. But if this term applies, so will its opposite.

Bacterial microbiome research is just beginning to work with the well‐known idea that pathogenicity is contextual (Table 3) rather than the other side of a “fundamental dichotomy” between commensality and pathogenicity (see Jiang et al. 2017, p. 814). In other words, organisms are not by their nature pathogens, but their pathogenic effects are determined by context (e.g. Chen et al. 2018). Protistology, the study of eukaryotic microbes, has long recognized opportunistic pathogenicity, when organisms may live asymptomatically in a host and only cause problems when the host (or resident microbiota) health state changes (e.g. Kaplan et al. 2000; Richardson 1991). Numerous individual protists and fungi exhibit opportunism that fluctuates from fully and partly asymptomatic infections to varying levels of pathogenicity: Dientamoeba, Candida, Entamoeba, Giardia, Toxoplasma, Pneumocystis, Blastocystis and Cryptosporidium (Bartelt and Platts‐Mills 2016; Bouzid et al. 2013; Bruijnesteijn van Coppenraet et al. 2015; Nieves‐Ramírez et al. 2018; Osman et al. 2016). S. var boulardii, although often characterized as a probiotic and thus assumed to have a positive influence on the gut, is also an opportunistic pathogen (Edwards‐Ingram et al. 2007). When patients are immune‐deficient, the yeast can cause tissue and blood infections that may be life‐threatening (Boyle et al. 2006). But on the other hand, Blastocystis may not deserve its standard status as potentially pathogenic: a detailed analysis shows it is very probably an ordinary commensal, inclined to healthy gut conditions (Beghini et al. 2017).

Although much more mechanistic detail is needed about how “opportunism” of this sort works, eukaryotic microbiome research is already primed—with its protistology and mycology roots—to develop better experimental insights (Kaneshiro and Dei‐Cas 2009). Defining the contexts of pathogenicity and the host–microorganism interactions that produce them is a finer grained way in which to generate causal insight than lumping the whole microbiota into “dysbiotic” or “homoeostatic” categories, with mutualism assumed as the default relationship. Existing insights about the contextual nature of protist and fungal pathogenicity can serve eukaryotic microbiome research well, especially in light of this young field's growing attention to cross‐domain interactions.

What should we say to summarize the state of eukaryotic microbiome research vis‐à‐vis bacterial microbiome research? There are negatives and positives. Most obviously, much more methodological development is still needed. More quantified functional analysis is necessary (not just barcodes and OTUs), and more experimental work. The other area requiring development is ecological modelling. We see considerable promise in that strand of potential development. In fact, we suggest that our overview of current human eukaryotic microbiome research shows extraordinary opportunities for more sophisticated analyses that combine ecological theory and quantitative data. Why is this?

As we noted in the introduction, we excluded helminth literature from our survey purely for size reasons, because we think there are advantages to focusing on the unicellular occupants of human bodies and other hosts (e.g. shared knowledge deficits, methodological synergy). Including too many eukaryotes (especially the larger ones) might also confuse public communication about the aims and achievements of microbiome research (e.g. Fig. S1). Given the potential of eukaryotic microbiome research to clarify general microbiome strategies, introducing further obscuration would be counterproductive. Nevertheless, we acknowledge that eukaryotic microbiome research is ideally located for drawing on knowledge and strategies from macroeukaryote parasitology as well as prokaryotic microbiome and virome research. In this respect, we foresee eukaryotic microbiome research going beyond its own domain to achieve deeper insight into the relationships between human hosts and their multiscale symbionts.

