Gut microbiome shifts with urbanization and potentially facilitates a zoonotic pathogen in a wading bird

Microbial communities in the gastrointestinal tract influence many aspects of host health, including metabolism and susceptibility to pathogen colonization. These relationships and the environmental and individual factors that drive them are relatively unexplored for free-living wildlife. We quantified the relationships between urban habitat use, diet, and age with microbiome composition and diversity for 82 American white ibises (Eudocimus albus) captured along an urban gradient in south Florida and tested whether gut microbial diversity was associated with Salmonella enterica prevalence. Shifts in community composition were significantly associated with urban land cover and, to a lesser extent, diets higher in provisioned food. The diversity of genera was negatively associated with community composition associated with urban land cover, positively associated with age class, and negatively associated with Salmonella shedding. Our results suggest that shifts in both habitat use and diet for urban birds significantly alter gut microbial composition and diversity in ways that may influence health and pathogen susceptibility as species adapt to urban habitats.

Living in urban areas can have important consequences for wildlife physiology and/or health through changes in habitat use, interactions, and diet [1]. For example, urban birds exhibit higher stress levels and more frequent interactions with non-native species [2]. Similarly, some species experience increased exposure to pollutants and reduced immune function [3]. The provisioning of urban wildlife, either intentionally (e.g., bird feeders) or unintentionally (e.g., garbage), can also promote the use of novel foods [4] and habitat types, such as manicured lawns [5].

In this study, we characterized the gut microbiome of white ibises with the goal of determining how gut microbiome community composition and alpha diversity changed with urbanization, the consumption of provisioned food, age, and sex. We then tested whether any differences in composition or diversity were associated with the prevalence of Salmonella spp. To do so, we sampled white ibises across an urban gradient in South Florida and collected feces for Salmonella isolation and microbiome analyses and blood for stable isotope analysis of diet.

We captured ibises in Palm Beach and adjacent counties in South Florida between October 2015 and March 2017 (Fig 1). South Florida has a tropical climate with a high biodiversity of wading birds and annual fluctuations in water levels between the dry (November—April) and rainy (May—October) seasons. Palm Beach County has dense urban developments along the coast progressing to agricultural development and wetlands further inland. We captured ibises at 15 sites where we had observed foraging ibises and that represented an urban land cover gradient (0–93% urban land cover, see [24] for details on land cover analysis; S1 Table). These sites included five restored or constructed wetlands, two wildlife rehabilitation centers, a landfill, a zoo, and six urban parks. We captured ibises in wetlands using mist nets with decoys and at more urban sites we used baited manually-operated flip traps and nylon slip-knot leg lassos [24].

We assessed ibis age using plumage as adults (≥3 years, all white feathers) or subadults (some brown feathers) [26] and recorded mass, culmen length, wing chord length, tarsus length and width to calculate body condition. We then collected ≤1% body weight of blood from each bird from the jugular or metatarsal vein. We used whole blood samples to confirm ibis sex using standard molecular techniques [27] and for stable isotope analysis of diet (see below). If a captured ibis defecated onto a clean surface, we collected ≥0.25 g of feces (0.63 ± 0.05, mean ± S.E.) using a sterile cotton tipped applicator for microbiome analysis. We also collected approximately one gram of fresh feces into 10 ml of dulcitol selenite broth for Salmonella isolation. All animal captures and handling were performed under a Florida scientific collection permit number LSSC1-11-100119G, and a federal collection permit number MB779238-2. All animal capture and handling procedures were reviewed and approved by the University of Georgia’s IACUC (AUP A2016 11-019-Y2-A1).

Fecal samples for gut microbiome analyses were stored in microcentrifuge tubes at -20C in the field and subsequently at -80C until DNA extraction. Up to 0.25 mg of sample was aliquoted into 96 well extraction plates for submission to the University of Wisconsin Biotechnology Center for extraction and sequencing. Bacterial and fungal DNA were extracted using the PowerMag microbial DNA isolation kit following the manufacturer’s protocol (Mo Bio Laboratories, Inc.). Extracted DNA was cleaned using a SpeedBead Clean-up protocol (GE SeraMag Beads, GE Healthcare, Chicago, IL) prior to library preparation.

DNA concentration was verified fluorometrically using either the Qubit® dsDNA HS Assay Kit or Quant-iT™ PicoGreen® dsDNA Assay Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Samples were prepared in a similar process to the one described in Illumina’s 16S rNA gene Amplicon Sequencing Library Preparation Protocol, Part # 15044223 Rev. B (Illumina Inc., San Diego, California, USA) with the following modifications: The 16S rNA gene V3/V4 variable region was amplified with fusion primers (forward primer 341f: 5’-ACACTCTTTCCCTACACGACGCTCTTCCGATCT(N)3/6CCTACGGGNGGCWGCAG-3’, reverse primer 805r: 5’-GTGACTGGAGTTCAGACGTGTGCTCTTCCGATCT(N)3/6GACTACHVGGGTATCTAATCC-3’). Region specific primers were previously described in [28] (underlined sequences above), and were modified to add 3–6 random nucleotides ((N)3/6) and Illumina adapter overhang nucleotide sequences 5’ of the gene‐specific sequences. Following initial amplification, reactions were cleaned using a 0.7x volume of AxyPrep Mag PCR clean-up beads (Axygen Biosciences, Union City, CA). In a subsequent PCR, Illumina dual indexes and Sequencing adapters were added using the following primers (Forward primer: 5’-AATGATACGGCGACCACCGAGATCTACAC[55555555]ACACTCTTTCCCTACACGACGCTCTTCCGATCT-3’, Reverse Primer: 5’-CAAGCAGAAGACGGCATACGAGAT[77777777]GTGACTGGAGTTCAGACGTGTGCTCTTCCGATCT -3’, where bracketed sequences are equivalent to the Illumina Dual Index adapters D501-D508 and D701-D712,N716,N718-N724,N726-N729). Following PCR, reactions were cleaned using a 0.7x volume of AxyPrep Mag PCR clean-up beads (Axygen Biosciences). Quality and quantity of the finished libraries were assessed using an Agilent DNA 1000 kit (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) and Qubit® dsDNA HS Assay Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific), respectively. Libraries were pooled in an equimolar fashion and appropriately diluted prior to sequencing. Paired end, 300 bp sequencing was performed using the Illumina MiSeq Sequencer and a MiSeq 600 bp (v3) sequencing cartridge. Images were analyzed using the standard Illumina Pipeline, version 1.8.2. OTU assignments and diversity plots were created using QIIME analysis pipeline [29] as described below.

Output sequencing files provided by the University of Wisconsin Biotechnology Center were separated by barcode sequences by the Biotech center, resulting in 192 pairs of forward and reverse read fastq files. Paired sequences were joined, quality filtered, clustered into operational taxonomic units, assigned to taxonomic identities, and aligned to create a phylogenetic tree using the QIIME pipeline [29]. Paired end reads were joined using the multiple_join_paired.py script and default parameters, separately for the two batches of files coming from the two Miseq runs. Unpaired sequences were discarded. Joined consensus sequences were quality filtered and combined into one fasta file using the multiple_split_libraries_fastq.py script with the “sampleid_by_file” option, again separately for the two Miseq runs, using default parameters. The two resulting combined files were then concatenated into one final file. Because we used the same sample identifiers on the two separate Miseq runs, by concatenating the output files from the two split_libraries script we effectively pool the sequences from both Miseq runs for each sample.

Representative sequences for each OTU were aligned using the align_seqs.py script, using the PyNAST method using default parameters. Aligned sequences were used to create a phylogenetic tree, using the make_phylogeny.py script with the FastTree method [32]. For phylogenetically informed analyses, the OTU table was filtered to remove any OTU’s whose representative sequences could not be aligned. The reshape2 package in R [33] was used to collapse OTUs into higher taxonomic levels for analysis (see S2 Table and S1 Fig for a summary of bioinformatics output at the genus level, which was used for analysis).

We isolated Salmonella from fecal samples by modifying previously published protocols [34]. Briefly, 1 g of feces was placed in dulcitol selenite pre-enrichment broth and was maintained at ambient temperature for approximately 2–4 days until they were shipped to the University of Georgia (Athens, Georgia) for culture. We then transferred 100μl of turbid pre-enrichment broth to 10 ml of Rappaport-Vassiliadis (RV) broth and incubated for ~24 h at 43°C (Oxoid, Hampshire, UK). We streaked for isolation from each RV enrichment onto xylose lysine tergitol 4 (XLT-4) agar plates and incubated for 24 ± 2 h. Colonies suspected to be Salmonella based on morphology (black colonies or yellow colonies with a black center) were streaked again for isolation to obtain a pure colony. Each isolate was then confirmed by characteristic growth on CHROMagar© Salmonella-Plus after 24 h of incubation at 37°C [34] (CHROMagar, Paris, France). We confirmed a subset of isolates as Salmonella via PCR [25,34]. Confirmed Salmonella isolates were stored at -80°C.

We quantified the proportion of provisioned food (i.e., bread and chips) in ibis diet using δ13C and δ15N stable isotope analysis of red blood cells. These isotopes reflect the carbon sources and trophic level of consumer diets; δ 13C differs for marine and terrestrial communities and C4 plants such as corn in processed foods [35], and δ15N is biomagnified in predators [36]. Avian red blood cells have a turnover rate of approximately two months [37] and so provide an estimate of assimilated diet over that period. We estimated the importance of provisioned food, freshwater and terrestrial invertebrates, marine invertebrates, landfill refuse, and fish by creating five-source mixing models using the R package SIAR [38]. Samples were analyzed following standard methods at the Center for Applied Isotope Studies at the University of Georgia (see [24] for in-depth description of diet sources and laboratory methods).

Microbiome data were analyzed at the genus and phyla levels. Microbial community composition was analyzed at the site level (i.e., relative abundance of each taxon was averaged across individual samples within a site) to control for pseudoreplication when comparing microbiome characteristics to site-level characteristics. Similarity among sites in average genus-level microbiome composition was visualized using principal coordinates analysis using the capscale function in the vegan package in R [39]. Associations between the microbiome and the geographic and demographic explanatory variables were assessed using environmental fits performed with the envfit function in the vegan package in R.

Explanatory variables were correlated to both microbiome measures and each other, making it difficult to determine which variables linked directly to patterns in microbial community measures and Salmonella prevalence. To address this issue, we performed structural equation modeling to better understand the relationships among the variables. Structural equation modeling was performed using the lavaan [44] and lavaan.survey packages [45]. We identified the best fit model starting from a complete model with all hypothesized relationships and interactions and then performed a manual backwards selection removing non-significant relationships from the model until the model fit stabilized with acceptable model fit parameters. This final model was tested further by removing one or more relationships from the model and comparing the model fit parameters for decline or improvement in model stability.

We sampled 82 white ibises at 15 sites (5.3 ± 4.0 birds per site) and sampled more adult females than other age and sex classes (adult females = 36, adult males = 20, subadult females = 17, subadult males = 9). Microbiome sequence analysis of white ibis feces yielded on average 104,695 sequence reads (± 6077 SEM) and 351.6 genera (± 19 SEM) per sample (S1 Fig, S2 Table).

The dominant shift in gut microbiome composition at the genus level correlated to the percent of urban landcover, the average percentage of diet from provisioned food, and average diversity (Shannon) at the genus level (Fig 2: Environmental Fit–Percent urban landcover p<0.0001, R2 = 0.835; Average percent of diet provisioned p = 0.021, R2 = 0.493; Percent of samples from adults p = 0.103, R2 = 0.314; Shannon diversity of genera p = 0.014, R2 = 0.519). Urban landcover and the average percentage of diet from provisioned foods in turn were moderately correlated (sample-size adjusted R2 = 0.304, p = 0.020).

Urban land cover and dietary provisioning were primarily associated with changes in genus-level bacterial community composition along the first ordination axis (PCoA1) (Fig 2, R2 = 0.82, F = 59.0, p < 0.001). This shift in composition corresponded to notable changes in the relative abundance of several bacterial phyla (Fig 3, Table 1). The most abundant phyla in white ibis feces were Firmicutes (mean percentage of sequences across all samples: 32.5%), Proteobacteria (22.6%), and TM7 (22.6%); however, average relative abundance of dominant phyla varied considerably across the urbanization gradient (Fig 3, Table 1). Firmicutes and Cyanobacteria significantly decreased in relative abundance while Proteobacteria, TM7, Bacteroidetes, OP11, and TM6 increased in relative abundance with increasing urban land cover (Table 1).

* Significant correlation after adjustment for false-discovery rate (Benjamini, Yoav; Hochberg, Yosef (1995). Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and powerful approach to multiple testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B. 57 (1): 289–300.)

Unlike bacterial composition, changes in bacterial genus diversity were associated with individual ibis biology rather than capture site. These changes in genus diversity, as measured by the Shannon diversity index, were not associated with urban land cover or dietary provisioning (Urban land cover: R2 = 0.04, F1,13 = 1.16, p = 0.30, Fig 4A; Provisioning: R2 = 0.03, F1,13 = 0.81, p = 0.38, Fig 4B). Rather, diversity was significantly correlated with microbiome community composition (PCoA1) (R2 = -0.29, F1,13 = 5.2, p = 0.04; Fig 4C). As predicted, ibis age, measured as the proportion of adult ibis captured at a particular site, was positively correlated with genus diversity (R2 = 0.16, p < 0.001). Mean bacterial diversity was negatively correlated with Salmonella prevalence (Fig 4D), such that ibises with lower genus diversity were more likely to be shedding Salmonella (β = -2.10 ± 0.99, z = -2.12, p = 0.03).

Given the co-linearity between several of our explanatory variables and community composition, we developed a structural equation model to better understand how these variables linked through gut community composition to associations with Salmonella prevalence (Structural equation model weighted by sample size at each site: Robust Chi-squared goodness-of-fit p = 0.466; Comparative Fit Index = 1.000; Tucker-Lewis Index = 1.032, Fig 5). The best model indicated that bacterial community composition was associated with both the degree of urbanization surrounding the sampling site and to a lesser extent the percentage of the diet attributed to provisioned food, where urbanization acted both directly on composition and indirectly through effects on diet (Urbanization: β = 1.18 ± 0.21, z = 5.64, p < 0.001, Diet: β = 1.51 ± 0.69, z = 2.18, p = 0.029, Fig 5, S3 Table). Bacterial community composition (PCo1) was negatively associated with average genus-level diversity, and diversity was positively associated with the proportion of adult ibis at each site (PCoA1: β -0.39 ± 0.15, z = -2.62, p = 0.009, Proportion adult: β = 0.65 ± 0.14, z = 4.68, p < 0.001, Fig 5, S3 Table). Genus-level diversity was then negatively associated with Salmonella prevalence (β = -0.41 ± 0.17, z = -2.42, p = 0.016; Fig 5, S3 Table).

In this study, we examined changes in the composition and diversity of the gut microbiome with urbanization and food provisioning for the American white ibis, a recently urbanized wading bird. We also tested if these changes were associated with an increased likelihood of shedding Salmonella, an opportunistic enteric zoonotic pathogen. Microbiome community composition was strongly associated with urban land cover and, to a lesser extent, the assimilation of provisioned food, such as bread. Microbial diversity was negatively associated with these changes in community composition, and ibises with less diverse microbiomes were more likely to shed Salmonella.

Many studies have demonstrated changes in the prevalence of pathogen prevalence, immune function, and stress in urban wildlife [1,68,69]. Shifts in microbiome diversity with habitat use and diet may be an underappreciated mechanism by which urbanization can affect wildlife health. This shift in pathogen shedding with gut diversity for urban ibis may also have important consequences for the role of urban wildlife as carriers of zoonotic pathogens across the landscape. American white ibis, as well as many other wildlife species, can act as asymptomatic carriers of Salmonella enterica and ibis shed Salmonella serotypes shared with local human cases [23]. As such, a greater understanding of how wildlife microbiome form and function are altered in changing environments may be crucial for improving conservation and public health.

