The Gut Microbial Endocrine Organ in Type 2 Diabetes



Historically, the focus of type II diabetes mellitus (T2DM) research has been on host metabolism and hormone action. However, emerging evidence suggests that the gut microbiome, commensal microbes that colonize the gastrointestinal tract, also play a significant role in T2DM pathogenesis. Specifically, gut microbes metabolize what is available to them through the host diet to produce small molecule metabolites that can have endocrine-like effects on human cells. In fact, the meta-organismal crosstalk between gut microbe-generated metabolites and host receptor systems may represent an untapped therapeutic target for those at risk for or suffering from T2DM. Recent evidence suggests that gut microbe-derived metabolites can impact host adiposity, insulin resistance, and hormone secretion to collectively impact T2DM progression. Here we review the current evidence that structurally diverse gut microbe-derived metabolites, including short chain fatty acids, secondary bile acids, aromatic metabolites, trimethylamine-N-oxide, polyamines, and N-acyl amides, that can engage with host receptors in an endocrine-like manner to promote host metabolic disturbance associated with T2DM. Although these microbe-host signaling circuits are not as well understood as host hormonal signaling, they hold untapped potential as new druggable targets to improve T2DM complications. Whether drugs that selectively target meta-organismal endocrinology will be safe and efficacious in treating T2DM is a key new question in the field of endocrinology. Here we discuss the opportunities and challenges in targeting the gut microbial endocrine organ for the treatment of diabetes and potentially many other diseases where diet-microbe-host interactions play a contributory role.

Over the past 30 years, the number of people with T2DM and prediabetes has increase 2-fold globally, positioning T2DM as a rapidly expanding public health challenge. T2DM is a multifactorial disease that slowly progresses over many years (Fig. 1), and as such therapeutic strategies are often designed in a personalized manner according to what stage of progression the patient presents. Although there are clear host genetic determinants impacting the global T2DM epidemic, genetic variation accounts for only a small proportion of risk of developing T2DM. In addition to genetic predisposition, unhealthy diets and a sedentary lifestyle are key drivers of the early phases of prediabetes, insulin resistance, and low-grade chronic inflammation that drive diabetic complications. Clearly, poor dietary practices play a predominant role in slow progression of prediabetes to frank T2DM. Therefore, understanding how dietary factors drive T2DM pathogenesis will be central in drug discovery moving forward.

Here we discuss how common nutrients in our diets can participate in meta-organismal (microbe to host) endocrine signaling pathways to promote T2DM progression. It is largely assumed that nutrients from our diets are simply absorbed or metabolized by our human cells primarily for energy needs and general cell health. However, there is clear evidence that microbes resident in the human gastrointestinal tract play major roles not only in allowing us to efficiently harvest energy from our food, but also serve as a key endocrine organ producing small molecule metabolites that act in a hormone-like manner to impact T2DM pathogenesis. It is important to understand that gut microbe-derived metabolites are sensed by dedicated receptor systems in the human host, and these host receptors may represent interesting new therapeutic targets (Fig. 2). Gut microbes can also signal to the host to regulate T2DM through direct microbe-host interactions, where constituents of the microbial cell wall are sensed by host cells through pattern recognition receptors (PRR) to promote or protect against inflammatory processes associated with T2DM complications (Fig. 3). Specifically, toll-like receptors (TLRs) 2 (as a heterodimer with either TLRs 1 or 6), 3, and 4 as well as nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-containing protein 1 (NOD1) have been mechanistically shown to exacerbate inflammation in diet-induced models of inflammation (1-6). Expression of TLRs 7, 8, and 9 have also been associated with diabetes in various contexts of obesity and T2DM (7-9). On the other hand, signaling through TLR5 and NOD1 have shown to be protective against insulin resistance (10-15) (Fig. 3). Collectively, through both nutrient metabolism-dependent (i.e., metabolite-driven) and metabolism-independent (i.e., PRR-driven) mechanisms, the gut microbiome forms a largely overlooked endocrine organ that plays a key role in the progression of T2DM. With our growing understanding of diet-microbe-host interactions, there is rapidly expanding potential that drugs targeting meta-organismal endocrinology may be a provocative new way to advance T2DM drug discovery.

The incidence of T2DM continues to increase in the United States and globally as the abundance of food in the developed world leads to chronic overnutrition and sedentary lifestyles becomes commonplace (16,17). Fundamentally, T2DM is a disease of improper fasting/refeeding responses controlled by a complex host endocrine system, resulting in improper control of glucose and lipid metabolism that then contributes to many T2DM-associated complications. Clinically, diabetes can be defined by different measurements of blood glucose including hemoglobin A1c (5.7%-6.4% considered prediabetic and >6.5% is diabetic) and fasting plasma glucose (100-125mg/dL considered prediabetic and >125 mg/dL is diabetic) (18). Despite the primary role of environmental factors such as smoking, poor diet, and sedentary lifestyle in T2DM development and progression, the basis for genetic susceptibility has also been investigated (19-21). As might be expected, many genes regulating host metabolism and hormonal regulation of glucose and lipid metabolism have been associated with T2DM (20). However, genetic variation accounts for only a small proportion of risk of developing T2DM, and environmental factors play a predominant role in driving the progression of this slowly developing disease (Fig. 1). In addition to genetic predisposition, the pathogenesis of T2DM begins with chronic nutrient excess in a healthy individual at baseline, leading to increased weight gain (i.e., adiposity) as the body is unable to utilize all the nutrients it is receiving. With the expansion of adipose tissue, insulin resistance develops resulting in reduced nutrient uptake, moderate hyperglycemia, and dyslipidemia (22). Additionally, as the lipid storage capacity of adipose tissue is finite, in obese individuals other nonadipose tissues such at the liver and skeletal muscle can begin to take on ectopic lipids which can promote lipotoxicity and associated insulin resistance. During the early phase of T2DM progression, pancreatic β cells can increase the production of insulin to counteract tissue insulin resistance. However, over time pancreatic β cells exhibit reduced capacity for glucose-stimulated insulin secretion and, in some cases, die, leading to loss of insulin production and eventually dependence on exogenous insulin (Fig. 1).

It is important to note that there have been game-changing advances (23, 24) in the treatment and management of all phases of T2DM, particularly with the advent of recombinant insulin and effective insulin sensitizing drugs. Therapeutic options for T2DM vary from lifestyle to pharmacological to surgical interventions. Specifically, lifestyle modification includes improving diet to restrict excess nutrient intake and increasing physical activity, while pharmacological treatment options are represented by recombinant insulin peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma agonists (“glitazones”), sulfonylureas, metformin, sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitors, and glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists. In the common case where T2DM develops in obese subjects, surgical options such as bariatric surgery can show dramatic improvements in diabetic complications. Historically, host derived hormones and hormonal control of host metabolism have been the focus of T2DM drug discovery. More recently, the investigation of the gut microbiota in host health and disease has exploded, ushering in a new wealth of information and potential for novel therapies that target meta-organismal endocrinology. It has become clear that gut microbes act as their own endocrine organ, communicating among each other and with their host in response to dietary cues. As such, there have been numerous studies implicating various microbial metabolites in T2DM pathogenesis. Despite many emerging studies, there remains a need to identify novel microbe-host interactions that correlate with T2DM outcomes, determine the mechanisms by which these novel and previously identified metabolites exert an effect on disease, and design novel therapies aimed at targeting the microbiota to modulate the production of these metabolites and downstream mechanisms to limit disease progression. Here we discuss meta-organismal endocrine pathways implicated in T2DM and the potential molecular mechanisms and therapeutic potential.

The short chain fatty acids (SCFAs), acetate, propionate, and butyrate are metabolic products of soluble dietary fiber and amino acids, were the first class of microbiota-derived metabolites to be thoroughly investigated as having implications in T2DM. Total SCFA concentrations have been measured micromolar concentrations in both portal and peripheral blood of humans (25). Four G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) for SCFAs have been identified: GPR41 (free fatty acid receptor 3), GPR43 (free fatty acid receptor 2), GPR109a, and olfactory receptor 78 (26-39) (Fig. 2). Of the 4 receptors, the 2 most directly implicated in T2DM are GPR41 and GPR43. GPR41 recognizes all 3 SCFAs but is activated 10-fold less by acetate and is reported to be expressed in adipose tissue, the gut by intestinal L-cells, the nervous system, and the kidney (26,34,36). Although GPR41 was reported to be expressed in mouse adipose tissue and induce leptin secretion (27), other studies have failed to find expression in this tissue (30,40). GPR41 knockout resulted in increased gut motility via reduced peptide YY (PYY) secretion, which resulted in decreased intestinal absorption of nutrients, implicating a role in food consumption (28). Consistent with this role in regulating food consumption, in the sympathetic nervous system, GPR41 activation was found to stimulate energy expenditure, thereby having a protective effect against T2DM onset (30). In the kidney, GPR41 seems to play a role in decreasing blood pressure, which could play a protective role againstT2DM-mediated kidney damage in later disease stages (34). Overall, these effects suggest activation of GPR41 has a beneficial effect on T2DM in murine models. However, there is limited information available regarding GPR41 in human tissues.

In addition to the previously discussed SCFAs, branched chain fatty acids (BCFAs), which are produced from branched chain amino acids (valine, leucine, and isoleucine) in Bacteroides, Eubacterium, and Clostridium species have also gained attention (49-51). These studies have suggested that BCFAs suppress immunoglobin A production and modify insulin resistance and signaling both positively and negatively (50-52). More investigation will be needed better understand the conflicting reports of BCFAs’ effects on metabolism. Overall, SCFAs seem to improve metabolic parameters, but given their varied receptors and effects in multiple tissues these observations may not comprehensively describe the role of SCFAs in T2DM development and pathogenesis. Additionally, the production of BCFAs by the same bacterial genera as SCFAs may complicate in vivo findings.

Primary bile acids (1BAs), cholic acid and chenodeoxycholic acid, are produced by the liver, conjugated with either glycine or taurine, and secreted from the gallbladder into the intestinal tract where most are reabsorbed and circulate at nanomolar to low micromolar concentrations (53). A small portion reaches the lower intestinal tract where microbes cleave the glycine or taurine and either reduce or epimerize the 7-hydroxy group to make the secondary bile acids (2BAs): deoxycholic acid (DCA), lithocholic acid (LCA), and ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA), which can then be absorbed into portal circulation, reaching nanomolar concentrations (53,54) (Fig. 4). Both 1BAs and 2BAs may are poised to play a central role in T2DM pathogenesis given their functions in intestinal fat and vitamin absorption and glucose homeostasis (55). These bile acids bind to and activate nuclear hormone receptors, such as the farnesoid X receptor (FXR), pregnane X receptor (PXR), and vitamin D receptor (VDR), as well as G-protein-coupled bile acid receptor-1 (TGR5) (Fig. 4). FXR is a nuclear hormone receptor that is expressed in the liver, intestines, kidney, and several other tissues where it regulates bile acid homeostasis in addition to lipid and glucose metabolism in response to both 1BAs and 2BAs (56). For 2BAs, FXR responds to DCA and LCA to negatively regulate bile acid production through the small heterodimer partner and fibroblast growth factor-15/19 (FGF15/FGF19) that inhibit expression of bile acid synthetic enzymes cytochrome P450 family 7 subfamily A member 1and cytochrome P450 family 8 subfamily B member 1 (57). In diabetic mice, the administration of a synthetic FXR agonist markedly reduced plasma glucose, triglycerides, free fatty acids, and cholesterol as well as hepatic steatosis (56). The effect on glucose homeostasis was attributed to improved insulin sensitivity, while decreased triglycerides resulted from reduced sterol regulatory-binding protein 1c, and increased reverse cholesterol transport was achieved through the enhanced expression of lecithin:cholesterol acyltransferase and scavenger receptor class B type 1 (56). Conversely, intestine-specific knockout of FXR in mice was shown to reduce insulin resistance and hepatic triglyceride accumulation (58). Most recently, it was demonstrated that an intestinally targeted pharmacological agonist of FXR promoted profound improvements in insulin resistance and enhanced energy expenditure in mice (59). Although there are some evidence supporting FXR agonists as antidiabetic agents, further study of FXR signaling in T2DM pathogenesis is warranted due to discrepant results across divergent preclinical animal model studies.

TGR5, unlike the nuclear receptors discussed above, is a GPCR, expressed by digestive, immune, and adipose tissues where it is preferentially activated by LCA and DCA (62-64). In the gut, TGR5 activation leads to secretion of GLP-1 and PYY, thereby having beneficial effects on insulin secretion and satiety (64-66). TGR5 knockout in macrophages and myeloid-lineage cells was found to exacerbate adipose tissue inflammation and insulin resistance, suggesting a protective role in T2DM pathogenesis (67). Furthermore, bile acid-driven activation of TGR5 in adipose tissue can promote thyroid hormone action thereby increasing energy expenditure (68).Given the varying physiological effects of 2BAs in T2DM models, their diversity of receptors and affected tissues warrant further study to determine whether BA metabolism by the microbiota may be targeted therapeutically. Although there has been a vast array of studies measuring microbe-associated bile acid conversion in human disease (69), additional work is needed to understand the specific role that gut microbes play in host bile acid receptor signaling in the early versus late stages of T2DM progression.

Bacteria are known to catabolize plant polyphenols and aromatic amino acids such as tryptophan, phenylalanine, and histidine to produce various aromatic metabolites. Some polyphenol metabolites including phenylpyruvic acid, apigenin, biochanin A, and 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvic acid as well as tryptophan metabolites such as indole, indole 3-propionic acid (IPA), indole 3-acetic acid, and indole 3-carboxaldehyde, have been identified to exert effects through various nuclear hormone receptors: the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and PXR (70-75). Polyphenol metabolites and indole have been consistently identified in plasma at nanomolar concentrations; however, indole metabolites such as IPA have been measured at low micromolar concentrations (76,77).The production of microbial AHR agonists was shown to be decreased in the feces of obese vs lean and T2DM vs non-T2DM patients (78). These results were then recapitulated in genetically obese mice as well as high-fat diet (HFD) fed mice and rats. Administration of an exogenous AHR agonist improved glucose and insulin tolerance in HFD mice, which was shown to be through reduced inflammation and increased GLP-1 secretion (78). As with 2BAs, PXR activation by polyphenols and indoles upregulates CYP3A, which affects xenobiotic metabolism and thus may influence on T2DM patients receiving pharmacological therapy.

Also, the microbial product of histidine metabolism, imidazole propionate (ImP), was recently shown to be directly involved in insulin resistance (87). ImP is significantly increased in both portal and peripheral blood of T2DM patients to an average of 10 to 15 micromolar vs obese, body mass index–matched nondiabetics with only 5 micromolar (87). Follow-up in murine models revealed that ImP was significantly increased in conventional vs germ-free mice, indicating the microbial origin of the metabolite. Mechanistically, these mouse studies showed that exogenous ImP showed worsened glucose tolerance, increased gluconeogenic enzyme expression, increased S6 kinase phosphorylation, and impaired insulin signaling in multiple tissues on a normal chow diet. In vitro ImP also impaired insulin-stimulated phosphorylation of protein kinase B (Akt) (87). Taken together, these results suggested that ImP activates mTORC1, which was then confirmed in both mouse and human tissues. Future studies may seek to validate these findings and identify therapeutic interventions aimed at limiting ImP production.

Common commensal bacteria produce the volatile trimethylamine (TMA) by cleaving it from choline, carnitine, betaine, and phosphatidylcholine (88-90). TMA, which smells like rotting fish, is known to activate a host GPCR called trace amine-associated receptor 5 in the olfactory epithelium. However, the role of trace amine-associated receptor 5activation in processes other than olfaction have remained elusive (91). After reaching portal circulation and trafficking to the liver TMA is oxidized to trimethylamine-N-oxide (TMAO) by flavin-containing monooxygenases (FMOs), most predominantly FMO3 where it then reaches peripheral blood at a micromolar concentrations in humans and mice (88,89,92-95). Although most commonly recognized as a contributing factor in atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease, the TMA-FMO3-TMAO pathway is also strongly associated with T2DM (94,95). An elegant study by Biddinger and colleagues demonstrated that mice with selective hepatic insulin resistance have elevated levels of circulating TMAO (94). This study demonstrated that male mice lacking the insulin receptor in the liver (LIRKO mice) have a profound up-regulation of the TMAO-producing enzyme FMO3 in the liver (94). Furthermore, antisense oligonucleotide–mediated inhibition of FMO3 in LIRKO mice lacking the insulin receptor in the liver was shown to inhibit TMAO production and to protect against the hyperlipidemic and proatherogenic phenotype of these mice (94). In agreement, an independent study showed that dietary supplementation with TMAO can exacerbate glucose intolerance in high-fat–fed mice (96). In addition, recent studies suggest TMAO levels may similarly be associated with the presence and severity of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (97-99), which can be a contributing factor in insulin resistance. We have also shown that either inhibition or genetic deletion can protect mice from HFD-induced obesity, which is associated with enhanced beiging of white adipose tissue (95). Consistent with the original observation that it correlates with the T2DM comorbidity cardiovascular disease, TMAO was found to contribute to thrombotic events by causing platelet hyperactivity (94,100-102). An additional tool that has been used for studying this meta-organismal pathway is nonlethal inhibitors of TMA lyase enzymes, which have been associated to thrombosis and cholesterol metabolism (103,104). The selective small targeting the reduction of TMA and TMAO may hold promise in treating T2DM and other diabetes-related complications.

Recently, it was shown that at high concentrations TMAO directly binds to and activates PERK, a key effector of the unfolded protein response in the liver, promoting hyperglycemia and metabolic dysfunction (105). Despite the data from these aforementioned studies, the notion of TMAO playing a role as a pathogenic metabolite has been opposed. One editorial proposed some concerns regarding the study looking at platelet reactivity, stating that dietary intake of TMAO and other factors, such as aspirin usage, should have been considered more carefully (106). Another study, using a bidirectional Mendelian randomization analysis, determined that the causal direction between T2DM and the metabolites betaine and choline was negatively causal (107). Conversely, TMAO and carnitine were not associated causally. Instead, T2DM was found to be causally associated to higher plasma TMAO, suggesting that the disease causes the observed changes to the metabolite rather than the metabolite playing a pathogenic role in disease (107). Taken together, it is evident that the bacterial production of TMA and subsequent conversion to TMAO by host FMO3 is related to T2DM pathogenesis and comorbidities. Given the fact that new drugs specifically targeting gut microbial production of TMA are now available (104), future studies should focus on whether these TMA lyase inhibitors can improve outcomes in preclinical models of obesity, T2DM, and related cardiometabolic diseases.

Many catabolite products of lysine, arginine, and ornithine have been identified and collectively referred to as polyamines, which include cadaverine, putrescine, spermine, spermidine, and agmatine (Fig. 5). These metabolites range from nanogram to microgram per milliliter concentrations in human serum (108). It is also important to note that these metabolites can be products of both host and microbe metabolism (108-111). Thus far, not much is known about the role of polyamines in T2DM, although one study found positive correlations between serum putrescine and glycosylated hemoglobin A1c as well as between spermine and fasting insulin (108). Using a functional screening technique, cadaverine, putrescine, and agmatine were identified as activators of the HRH4 histamine receptor from most to least potent (109). A developmental study using a zebrafish model determined that host polyamine synthesis and specifically spermidine was required for proper β-cell differentiation (110). A recent study found that agmatine production by the microbiota in response to metformin is responsible for an increase in fatty acid oxidation in C. elegans, suggesting that a drug-microbe interaction could explain the efficacy of metformin in T2DM patients (111). Lastly, polyamines have been implicated in renal hypertrophy in T2DM and thus may contribute to kidney dysfunction in advanced disease (112). Further research on polyamines in T2DM are warranted, particularly focused on what host sensing mechanisms other than HRH4 are involved and whether altered host and/or microbial polyamine production play functional roles in disease progression.

In a recent publication, Cohen and colleagues used functional bacterial metagenomics to discover commensal bacteria that produce N-acyl amides with 6 families of N-acetyl synthase (NAS) genes. These NAS genes acylate amino acids such as glycine, alanine, lysine, and glutamine as well as serinol (113). Many of these N-acyl amides mimic endogenous signaling molecules that bind to host GPCRs (113). Among these GPCRs are G2A, S1PR4, and PTGER4, which are involved in various immune functions as well as GPR119, which has been extensively implicated in T2DM (113-115). Upon cloning type VI NAS into E.coli and monocolonizing mice, it was discovered that the NAS product, N-oleyl serinol, improves glucose tolerance via increased plasma insulin and GLP-1 (113). Work from the same group previously identified commendamide, an N-acylated glycine, as a G2A agonist that activates NF-κB signaling (116). However, whether commendamide signals via G2A to impact T2DM has never been examined (116). Further investigation with native microbes, nonreporter based cell culture, and more in vivo systems are needed to better establish whether these products play a role in T2DM and may be targeted therapeutically.

Significant advances have been made over the past decade to begin elucidating the molecular mechanisms by which these metabolites exert their effects diverging from providing correlation and surrogate readout data that only suggest causality on disease phenotypes. Emerging technology in both preclinical animal models and microbiology will allow for increased proficiency in dissecting the roles of individual metabolites, receptors, and microbes in disease pathology. Given the previous discussion, a trend has emerged that GPCRs tend to be targets of many microbial metabolites; therefore, continued effort should focus on attempting to identify receptors using microbial metabolite libraries and bacterial supernatants (109). Additionally, the implementation of expanding multi-omics platforms and machine learning techniques will aid in the discovery of complex interactions between multiple metabolites. For example, it has recently been shown that the TMA/TMAO pathway likely interacts with the mechanisms surrounding BA metabolism and FXR signaling (103,117). With an enhanced understanding of the gut microbial endocrine organ, therapeutic discovery targeting these interactions may proceed, leading to novel treatment options for T2DM and other diseases.

There is now sufficiently strong evidence that gut microbe-associated pathways play a central role in diet-driven progression of T2DM. Although often overlooked in the field of endocrinology, our gut microbiome functions as a chemically diverse endocrine organ, produces a large number of metabolism-dependent (Fig. 2) and metabolism-independent (Fig. 3) endocrine signals that play regulatory roles in T2DM progression. In simple terms, gut microbiota can serve as a “metabolic filter,” significantly influencing how dietary inputs are assimilated into hormone-like compounds that impact disease pathogenesis. Gut microbiota-derived metabolites discussed here (SCFAs, bile acids, aromatics, polyamines, and N-acyl amides) are clearly altered in T2DM subjects, but whether these metabolites are simply biomarkers of disease or, alternatively, causally linked to disease progression is still an intense matter of debate. To this point the microbiome field has been dominated by correlative metagenomic approaches, simply cataloging microbial communities and predicting metabolic function in disease cohorts is insufficient as we move forward. Instead, functional studies coupling microbial metabolite quantification (metabolomics, proteomics, etc.), dietary manipulation, and host receptor discovery in relevant preclinical animal model systems are essential. Although drug discovery has historically targeted host enzymes and receptors, a fertile period in pharmacology lies ahead where instead we target microbial enzymes (104) or the receptors (GPCRs or nuclear hormone receptors) in the human host that sense gut microbe-derived signals. A central challenge remaining will be to establish mechanistic causal links between bacterial metabolite production and T2DM pathogenesis and to rationally design therapeutic strategies to impact meta-organismal endocrinology.

Disclosure Summary: The authors have nothing to disclose.

Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no data sets were generated or analyzed during the current study.

