Metaproteomics reveals persistent and phylum-redundant metabolic functional stability in adult human gut microbiomes of Crohn’s remission patients despite temporal variations in microbial taxa, genomes, and proteomes





The gut microbiome plays a fundamental role in the human host’s overall health by contributing key biological functions such as expanded metabolism and pathogen defense/immune control. In a healthy individual, the gut microbiome co-exists within the human host in a symbiotic, non-inflammatory relationship that enables mutual benefits, such as microbial degradation of indigestible food products into small molecules that the host can utilize, and enhanced pathogen defense. In abnormal conditions, such as Crohn’s disease, this favorable metabolic relationship breaks down and a variety of undesirable activities result, including chronic inflammation and other health-related issues. It has been difficult, however, to elucidate the overall functional characteristics of this relationship because the microbiota can vary substantially in composition for healthy humans and possibly even more in individuals with gut disease conditions such as Crohn’s disease. Overall, this suggests that microbial membership composition may not be the best way to characterize a phenotype. Alternatively, it seems to be more informative to examine and characterize the functional composition of a gut microbiome. Towards that end, this study examines 25 metaproteomes measured in several Crohn’s disease patients’ post-resection surgery across the course of 1 year, in order to examine persistence of microbial taxa, genes, proteins, and metabolic functional distributions across time in individuals whose microbiome might be more variable due to the gut disease condition.

The measured metaproteomes were highly personalized, with all the temporally-related metaproteomes clustering most closely by individual. In general, the metaproteomes were remarkably distinct between individuals and to a lesser extent within individuals. This prompted a need to characterize the metaproteome at a higher functional level, which was achieved by annotating identified protein groups with KEGG orthologous groups to infer metabolic modules. At this level, similar and redundant metabolic functions across multiple phyla were observed across time and between individuals. Tracking through these various metabolic modules revealed a clear path from carbohydrate, lipid, and amino acid degradation to central metabolism and finally the production of fermentation products.

The human gut metaproteome can vary quite substantially across time and individuals. However, despite substantial intra-individual variation in the metaproteomes, there is a clear persistence of conserved metabolic functions across time and individuals. Additionally, the persistence of these core functions is redundant across multiple phyla but is not always observable in the same sample. Finally, the gut microbiome’s metabolism is not driven by a set of discrete linear pathways but a web of interconnected reactions facilitated by a network of enzymes that connect multiple molecules across multiple pathways.

The online version of this article (10.1186/s40168-019-0631-8) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

The human body hosts a dynamic ecosystem of microbial organisms that form an integral part of the overall health maintenance of the host [1]. These microbiota comprise several similar but distinct niches spread out across every surface and cavity of the body, including the skin, nose, mouth, genital track, and gut, where they perform similar but distinct functions [2]. Microbiota, both in terms of population composition and abundances, associated with a healthy human host have been credited with assisting the host with critical functional roles, including expanded metabolism, pathogen defense, immune development, and immune modulation [3–5]. In contrast, microbiota associated with a diseased human host have been associated with unhealthy phenotypes such as obesity, allergies, chronic pain, and inflammation [6–8].

A few studies have investigated the gut metaproteomes of preterm infants and healthy adults across time, and these studies have revealed variability in both the protein identities as well as overall metabolic activities [23–25]. Recently, the temporal dynamics of the gut microbiome composition in an inflammatory bowel disease cohort that included subjects with Crohn’s disease (CD) having inflammation either in the ileum (ICD) or the colon (CCD), as well as subjects with ulcerative colitis and heathy individuals, were determined by 16S rRNA gene sequencing [26]. All of the subjects with IBD exhibited more volatility in microbiome composition over time, as compared to the healthy individuals, but the degree of dysbiosis from healthy was significantly higher for the ICD patients that had undergone surgery. An open question is how this volatility influences functions carried out by the gut microbiome? To examine this issue, the current study utilizes an integrated metagenomic/metaproteomic approach to investigate the longitudinal stability and variability in the gut metaproteomes of Crohn’s disease patients post resection-surgery. In contrast to previous studies, the focus of this work seeks to go beyond taxa, gene, and protein profiling to investigate microbial metabolic activity at a higher functional level to observe how persistent and redundant function is maintained across varying microbial gut populations. Fecal samples were collected from several adult individuals in remission (post resection surgery) over the course of 1 year (25 samples in total and 5 samples per individual). Metagenomic and metaproteomic data revealed persistent and phylum-redundant metabolic functions despite a significant level of variability in taxa, genes, and proteins.

This study focused on five human subjects (labeled as P58, P68, P33, P92, and P104), each with a history of Crohn’s disease and resection surgery, which were selected (as detailed below) from a larger Swedish cohort that has been described previously [26]. Five subjects were selected who had multiple fecal samples collected over 1 year. Representatives of both sexes were included in the study (3 females and 2 males), and the subjects were all adults (youngest, born 1967; oldest born 1944). All subjects had undergone resection surgery prior to 2008 and were in remission during this sample collection. (Additional file 1: Table S1).

Stool (fecal) samples were self-collected and shipped within 1 day to Dr. Jonas Halfvarsson at the Orebro University Hospital in Orebro, Sweden, where they were immediately frozen at − 70 °C upon arrival. The samples were stored frozen until use, and then small portions were excised and thawed immediately prior to DNA extraction to avoid freeze-thaw damage. DNA was extracted from 250 mg of each fecal sample in duplicate. For processing, samples were thawed at 4 °C and, in aliquots of 0.15 g per tube, resuspended in 1 ml of 1 × phosphate-buffered saline. Cell lysis was initiated with two enzymatic incubations, first, using 5 μl of lysozyme (10 mg ml−1; Amresco, Solon, OH), 13 μl of mutanolysin (11.7 U μl−1; Sigma-Aldrich), and 3 μl of lysostaphin (4.5 U μl−1; Sigma-Aldrich) for an incubation of 30 min at 37 °C and, second, using 10 μl proteinase K (20 mg ml−1; Research Products International, Mt. Prospect, IL), 50 μl 10% SDS, and 2 μl RNase (10 mg ml−1) for an incubation of 45 min at 56 °C. After the enzyme treatments, cells were disrupted by bead beating in tubes with lysing matrix B (0.1-mm silica spheres; MP Biomedicals, Solon, OH), at 6 m s−1 for 40 s at room temperature in a FastPrep-24 (MP Biomedicals). The resulting crude lysate was processed using the ZR fecal DNA miniprep kit (Zymo, Irvine, CA) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. The samples were eluted with 100 μl of ultrapure water into separate tubes. DNA concentrations in the samples were measured using the Quant-iT PicoGreen double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) assay kit (Molecular Probes, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) [27].

DNA isolation from stool samples yielded 3–5 μg of purified metagenomic DNA from each of the 15 samples. All metagenomic samples were sequenced using the Illumina platform. Illumina libraries were prepared with the DNA Prep Kit (Illumina, San Diego, CA) following a variation of the manufacturer’s protocol. Following library construction, each sample was subjected to cluster amplification (cBOT) and paired-end sequencing using an Illumina HiSeq2000 according to manufacturer specifications. Raw sequence data were processed using a combination of Illumina RTA/CASAVA software for base-calling and quality scoring and in-house QC pipelines to filter and truncate low-quality reads. Sequences were assembled using NEWBLER by subject after read reduction using khmer [28, 29]. Genes were predicted using MetaGeneMark [30]. Default parameters were used for all assembly related software. Amino acid sequences of all the predicted genes were then compiled into five individual-specific protein databases (each one consisting of a single concatenated, de-replicated metagenome of all three time-points per individual). The metagenome sequence data can be retrieved using the following URL for the NCBI SRA data deposit, under project ID 46321: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/entrez?db=bioproject&cmd=Retrieve&dopt=Overview&list_uids=46321

Each fecal sample for metaproteome measurements (~ 130 mg for each sample) was solubilized in 1 mL SDS lysis buffer (4% w/v SDS, 100 mM Tris·HCl (pH 8.0), 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT)), sonically disrupted (40% amplitude, 10-s pulse with 10-s rest, 2-min total pulse time), incubated at 95 °C for 5 min, and centrifuged at 21,000 × g. An aliquot of each crude protein extract was quantified using a bicinchoninic acid (BCA)-based protein assay kit (Pierce), and yielded about 4 mg/mL protein for each sample. The crude protein extract was precipitated by trichloroacetic acid (TCA), pelleted by centrifugation, and washed with ice-cold acetone to remove lipids and excess SDS, as described previously [18]. The protein precipitates were resolubilized via sonication in 500 μl of 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris·HCl (pH 8.0) and reduced by incubation with DTT at a final concentration of 10 mM for 1 h at room temperature. Samples were normalized for total protein at this step by using 1 mg of crude protein for each sample, which was then diluted further with 100 mM Tris·HCl and 10 mM CaCl2 (pH 8.0) to a final urea concentration below 4 M. Proteolytic digestions were initiated with sequencing grade trypsin (1/100, w/w; Promega) and incubated overnight at room temperature. A second aliquot of trypsin was added (1/100) after the reactions were diluted with 100 mM Tris·HCl (pH 8.0) to a final urea concentration below 2 M. Following digestion, the peptides were acidified (protonated) in 200 mM NaCl and 0.1% formic acid, filtered with a 10 kDa molecular weight cutoff spin column (Sartorius) to remove under digested proteins. Final peptide solutions were then quantified using bicinchoninic acid (BCA)-based protein assay kit (Pierce) to enable uniform sample injection onto the LC column.

Peptide mixtures were analyzed in technical replicate measurements via two-dimensional liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC/LC-MS/MS) on an LTQ-Orbitrap-Elite mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides (100 µg per sample) were loaded and separated on-line using a bi-phasic 2D (strong-cation exchange (SCX) and C18 reverse phase (RP))-LC column. Each peptide sample was first washed off-line to remove residual urea and NaCl and was then placed in-line and analyzed via 22-h 2D-LC-MS/MS. All samples were analyzed by 11 salt pulses (5%, 7.5%, 10%, 12.5%, 15%, 17.5%, 20%, 25%, 35%, 50%, and 100% of 500 mM ammonium acetate) each followed by a 110 min gradient to 50% solvent B (70% acetonitrile, 30% HPLC grade water, 0.1% formic acid) with the following profile: 0 to 10% solvent B in 10 min, 10 to 35% solvent B in 75 min, and 35 to 50% solvent B in 25 min. Mass spectral data were acquired using Xcalibur in data-dependent acquisition mode for each chromatographic separation. One precursor MS scan was acquired in the Orbitrap at 30 K resolution followed by ten data-dependent MS/MS scans (m/z 400–1700) at 35% normalized collision energy with dynamic exclusion enabled at 1.

Custom-built FASTA target-decoy databases were generated for each individual by combining that individual’s specific protein database mentioned above with the human genome and common contaminants. The MS raw data for each sample was searched against the individual-specific protein database using MyriMatch/IDPicker with a PSM false discovery rate (FDR) filter of less than 2% [31, 32]. MyriMatch automatically concatenates a reversed database to the forward version prior to searching to enable proper FDR calculation. Protein sequences were clustered into protein groups at ≥ 90% sequence identity using USEARCH (v5.0) [33]. A protein group was classified as identified if it had at least one unique peptide and two distinct peptides, as resolved with in-house scripts. Mass spectra were assigned to protein groups using spectral balancing, as previously described [15, 25, 34].

The protein databases were functionally annotated with Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) orthologous groups and phylum and genus level taxonomical assignments using Ghost KOALA [35]. Phylum level taxonomy and KEGG orthologous groups were assigned to each protein group using the Ghost KOALA annotations of the seed sequence for each protein group. The KEGG assignments to each identified protein group were further used to infer and quantify human gut microbiome-specific metabolic modules using GOmixer [36, 37]. A metabolic module was inferred if ≥ 33.3% of the enzymatic steps in the module were covered within a single phylum. The phylum abundance of each module was calculated in GOMixer by using the mean spectral count of each phylum’s protein groups that mapped to the module. To examine statistical variance between samples, Spearman correlation coefficients between samples were calculated and hierarchically clustered into a heatmap using Euclidian distance. Technical reproducibility was evaluated using Spearman correlation coefficients between measurements of the same sample. All statistics were calculated using Python scripts. All figures were rendered using Python scripts (https://www.python.org/) or Excel. All figures were refined for quality and sizing in Inkscape (www.inkscape.org). All python scripting was done using the following libraries: Pandas, NumPy, Seaborn (https://seaborn.pydata.org/), Matplotlib, and SciPy [38–41]. Functional influence of each phylum was calculated by taking the total number of KEGG orthologous groups identified with protein evidence in each phylum by sample and dividing that by the total number of KEGG orthologous groups found in the sample’s protein database.

16S rRNA sequences were previously generated and published for 135 fecal samples from a Swedish cohort of IBD patients and healthy subjects [26]. From this same sample collection, five individuals with ileal Crohn’s disease (ICD) were selected for deeper analysis of microbial function by metagenomics and metaproteomics because these ICD individuals showed the greatest microbiome volatility and were the most disparate compared to healthy individuals [26].

Shotgun metagenomic sequence data were generated from three fecal samples per each individual, corresponding to an initial time point and at two subsequent 6-month intervals. Metaproteome measurements were conducted on the same samples, plus an additional two intervening time-points for each individual, ensuring that the protein data was adequately represented by metagenomes on either side of the sampling dates.

A total of 14,850 non-redundant protein groups were identified in this study from the 25 samples. Of these protein groups, 494 were human, and 14,356 were microbial. A total of 732–2900 microbial and 119–222 human protein groups were found in each sample (Additional file 1: Figure S1A). Although relatively few human protein groups were identified in total number, they were quite abundant in most samples and comprised a substantial proportion of the assigned spectra. (Additional file 1: Figure S1B). The measurement correlation for all technical replicates had an R2 greater than 0.9 and a slope within 0.1 of 1, indicating high technical reproducibility (Additional file 1: Figure S2).

Overall these results suggest that there is an underlying continuity in metaproteomes from the same individual. However, due to the protein variability found within the individuals even with the most similar metaproteomes (P58 and P68), any real observations of functional similarity between samples are likely more meaningful by observing common identifiers of function, such as KEGG orthologous groups, instead of the individual taxa, genes, or proteins.

KEGG can be used to infer the functional and taxonomic association of protein groups based on the biochemical function of the orthologous groups (KEGG orthology group (KO) terms) [42] and was employed here to classify and interrogate the metaproteome information. For 99% of all protein groups, KO terms and phylum assignments were unambiguous. For this reason, the annotation of the seed sequence for each protein group was used for the annotation of the entire protein group. The KEGG annotations for each protein sequence and related protein group are detailed in Additional file 2: Spread Sheet 1. The protein groups, their final KEGG annotations, and their abundance per measurement are listed in Additional file 3: Spread Sheet 2.

Variability between samples decreased when the qualitative analysis was constrained to the KO term level. Between individuals, 25% of the KO terms identified across all samples were seen at least once in every individual. There was also lower intra-individual variability. A greater percentage of the total number of detected KO terms in each individual was also found across time when compared to the protein groups (Fig.
1). These followed essentially the same trend as the protein group level observations, with P104, P33, and P92 being more variable than P58 and P68 (Fig.
1). This suggests two conclusions: the trends in terms of the most variable individuals across time hold true through to the KO term level, and there is overall less qualitative variation between samples when focusing on functional groups instead of protein groups (Fig.
1).

To expand the search for functional similarity between samples, the metabolic dynamics of this metaproteomic dataset were explored using a map of human microbiome derived metabolic modules created by the Raes lab [36], which represent a set of reactions responsible for the conversion of one compound to another, and are inferred via enzyme evidence from the metaproteomic datasets. This metabolic map is available in an online tool called “GOmixer” at http://www.raeslab.org/gomixer/ and is illustrated for this study in Fig.
3. One hundred sixteen out of a total of 133 metabolic modules in “GOmixer” were inferred for specific phyla using the Ghost KOALA annotations for each protein group. A variety of phyla contributed proteomic evidence for these modules; however, in agreement with the trends in Additional file 1: Figure S4, most of the inferred modules were populated with protein groups that originated in Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, Proteobacteria, or Actinobacteria. Two or more phyla provided evidence for most of the modules observed in Fig.
3, where the green lines indicate modules that have protein evidence in two or more phyla, and the red lines indicate modules that have protein evidence in all four of the main phyla described above. Together, these modules indicate protein evidence for high redundancy in metabolic function between gut microbiome phyla.

The metaproteomic experimental evidence for these specific metabolic modules reveals a detailed functional view of the gut microbiome ecosystem, in which microbes acquire energy by degrading complex molecules from both the host and the host’s diet, and then this degradation process ultimately leads to metabolites, such as butyrate, acetate, and propionate, that the host can use for energy. It appears that the majority of this metabolic function is not specific to an individual bacterial strain, species, genus, or phylum but is instead shared between phyla. Furthermore, the phylum driving an individual module, as evidence by proteomic data, can change dynamically across time and individuals (Figs.
4b, and
5b, Additional file 1: Figure S5-S9). This manuscript provides a detailed analysis of a few of these key modules, but the full set of modules that were inferred with proteomic evidence across time and individuals is detailed in Additional file 4: Spreadsheet 3.

Detailed analysis of Fig.
3, and the information in Additional file 4: Spreadsheet 3, prompted interest in two specific modules, MF003 and MF005. These modules are observed in all individuals across multiple phyla and highlight metabolites that enter central metabolism at multiple positions in the pathway. Specifically, these modules represent the degradation of acetylglucosamine and acetylneuraminate into d-Fructose 6-phosphate, pyruvate, and acetate. Acetylglucosamine and acetylneuraminate are sugar amine hybrids found in the host mucosal layer, human milk oligosaccharides, and in animal food products that are key host nutrients and presumably are used by the gut microbiome as a source of energy [44–46]. Interestingly, providing N-acetyl-glucosamine as a supplement has been suggested as a potential method for alleviating inflammatory bowel disease [47]. MF0003 and MF0005 enter central metabolism at three separate levels, and merge with each other at N-acetyl-d-glucosamine 6-phosphate, highlighting a simple demonstration of the interconnected nature of gut microbiome metabolism (Fig.
4).

These enzymes serve as a representative case for both the redundant and dynamic nature of microbiome metabolic functions. For example, most of these enzymes were observed in one of the four phyla at least once, but the modules were not always inferred in the same phyla across individuals. These modules also highlight the web like nature of gut microbiome metabolism. The degradation of acetylglucosamine and acetylneuraminate connects at N-acetyl-d-glucosamine 6-phosphate, and together these modules release products into central metabolism at three separate points: d-fructose 6-phosphate, pyruvate, and acetate. d-fructose 6-phosphate is a precursor to the pay-off phase of glycolysis. Pyruvate is the end product of the pay-off phase of glycolysis and is the starting point for a variety of fermentation pathways, as well as the TCA cycle and glyoxylate bypass. Acetate is one of the three main short-chain fatty acids produced by the gut microbiome and is a source of energy for both the host and the microbiome. It can be converted to acetyl-CoA at the cost of ATP or via transferase with the help of butanoyl-CoA or propanoyl-CoA [48]. Conversion by transferase produces butyrate and propionate which can also be converted by the host into energy. Together, these modules represent a sample case of how many different phyla contain similar metabolic modules that can utilize host derived molecules, such as acetylglucosamine and acetylneuraminate.

Just as acetylglucosamine and acetylneuraminate feed the microbiome, short-chain fatty acids, particularly acetate, propionate, and butyrate, are thought to be one of the primary methods by which the gut microbiome feeds its host. “GOmixer” highlights nine modules as acetate (MF0113), propionate (MF0121, MF0122, MF0123, MF0125, MF0126), or butyrate (MF0114, MF0116, MF0117) producing. All these modules were observed with peptide evidence in at least one sample. Some of these modules do not represent the direct production of short-chain fatty acids but instead represent the production of precursors to CoA-transferase and kinase reactions. Only MF0113, MF0116, MF0117, MF0125, and MF0126 connect the direct production of short-chain fatty acids via CoA-transferase, kinase, or a similar reaction. The average abundance of the KO terms in each module divided by the total depicts the persistence of function amidst a dynamic microbial ecosystem as evidence for particularly propionate and acetate producing modules persistence across time and individuals, while being driven by different phyla or modules (Fig.
5b, Additional file 1: Figures. S5-S7; Additional file 4: Spreadsheet 3). Evidence for enzymes involved in the direct production of butyrate was observed only in individuals P58, P68, and P92. This supports previous proteomic studies, which indicated that the abundance of butyrate producing enzymes is significantly lower in patients with Crohn’s disease [18].

K00656 has been consistently observed in previous metaproteomic studies, along with acetate producing enzymes K00625 and K00925, [24, 43] indicating that acetate production via these enzymes may be ubiquitous regardless of human host health status. Interestingly, one of these studies [24] highlights propionate CoA-transferase and butryl-CoA dehydrogenase as being core enzymes, although these are not observed across all individuals in this dataset. This correlates to previous research which has shown that short-chain fatty acid-producing proteins, especially butyrate, are less abundant in Crohn’s disease patients [18].

Measurement of the metaproteomes of Crohn’s disease patients (all post resection-surgery and in remission) over the course of a year revealed substantial variability in the protein groups observed across time and individuals. There was significant qualitative variability even within the same individuals, which supports the dynamic nature of the microbiome’s composition that was previously observed in the same individuals [26]. The gut metaproteomes of these individuals were distinctly personalized, with some individuals exhibiting less variability across time than others.

Specifically, there was evidence that there is persistent and phylum-redundant metabolic functional stability in these individuals. This approach provides a distinct observational viewpoint of following metabolic reactions and compounds/enzymes as a marker of overall microbiome activity, even if populations and specific genes/proteins vary.



This research was funded by the National Institutes of Health, Human Microbiome Project, grant UH2DK83991. A portion of the metagenome sequencing was also supported in part by a grant entitled “Metagenomic and metaproteomic analysis of the human gut microbiome in Crohn’s disease” (reference # 2458) from the Crohn’s and Collitis Foundation of America. Oak Ridge National Laboratory is managed by UT-Battelle, LLC, for the U.S. Department of Energy.

The metagenome sequence data can be retrieved using the following URL for the NCBI SRA data deposit, under project ID 46321:http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/entrez?db=bioproject&cmd=Retrieve&dopt=Overview&list_uids=46321

All raw mass spectra for the proteome measurement from this study have been deposited into the UCSD Massive repository with accession number: massIVE ID MassIVE MSV000082823. Supplemental figures and tables are provided as additional files.

This manuscript has been authored by UT-Battelle, LLC under Contract No. DE-AC05-00OR22725 with the U.S. Department of Energy. The United States Government retains and the publisher, by accepting the article for publication, acknowledges that the United States Government retains a non-exclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, world-wide license to publish or reproduce the published form of this manuscript, or allow others to do so, for United States Government purposes. The Department of Energy will provide public access to these results of federally sponsored research in accordance with the DOE Public Access Plan (http://energy.gov/downloads/doe-public-access-plan).

Fecal samples were obtained from a Swedish cohort previously described in several studies [18, 51–53]. All samples were previously collected for another study [26] and were de-identified prior to any work on this project.

Not applicable

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

