Sex, Body Mass Index, and Dietary Fiber Intake Influence the Human Gut Microbiome



Increasing evidence suggests that the composition of the human gut microbiome is important in the etiology of human diseases; however, the personal factors that influence the gut microbiome composition are poorly characterized. Animal models point to sex hormone-related differentials in microbiome composition. In this study, we investigated the relationship of sex, body mass index (BMI) and dietary fiber intake with the gut microbiome in 82 humans. We sequenced fecal 16S rRNA genes by 454 FLX technology, then clustered and classified the reads to microbial genomes using the QIIME pipeline. Relationships of sex, BMI, and fiber intake with overall gut microbiome composition and specific taxon abundances were assessed by permutational MANOVA and multivariate logistic regression, respectively. We found that sex was associated with the gut microbiome composition overall (p=0.001). The gut microbiome in women was characterized by a lower abundance of Bacteroidetes (p=0.03). BMI (>25 kg/m2 vs. <25 kg/m2) was associated with the gut microbiome composition overall (p=0.05), and this relationship was strong in women (p=0.03) but not in men (p=0.29). Fiber from beans and from fruits and vegetables were associated, respectively, with greater abundance of Actinobacteria (p=0.006 and false discovery rate adjusted q=0.05) and Clostridia (p=0.009 and false discovery rate adjusted q=0.09). Our findings suggest that sex, BMI, and dietary fiber contribute to shaping the gut microbiome in humans. Better understanding of these relationships may have significant implications for gastrointestinal health and disease prevention.

The human gastrointestinal tract carries a structured microbial composition consisting of more than ten-fold the number of human cells in the body [1]. The gut microbiota plays an indispensable role in digesting food components and in host immunological response [1, 2]. Comprehensive genomic-based microbiome assessments have identified significant inter-individual variation in the composition of the human gut microbiome [3]. Increasing evidence suggests that gut microbiome variation is important in the etiology of gastrointestinal diseases [4, 5] including cancer [6, 7], as we recently reported [8]. However, significant knowledge gaps remain in our understanding of personal factors that influence gut microbiome composition. Better understanding of these personal factors and their relationships with the gut microbiome may have important implications for disease prevention.

To better understand the determinants of the human gut microbiome, we assessed gut microbiome composition in fecal samples from 82 subjects in the control group of a case-control study of colorectal cancer [8]. We investigated the relationship of sex, adiposity, assessed by body mass index (BMI) [25], and dietary fiber, individually and jointly, to gut microbiome composition and distribution of specific taxa and found that sex, BMI, and dietary fiber were associated with differences in the human gut microbiome.

Samples and data were collected from control group participants in a case-control study of gut microbiome and colorectal cancer, as recently described [8]. Study participants were originally recruited at three Washington, D.C., area hospitals (National Naval Medical Center, Walter Reed Army Medical Center, and George Washington University Hospital) between April 1985 and June 1987, prior to elective surgery for non-oncological, non-gastrointestinal conditions, including orthopedic or neurosurgical procedures, hernia repairs, vascular procedures, and other general surgeries [26, 27].

We included 82 subjects for study among 94 participants in the original investigation with at least 100 mg of lyophilized fecal material available (described below), excluding subjects with less than 1000 microbial sequence reads and with missing or extreme caloric intake (≤500 or ≥5500kcal/day). None of the eligible subjects reported taking antibiotics during the year prior to being recruited into the study. The study was approved by the institutional review boards from New York University School of Medicine and National Cancer Institute and all participants provided signed written informed consent. All signed written consent forms are documented and stored at the National Cancer Institute.

Demographic information on age, sex, height, weight, and race (White, Black, Hispanic, Asian or Pacific Islander) were ascertained by structured demographic questionnaires completed prior to hospitalization and treatment. BMI was calculated by dividing weight in kilograms by squared height in meters. Study participants were then classified as normal weight (<25kg/m2) or overweight or obese (≥25kg/m2) based on the WHO definition [28]. Diet intake was assessed using a self-administered 100 item food frequency questionnaire. Long term intake frequency and portion size were queried. Nutrient intakes were derived from frequency and portion-size responses from the food frequency questionnaire, in which nutrient values per portion were multiplied by the daily frequency of intake and summed across all relevant food items, using the US Department of Agriculture pyramid food group serving database [29]. Diet data was standardized by total calorie intake [30]. Total fiber (5.7–11.3, 11.3–14.5, 14.5–17.6, 18.0–38.7 g/day), fruit and vegetable fiber (1.6–6.5, 6.6–8.8, 8.9–11.7, 11.8–21.9 g/day), bean fiber (0–0.9, 0.9–1.3, 1.4–2.3, 2.3–10.7 g/day), and grain fiber (1.0–2.5, 2.8–3.5, 3.6–5.1, 5.1–9.7 g/day) were grouped into quartiles. For taxa-specific analyses, total and specific sources of fiber were treated as continuous values.

Prior to hospitalization and treatment, subjects were asked to collect fecal samples at home, over a two day period, and store the material in a plastic container, in a Styrofoam chest containing dry ice. Fecal samples were shipped to a USDA laboratory, where the two-day samples were pooled, lyophilized and stored at a minimum of -40°C in sealed, air-tight containers.

We extracted DNA from the stored fecal samples using the Mobio PowerSoil DNA Isolation Kit (Carlsbad, CA) with bead-beating. As we reported previously [8], 16S rRNA amplicons covering variable regions V3 to V4 were generated using primers (347F-5′GGAGGCAGCAGTRRGGAAT′-3′ and 803R 5′-CTACCRGGGTATCTAATCC-3′) incorporating Roche 454 FLX Titanium adapters (Branford, CT) and a sample barcode sequence [31]. Amplicons were sequenced with the 454 Roche FLX Titanium pyrosequencing system following the manufacturer’s specifications. Laboratory personnel were blinded to personal factor status.

Multiplexed, barcorded sequencing data was deconvoluted. Poor-quality sequences were filtered based on sequences less than 200 or greater than 1000 base pairs, missing or mean quality score <25, or mismatched barcode and primer sequences. Chimeric sequences were removed with ChimeraSlayer [32]. Filtered sequences were binned into operational taxonomic units with 97% identity and aligned to fully-sequenced microbial genomes (IMG/GG GreenGenes), using the QIIME pipeline [33]. Blinded quality control specimens in all sequencing batches (38 aliquots from 9 unmatched parent study control subjects) had good reproducibility, with intraclass correlation coefficients of 0.90 for principal coordinate analysis, 0.84 for Shannon diversity index, and 0.43 to 0.59 for relative abundances of major phyla [8].

The relationship of overall gut microbiome composition with personal factors (sex, BMI, and dietary fiber intake) was assessed by principal coordinate analysis (PCoA), based on the unweighted (qualitative) phylogenetic UniFrac distance matrix [34]. PCoA plots were generated using the first two principal coordinates (PCs), according to categories of personal factors. Adonis [35], which uses permutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA), was used to test statistical significances of association of overall composition with personal factors. To control for confounding, we used Generalized Linear Regression where each PC was treated as the outcome and the personal factors were mutually adjusted. Richness and evenness were assessed by Shannon’s diversity index and evenness index [36], respectively, and Monte Carlo permutations were used for assessment of statistical significance [33].

False discovery rate (FDR) adjusted q-values were calculated for comparisons of taxa [37]. To minimize the number of null hypotheses that had to be corrected for, we limited these analyses to the three major phyla, Actinobacteria, Bacteroidetes, and Firmicutes (at least 50% of samples positive, with at least 1% median abundance). All analyses were carried out using SAS, version 9.3 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC) unless otherwise specified.

Among the 82 subjects included for study, 62.2% were men and 85.4% were white (Table 1). Their age ranged from 30–83 years (58.4±13.2 [mean ± standard deviation]). This study population included 46.3% former smokers and 9.8% current smokers. Mean intake of total dietary fiber was 14.1 grams per day. From the 82 immediately frozen fecal samples, gut microbiome was assessed by multiplexed 16S rRNA gene sequencing with amplification of the hyper-variable V3 to V4 region. In total, 331,288 high-quality 16S rRNA sequence reads (4,040±1,843 [mean ± standard deviation] sequences per sample) were binned to operational taxonomic units and subsequently assigned taxonomy.

1All characteristics were compared by sex using either Chi square or Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon tests. All analyses were carried out using SAS software (version 9.3).

2Race was grouped as White and Other for Chi square test.

1Adonis, which uses permutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA), was used to test statistical significances of association of overall composition with personal factors. All analyses were carried out using the QIIME pipeline.

2BMI was categorized as normal weight (<25 kg/m2) versus overweight or obese (≥25 kg/m2).

3Total and specific sources of dietary fiber were categorized as low (quartiles 1–3) versus high (quartile 4) intake.

1 All estimates were computed using generalized linear regression models where principal coordinates were treated as outcomes and all personal factors treated as predictor variables. All analyses were carried out using SAS software (version 9.3).

2 Fiber from fruits and vegetables, sex, race, and age were included jointly in multivariate regression models.

Sources of dietary fiber intake tended to be associated with the gut microbiome. Fiber from fruits and vegetables (p = 0.06) and from beans (p = 0.06) were marginally associated with overall gut microbiome composition (Fig 4A, Table 2). The relationships of total fiber, fiber from fruits and vegetables, and fiber from grains were particularly stronger in women (p = 0.005, p = 0.05, p = 0.01, respectively, Table 2). Fiber from beans was strongly related to overall gut microbiome in men (p = 0.01, Table 2). Unsupervised classification showed that intake of fiber from fruits and vegetables clustered notably with class Clostridia (Cluster 1, Fig 4B, S1 Table). Multivariate logistic regression, adjusting for confounding, further supports this relationship (Table 4, OR for high vs. low Clostridia abundance = 1.24, p = 0.009 and FDR adjusted q = 0.09). We noted a second cluster of fiber from bean intake with members of Actinobacteria phylum (Table 4, OR = 2.24, p = 0.006 and FDR adjusted q = 0.05), and Bifidobacteriales order (OR = 1.65, p = 0.04 and FDR adjusted q = 0.43). No clear associations were observed between intake from grain fiber and microbial taxa (Table 2). Results of fiber intakes with specific microbial taxa were consistent in men and in women.

1All estimated OR’s and 95% CI’s were computed using multivariate logistic regression models where low and high relative abundances were treated as outcome and fiber intake treated as continuous variables of interest. Low and high groups were based on median value. Age, sex, race, and smoking status were controlled for. All analyses were carried out using SAS software (version 9.3).

2False discovery rate adjusted q-value.

3Taxa treated as absent/present because they were <80% present across all 82 samples.

In this study, we found that women had significantly different gut microbiome composition overall and particularly lower Bacteroidetes abundance, compared with men. BMI was associated with altered microbiome community composition. Greater intake of fiber from fruits and vegetables and from beans was associated with greater Clostridia and Actinobacteria abundances, respectively.

We found that sex, BMI, and source of dietary fiber are associated with differences in the gut microbiota. There is increasing evidence of a relationship between gut microbiota and gastrointestinal diseases [4, 5], including colorectal cancer [6–8], and other diseases, such as diabetes [53, 54]. These personal factors are important in an overlapping spectrum of chronic diseases [55–58] and may partly operate through common microbial pathways influencing hormone profiles [11, 17] and gut transit [44]; our findings may have implications for disease prevention.

