Individual variations in cardiovascular-disease-related protein levels are driven by genetics and gut microbiome

Despite a growing body of evidence, the role of the gut microbiome in cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) is still unclear. Here we present a systems-genome-wide and metagenome-wide association study on plasma concentrations of 92 CVD-related proteins in the population cohort Lifelines-DEEP. We identified genetic components for 73 proteins and microbial associations for 41 proteins, of which 31 were associated to both. The genetic and microbial factors identified mostly exert additive effects and collectively explain up to 76.6% of inter-individual variation (17.5% on average). Genetics contributes most to concentrations of immune-related proteins, while the gut microbiome contributes most to proteins involved in metabolism and intestinal health. We found several host-microbe interactions that impact proteins involved in epithelial function, lipid metabolism and central nervous system function. This study reveals important evidence for a joint genetic and microbial effect in cardiovascular disease and provides directions for future applications in personalized medicine.

Advances in high-throughput deep-sequencing technology have revolutionized our understanding of the impact of the human genome and gut microbiome on human health. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) and metagenome-wide association studies have provided evidence that the development of many complex diseases can be determined by the human genome, the microbiome, and their interactions. This has now been shown for cardiovascular diseases 1, type 2 diabetes 2, inflammatory bowel disease 3,4, and different types of cancer 5. However, the impact of gut microbiome and genome-microbe interactions on molecular traits is largely unknown, which greatly limits our mechanistic understanding of microbial associations with complex diseases.

Circulating plasma proteins are often used as risk factors or biomarkers for various diseases. Understanding the impact of genetics, the gut microbiome, and their interactions on the inter-individual variation of circulating plasma proteins will provide deeper insights into host-microbe interactions in health and disease. Here we present a systems genome and metagenome association analysis on 92 circulating plasma proteins in two subsets of the Lifelines Dutch population cohort, Lifelines-DEEP1 (n=1,178) and Lifelines-DEEP2 (n=86) (Online Methods, Fig. 1), for which we have genotype, metagenome, transcriptome and detailed phenotype data 6. These proteins were selected a priori based on their direct or indirect role in the development of cardiovascular diseases (CVD) (Supplementary Table 1). However, most of the proteins have a broader impact on host health and are also found to be relevant to many other diseases (Supplementary Fig. 1). Thus we believe that the knowledge gained here can be generalized to a wide spectrum of diseases and thereby impact other physiological processes and diseases.

To estimate the effect of host genetics on protein levels, we first performed a local protein quantitative trait loci (cis-pQTL) analysis by testing SNPs located within 250kb of the genes coding for the 92 proteins. This yielded 129 significant cis-pQTLs for 66 proteins at genome-wide false discovery rate (FDR) 0.05 level (Supplementary Table 2 and Supplementary Fig. 2). We then regressed out the cis-pQTL effects and conducted a trans-pQTL mapping in a genome-wide manner and then separately on disease- and trait-associated SNPs only, which together yielded 85 independent trans-pQTLs for 36 proteins (Supplementary Table 3 and Supplementary Fig. 3). Of these, 19 cis-pQTLs and 74 trans-pQTLs were associated with complex traits and diseases, including 10 cis- and 7 trans-regulated proteins known to be relevant for CVD (Supplementary Tables 2 and 3). In addition, we separately assessed associations to 422 putative CVD-associated SNPs 7 and detected pQTL associations for 14 proteins (Supplementary Table 4 and Supplementary Note 1). These pQTLs could point to driver genes in CVD (Supplementary Note 2), e.g. as can be seen in the pleotropic trans-pQTLs effect observed at the KLKB1 gene (Supplementary Fig. 4)

We found that only 64% of cis-pQTLs had at least one corresponding significant cis-eQTL, and 76% of these had the same allelic direction in blood from the same individuals or in other tissue types from the GTEx project 12 (Supplementary Note 3, Supplementary Tables 2 and 6, Supplementary Fig. 5). In contrast, none of the 85 trans-pQTLs were detectable at expression level, but this may be due to the power issue as the effect sizes of trans-eQTLs are known to be very modest. Despite this, our data does provide evidence that a large amount of trans-regulation can happen at translation- or protein-level, e.g. through regulation of translational rate and protein secretion to blood, through post-translational modification or through protein-protein interactions, and these trans effects are not necessarily detectable at transcription level.

Next we linked the variation in plasma proteins to the gut microbiome. We assessed the association of plasma protein concentration with various microbial features, including alpha diversity assessed by Shannon index, beta diversity assessed by Bray-Curtis distance, 355 bacterial taxa (including 164 bacterial species and 191 upper level taxa) and 438 bacterial MetaCyc pathways (Fig. 1, Online Methods, Supplementary Tables 7-10). A total of 41 unique proteins were associated with at least one microbial feature at FDR 0.05 level: 2 proteins were associated to Shannon diversity index (Supplementary Table 7 and Supplementary Fig. 6), 6 proteins to beta-diversity (Supplementary Table 8 and Supplementary Fig. 6), 23 proteins to bacterial taxa (Supplementary Table 9), and 25 proteins to bacterial pathways (Supplementary Table 10). Although most of the microbial associations to proteins are novel, several proteins have previously been linked to the gut microbiome, including plasminogen activator inhibitor (PAI)-1 and urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA) 13, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) 14, members of the paraoxonases family (PON) 15,16, tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNF-R2) 17 and insulin-like growth factor (IGF) 18. For example, the gastric pathogen Helicobacter pylori stimulates expression of PAI and of uPA and its receptor (uPAR) in gastric epithelial cells 13 and can also affect epithelial signaling pathways partially through activation of EGFR 14.

In total, we identified host genetic and microbial features that underlie the inter-individual variation of 83 plasma proteins, of which 31 were found to be associated to both genetic and microbial factors (Supplementary Fig. 7). We further assessed to what extent the protein-microbiome associations are dependent on genetic effects by systematically comparing the pQTLs with previously reported microbiome QTLs (mbQTLs) 19 (Supplementary Note 4). While we did not observe any overlap between pQTLs and mbQTLs at the genome-wide significance level, several pQTLs for Ep-CAM, PON3, PAI and CHI3L1 showed suggestive associations with the corresponding microbial factors (Supplementary Table 11). After regressing out the effects of all significant pQTLs and mbQTLs for proteins and microbiome, respectively, the association strength between protein and microbiome remained highly comparable (Supplementary Fig. 8, Supplementary Note 4, Supplementary Tables 12 and 13).

We then quantified the proportion of explained variance for each protein by genetic and microbial factors separately and jointly (Online Methods). Cis-pQTL effects explained an average of 14.9% of the variation of 66 of the cis-regulated proteins (range 0.35% to 73.3%). Trans-pQTL effects explained an average of 9.5% of the variation for 36 of the trans-regulated proteins (range 0.7% to 51.8%). Compared to host genetic factors, the effect of microbial features was smaller, contributing on average 3.2% of the variation for the 41 proteins (range 0.4% to 26.5%) (Fig. 2 and Supplementary Table 14). The effects of host genetic factors and microbial features were mostly independent and showed additive effects (Supplementary Fig. 9 and Supplementary Note 5). They collectively explained an average of 17.5% of the variation, ranging from 1% of the variation in the concentration of tPA protein up to 76.6% of the variation in IL6-RA concentrations (Fig. 2). However, we also detected 21 significant genome-microbiome interactions for eight proteins (Supplementary Table 15 and Supplementary Note 5): 14 significant interactions for Ep-CAM and 1 interaction each for PON3, CNTN1, CHI3L1, TLT-2, PSP-D, CTSZ and IL-6RA.

In contrast to most genes, which were more affected by genetics than by microbiome, plasma levels of proteins active in the intestinal epithelium appeared to be more linked to the gut microbiome, and these proteins include epithelial cell adhesion molecule (Ep-CAM) and trefoil factor 3 (TFF3). The variation in Ep-CAM levels was mostly associated to microbial features (26.5%), with 7% of the variation explained by two trans-pQTL loci: the FUT2 locus at 19q13.33 and the TMIGD1 locus at 17q11.2 (Supplementary Table 14). Both the FUT2 and TMIGD1 genes are abundantly expressed in the intestine (Supplementary Fig. 10). Ep-CAM is a trans-membrane glycoprotein highly expressed in the colon and small intestine (according to GTEx data 20) and associated with both benign and malignant cell proliferation. Ep-CAM is overexpressed in cancer cells 21,22 and considered a plausible anti-cancer drug target 23–25. The FUT2 gene encodes alpha-(1,2)-fucosyltransferase, which is involved in the creation of the H antigen precursor. The top trans-pQTL, SNP rs601338 in FUT2 (r LLD1=-0.13; P=3.9x10-6), is a functional SNP. The rs601338-A allele creates a stop codon that results in a non-functional enzyme. Individuals homozygous for rs601338-A are not able to express the H-type1 oligosaccharide ligand to their mucus and are called ‘non-secretors’ for ABH antigens. FUT2 non-secretors have reduced susceptibility to multiple pathogens, including Norwalk virus 26 and Helicobacter pylori 27, but are at increased risk for Crohn’s disease 28. FUT2 locus genotypes are also strongly associated with cancer markers 29 and to plasma level of B12, which is clinically associated with CVD 30.

Other producers of butyrate include commensal bacteria Clostridia, which helps to maintain gut homeostasis 36. We also found the plasma level of Ep-CAM was associated with many species of the Clostridiales order, e.g. Clostridium bartlettii (r=-0.30, P=3.8x10-25, FDR=4.7x10-21) (Supplementary Table 9). Interestingly, we also detected suggestive interactions between Clostridia spp. and the FUT2 SNPs (Supplementary Table 15). Furthermore, of the 97 pathways significantly associated with Ep-CAM (Supplementary Table 10), higher plasma level of Ep-CAM was associated to a lower biosynthesis of preQ0 (r=-0.29, P=4.3x10-22, FDR=1.7x10-17), a newly discovered metabolite with anti-cancer activity 37. However, FUT2 secretor/non-secretor status did not appear to have any effect on the association between Ep-CAM and bacterial biosynthesis of anti-cancer compounds. Based on the methodology behind the Mendelian randomization approach, the lack of genetic association of FUT2 with pre-Q0 biosynthesis does not support a causal impact of Ep-CAM on pre-Q0 biosynthesis. This may indicate that pre-Q0 biosynthesis can affect Ep-CAM, in line with the anti-cancer properties of pre-Q0.

Proteins that function in the same pathways can have direct protein-protein interactions and/or form a co-abundant relationship. To visualize these relations, we combined Bayesian network analysis on protein co-abundance with experimentally validated protein-protein interactions to produce a joined network (Fig. 4). A group of proteins involved in lipid/glucose metabolism that were mainly associated to the gut microbiome also formed a sub-cluster in the Bayesian network analysis. These proteins—PAI, PON3, uPA, IGFBP-1 and IGFBP-2, TFF3, LDL-receptor and RARRES2 (Fig. 4)—were also highly correlated to various risk factors for CVD measured in the Lifelines-DEEP cohort (Supplementary Table 16). Body Mass Index (BMI), for instance, was highly correlated to chemerin (RARRES2) (r=0.37; P=1.8x10-34), which regulates adipogenesis and adipocyte metabolism 38, and insulin like growth factor binding protein 1 (IGFBP-1), which plays an important role in glucose and insulin metabolism 39 (r=-0.44; P=6.9x10-49). Triglyceride concentration was mostly associated to IGFBP-2 (r=-0.35; P=2.0x10-31), while HDL cholesterol level was mostly positively associated to PON3 (r=0.40; P=4.2x10-39). Insulin was mostly associated to insulin binding proteins IGFBP-1 (r=-0.40; P=4.35x10-41) and IGFBP-2 (r=-0.39; P=1.69x10-38).

Serum level of plasminogen activator inhibitor (PAI) was another protein showing a strong association with the gut microbiome: 6.9% of the variation in PAI could be explained by the gut microbiome and only 0.74% by genetics. PAI is a key regulator in fibrinolysis, the process of breaking down fibrin and maintaining vessel patency. PAI also plays a role in inflammation, and its level can be induced by oxidized LDL 49,50. Consistent with PON3 preventing LDL oxidation 40, our data showed negative association between PON3 and PAI (r=-0.33, P < 2.2x10-16), with both being associated to metabolic traits like BMI (Supplementary Table 16). We detected significant associations of PAI with 6 taxa and 38 pathways, 4 and 14 of which are shared with PON3, respectively (Supplementary Fig. 11B). Notably, the bacterial species and pathways shared between PON3 and PAI were likely to affect proteins through their impact on metabolism. After regressing out BMI, most shared associations vanished (Supplementary Fig. 11B). This provides a functional link between the gut microbiome, lipid metabolism and obesity-related inflammation. However, almost all bacterial species (8 out of 9) and pathways (38 out of 46) specifically associated to PON3 remained significant after regressing out BMI, suggesting PON3 has a more direct impact on<?> the gut microbiome (Supplementary Fig. 11B). Previous studies have shown that paraoxonases (PON1, 2 and 3) can display antioxidative and anti-inflammatory effects in the intestine 51. In patients with inflammatory gastrointestinal disorders, PON3 gene expression in the intestine and colon was significantly reduced 52. Moreover, expression of human PON1 in Drosophila resulted in a decrease in the superoxide anion level, which plays an important role in gut immunity, and eventually in altered bacterial colonization 15. Thus, the association between PON3 and the gut microbiome has revealed a novel functional link between lipid oxidation, intestinal health and gut microbiome.

The central nervous system (CNS) is emerging as an important factor in control of BMI and susceptibility to obesity and related morbidity53. In addition to proteins functioning in the intestine and in metabolism, we found some proteins associated with the gut microbiome that are active in neural systems. Among these, the most notable were contactin 1 (CNTN1) and NOTCH3, both proteins involved in the NOTCH signaling pathways that play important roles in the development of the neural system, and EGFR, an epidermal growth factor (Fig. 4). CNTN1, in particular, was associated to both genetics and the microbiome. Our data showed 6.6% of the variation in CNTN1 could be explained by two independent cis-pQTL SNPs, rs12811939 (r=0.21; P=1.14x10-13) and rs17541621 (r=0.18; P=7.47x10-10) (Supplementary Table 2), and 6.1% of the variation was explained by a trans-pQTL SNP, rs61261356, located at the intronic region of the TMEM8A gene (r=0.26; P=4.25x10-22) (Fig. 5A). Moreover, 3% of the variation of CNTN1 was explained by the gut microbiome (Fig. 2), with a positive association with the bacterial pathway of chorismate biosynthesis (r=0.13, P=2.5x10-5, FDR=8.6x10-3, Fig. 5B). Chorismate is a precursor for tryptophan, which can be further converted to serotonin. 90% of tryptophan is synthesized in the gastrointestinal tract and is considered as a key signaling metabolite between the gut and the CNS 54. Interestingly, we also found a nominally significant interaction between chorismate biosynthesis and the trans-pQTL SNP at the TMEM8A locus (P=0.04). The association between chorismate biosynthesis and CNTN1 is weaker and non-significant in individuals homozygous for the rs61261356 C/C (r=0.029) and T/T (r=0.068) genotypes as compared to T/C individuals (r=0.20, P=1.6x10-5) (Fig. 5C).

To pinpoint the putative candidate gene at rs61261356, we checked blood eQTL data from the same samples and detected a cis-eQTL effect of this SNP on TMEM8A (P=2.75x10-28) (Supplementary Table 3). The role of TMEM8A is largely unknown. However, it is predicted to act as an adhesion protein that keeps T cells in resting state 55. To search for other genes affected by this SNP, we looked for it in a larger RNA-seq-based eQTL mapping 56. In addition to the eQTL for TMEM8A, we found that this SNP affects alternative exon usage (exon-ratio levels) of AXIN1. The gene AXIN1 encodes a scaffold protein in the β-catenin destruction complex which, if disrupted, contributes to pathogenesis of various human diseases including colorectal carcinogenesis and IBD 57. AXIN1 shows a relatively abundant expression in brain and colon and plays a role in intestinal inflammation. A previous study demonstrated that Salmonella infection promotes the degradation and plasma sequestration of AXIN1, leading to bacterial invasiveness and inflammatory responses 58. Moreover, evidence also supports vitamin D and the vitamin D receptor (VDR) as important regulators of IBD and colon cancer and they also play a role in maintenance of physiological level of AXIN1 57. This highlights the potential link between AXIN1 and the gut microbiome.

Cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) are complex multifactorial diseases, and the processes underlying them include metabolism and inflammation, which relate to many other organs, including the liver, intestine and CNS. CVD can therefore be considered as a “systemic disease” rather than a single organ disease. In this study, we performed a systematic genome and metagenome analysis on plasma levels of 92 CVD-related proteins in 1,264 individuals. To our knowledge, this is the first effort to date to evaluate the roles of host genetics and microbiome composition, and their interaction, in regulating plasma protein concentrations in relation to CVD. We not only quantify what percentage of variation in plasma proteins can be collectively explained by genetics and the gut microbiome, but also provide insights into the mechanisms that underlie host-microbe interactions that relate to CVD. Our data show that genetic factors contribute most strongly to immune-related proteins, while the gut microbiome has a stronger relation to proteins involved in metabolism and obesity-related inflammation. We further demonstrate the interactions between the gut microbiome and host genetics, and these suggest novel microbial links to CVD via intestinal health, lipid oxidation and the CNS.

Altogether, our results demonstrate complex genetic–microbiome interplay in the regulation of circulating proteins which modulate various biological processes and that these effects can be seen in many different organs and tissues. This study provides conceptual advances that lay important groundwork for future applications in personalized medicine, which will have to take into account both the genome and metagenome.

The Lifelines cohort is a large prospective cohort study from the north of the Netherlands. This study includes two sub-cohorts of Lifelines: Lifelines-DEEP (LLD, n=1,500) and Lifelines-DEEP 2 (LLD2, n=119). The cohort contains 58% females and 42% males, the mean age is 45.04 (standard deviation (s.d.)=13.60), the mean body mass index (BMI) is 25.26 (s.d.=4.18) and 12% of participants are obese (BMI > 30). Common diseases within the cohort include high blood pressure (19%), anemia (15%), migraine (20%), irritable bowel syndrome (10%) and asthma (10%). The mean Framingham risk score for CVD is 8.6 for men and 5.7 for women, and 20% of individuals are current smokers. A detailed cohort description can be found in Tigchelaar et al. 6 and Zhernakova et al. 66

For both these sub-cohorts multiple levels of omics data are available, including genotypes, gene expression, microbiome, and proteomics data 6,67.

Blood samples of study participants were collected and frozen at -80°C prior to proteomics measurement. Protein levels from EDTA plasma samples were measured in 1,447 participants in the LLD (n=1,332) and LLD2 (n=115) cohorts and determined using Olink Proseek Multiplex CVD III panel (OLINK, Uppsala, Sweden), a multiplex immunoassay for high-throughput detection of protein biomarkers in liquid samples 68. This panel includes 92 proteins that are either established biomarkers or exploratory proteins with a high potential as new cardiovascular disease biomarkers. More detailed information can be found at the Olink website (see URLs section).

We normalized the protein data by applying a z-score transformation. To further identify confounding factors, we first calculated correlations of protein levels with phenotypes and detected significant correlations for age, sex, smoking status, oral contraceptive usage and blood cell counts (basophils, eosinophils, erythrocytes, granulocytes, lymphocytes, monocytes and thrombocytes). For subsequent analyses for each protein level, we considered adjusted protein levels: residuals obtained from a linear regression model that included all the confounding factors as covariates. We further investigated for the presence of hidden confounders by principal component analysis (PCA) on adjusted protein levels. We found that the first 10 PCs were associated with genetic variants and therefore did not adjust for any PCs in subsequent analyses. Finally, we estimated the effect of sample plate batches on protein levels, and detected no plate batch effect.

Fecal samples were collected within two weeks of blood sample collection, and microbial DNA isolation in LLD was performed as described earlier 66. The metagenomics analysis in LLD2 samples followed the same procedure, except that fecal samples were not frozen but stored in RNAlater. We generated high quality metagenomics sequencing data for 1,135 LLD samples and 119 LLD2 samples, with at least 15 million reads per sample.

Both taxa and pathway datasets were log-transformed for subsequent analysis.

Whole blood RNA-seq data was generated as described previously 56. In brief, paired end reads were aligned to the human genome using STAR aligner 70, allowing for no more than 7 mismatches. Gene expression estimation was performed using HTSeq-count 71 on uniquely mapping reads. Gene level expression data was normalized by TMM method 72, followed by log2 transformation, probe centering and sample z-transformation. We regressed out the effects of age, sex and blood cell counts (basophils, eosinophils, erythrocytes, granulocytes, lymphocytes, monocytes and thrombocytes) from expression data using a linear regression model. Both proteomic and expression data was available for 1,293 samples.

Microarray genotype data for the LLD cohort was generated using CytoSNP and ImmunoChip assays as previously described 6. Quality control checks on the LLD cohort were performed using the Human reference consortium (HRC v1.0) preparation checking tool (v4.2.3) (see URLs section). We then uploaded the resulting VCF files to the Michigan Imputation Server 73. Phasing and imputation were performed using the option SHAPEIT for phasing, population EUR and mode Quality Control and Imputation, for all steps we used version R1 as reference 74.

We further excluded SNPs that had imputation quality r2 < 0.5, failed the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium test (P < 1x10-6), or had a call rate < 95% or a minor allele frequency < 5%. In this way, we obtained genotype data for > 7 million SNPs (Genome Build hg19) for 1,349 unrelated individuals: 1,262 from LLD and 87 from LLD2.

Using a previously described pipeline 76, we performed QTL mapping by calculating Spearman rank correlation in LLD (1178 samples with both genotype and protein data) and LLD2 (86 samples with both genotype and protein data) datasets and combining the results using the weighted z-score method. To correct for multiple testing, we permuted genotype labels 250 times to create a null distribution that was then used to control false discovery rate (FDR) at 0.05.

We also compared genetic effects on protein and mRNA expression levels. To do this we specifically tested all significant independent SNP–gene combinations, reported all eQTLs with FDR < 0.05, and compared the effect size and direction. We also used the large scale whole blood eQTL published by Westra et al. 79 and eQTLs data of various tissue types from GTEx v7 release 12.

To replicate previously reported pQTLs, we considered all pQTL studies with reasonable sample sizes (n > 1,000) published in the two years prior to November 2017 (Sun et al. 2017 8, Suhre et al. 2016 9, Sun et al. 2016 10 and Folkersen et al. 2017 11). We first extracted pQTLs for the 92 proteins under study and tested all reported pQTLs in our dataset. If a pQTL was significant at FDR 0.05 level and had the same allelic direction, we reported it as replicated. For each pQTL, we calculated the power for replication at significance level 0.009 (the least significantly replicated pQTL), estimating non-centrality parameters of Chi-squared distributions reconstructed from P-values and sample sizes reported in the aforementioned studies.

We then assessed the genetic effects of SNPs associated with coronary artery disease (CAD) reported by Nelson et al.7. The paper reported 422 unique CAD-associated SNPs, including 73 SNPs for 72 established loci and 366 SNPs for 304 suggestive loci. In addition to single SNP association, we also tested the correlation between the combined CAD risk score with protein levels using Spearman rank correlation analysis. To calculate the genetic risk score we multiplied risk allele counts (for imputed genotypes we converted dosages to genotypes) by log odds ratios provided in the paper and summed that for all reported SNPs. The FDR was controlled using the Benjamini-Hochberg approach.

Association with alpha-diversity

For the protein models with significant interactions identified by ANOVA (P < 0.05), we reassessed the all interaction terms, translating imputed SNP dosages to genotypes to identify non-additive effects of genetic-microbiome interactions.

Proteins from the same pathways often exert protein-protein interactions and/or form co-abundance networks. To visualize protein-protein relationships, we plotted the protein network combining the experimentally validated protein-protein interactions (PPIs) from STRING 85 and the protein co-abundance network that was constructed using the function bnfit() from the R package for Bayesian Network Structure Learning, Parameter Learning and Inference (bnlearn) 86. The network was visualized using the program Cytoscape 87. Node size reflected the amount of variance explained by genetics and microbiome together and the pie chart showed the percentage variance explained for cis-pQTLs, trans-pQTLs and microbiome.

To explore the relation between FUT2 secretor status, Ep-CAM level and Blautia genus abundance, we used partial Spearman correlations (R package ppcor 88). Specifically, we re-estimated the associations between each pair of traits while controlling for the third. Ep-CAM level was considered as a mediator of the effect of FUT2 secretor status on the level of Blautia. We estimated the proportion of FUT2 secretor effect on Blautia that mediated Ep-CAM level using package mediation for R 89. The significance of mediated and direct effects of FUT2 secretor status on Blautia was estimated using heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors for quasi-Bayesian simulations and 10,000 permutations.

A group of metabolism-related proteins, including PAI and PON3, were associated to the gut microbiome. We hypothesized that BMI might be a confounding variable. To further assess whether these microbial associations were related to or independent of BMI, we repeated microbial association analysis including BMI as a covariate.

The study was approved by the institutional review board of UMCG, ref.M12.113965.

Accession codes

The LifeLines-DEEP metagenomics sequencing data are available at the European Genome-phenome Archive (EGA) with access code EGAS00001001704.

Author contributions

Competing financial interests statement

Dr. De Boer has received research grants and/or fees from AstraZeneca, Abbott, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Novartis, Roche, Trevena, and ThermoFisher GmbH. Dr. de Boer is a minority shareholder of scPharmaceuticals, Inc. Dr. de Boer received personal fees from MandalMed Inc, Novartis, and Servier. All other authors declare no competing financial interests.

URLs

The LifeLines cohort study: www.lifelines.nl; Olink CVD II panel description: http://www.olink.com/products/cvd-iii-panel/; HUMAnN2 pipeline: http://huttenhower.sph.harvard.edu/humann2; UniRef50: http://www.uniprot.org/; MetaCyc metabolic pathway database: www.metacyc.org; Vegan R package: http://CRAN.R-project.org/package=vegan; the Human reference consortium (HRC v1.0) preparation checking tool: http://www.well.ox.ac.uk/~wrayner/tools/.

Reporting Summary

Further information on experimental design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.

