Metagenomics reveals impact of geography and acute diarrheal disease on the Central Indian human gut microbiome







The Central Indian gut microbiome remains grossly understudied. Herein, we sought to investigate the burden of antimicrobial resistance and diarrheal diseases, particularly Clostridioides difficile, in rural-agricultural and urban populations in Central India, where there is widespread unregulated antibiotic use. We utilized shotgun metagenomics to comprehensively characterize the bacterial and viral fractions of the gut microbiome and their encoded functions in 105 participants.

We observed distinct rural-urban differences in bacterial and viral populations, with geography exhibiting a greater influence than diarrheal status. Clostridioides difficile disease was more commonly observed in urban subjects, and their microbiomes were enriched in metabolic pathways relating to the metabolism of industrial compounds and genes encoding resistance to 3rd generation cephalosporins and carbapenems. By linking phages present in the microbiome to their bacterial hosts through CRISPR spacers, phage variation could be directly related to shifts in bacterial populations, with the auxiliary metabolic potential of rural-associated phages enriched for carbon and amino acid energy metabolism.

We report distinct differences in antimicrobial resistance gene profiles, enrichment of metabolic pathways and phage composition between rural and urban populations, as well as a higher burden of Clostridioides difficile disease in the urban population. Our results reveal that geography is the key driver of variation in urban and rural Indian microbiomes, with acute diarrheal disease, including C. difficile disease exerting a lesser impact. Future studies will be required to understand the potential role of dietary, cultural, and genetic factors in contributing to microbiome differences between rural and urban populations.

The human gut houses a complex microbial ecosystem referred to as the microbiome, which includes prokaryotic, eukaryotic, and viral components. While the bacterial components of the microbiome have received considerable attention, comparatively little is known about the composition and physiological significance of human gut-associated bacteriophage populations, otherwise known as the phageome.1 Moreover, despite the growing global burden of antibiotic resistance to modern health care, very few studies have directly2,3 or indirectly (through analyzing urban sewage)4 examined the antibiotic resistomes of human fecal metagenomes. Such paucity of data prevents a complete understanding of the global burden and transmission of antimicrobial resistance (AMR), which is essential to support national and global priority setting, public health actions, and treatment decisions. Although recent years have seen an explosion of gut microbiome studies in rural pre-industrialized societies such as hunter-gatherer and other geographically diverse populations,5–10 little is known about microbial variability and its implications for health and disease in other underrepresented populations in South America, Africa, and regions in Asia, particularly India, where there is a scarcity of microbiome data in diarrheal and other populations.11–14 Diarrheal diseases are a major cause of morbidity and mortality in India, making identification of etiological agents of utmost importance.15–18

Our results indicate that the rural habitants of Melghat show a Prevotella-dominant microbiome compared with the urban population of Nagpur, which is enriched with Bacteroides spp. Urbanization is associated with functional enrichment of genes involved in xenobiotic and lipid metabolism. Although a core set of AMR genes are detectable in the Korku population, Nagpurian urbanites display a much higher burden of AMR overall. Viral diversity and composition are more influenced by geography than diarrheal status, with urban- and rural-specific phage populations linked to bacterial hosts through CRISPR spacer identification. C. difficile is principally detected in the urban and peri-urban exposed antibiotic populations, many of which carry AMR genes to virtually every class of antibiotic.

For our fecal metagenome study in which we were comparing urban vs rural microbiome profiles and assessing impact of diarrhea and CDI, we analyzed fecal samples collected from 105 Central Indian participants comprising 35 rural (12 with diarrhea) and 70 urban (46 with diarrhea) participants from Melghat and Nagpur districts, respectively (Supplementary Table 1 and Supplementary metadata). We selected an enriched set of fecal DNA samples derived from diarrheal samples that had previously tested positive in diagnostic C. difficile immunoassays for whole-genome shotgun sequencing (WGS). Of these diarrheal samples, 63% (29/46; urban) and 25% (3/12; rural) had tested positive for toxigenic C. difficile in the C. DIFF QUIK CHEK assay.

Overall, significant confounding associations were observed between geographic location and several other study variables. Consequently, we focussed our analyzes primarily on geographic location, with the understanding this accounts for both subject specific and environmental factors.

Principal coordinates analysis was performed on a Bray–Curtis Dissimilarity matrix of the species-level taxonomic profiles (n = 105), excluding viral taxa. Urban (n = 70) and rural (n = 35) subjects separated well along with the 1st principal component (Figure 2A) but diarrheal status (control n = 47 vs. diarrheal n = 58) did not appear to have as much influence on sample clustering. This observation was confirmed by PERMANOVA which indicated that geographic location (urban vs rural) accounted for 7.7% of the variation between samples (F = 8.67, p = .001) while diarrheal status accounted for a further 1.7% (F = 1.94, p = .028). Including C. difficile toxin status and recent antibiotic exposure in the model accounted for an additional 2.1% (F = 2.48, p = .005) and 1.4% (F = 1.62, p = .09) of variation, respectively. Considering other demographic variables of interest, including age, gender, BMI, housing quality, and animal ownership when combined with geography, only age (2.1%, F = 2.41, p = .008) contributed significantly to the residual variation explained, reflecting the strong association of these variables with study location.

Analyzing the species-level taxonomic abundances using generalized linear models yielded 26 taxa which differed significantly between rural and urban control subjects, and 16 taxa which differed significantly between control and diarrheal subjects (Figure 2D, Supplementary Tables 2& 3). A direct comparison was also made between diarrheal subjects testing positive and negative for C. difficile toxin, yielding 18 taxa which differed significantly (Supplementary Table 4).

Antimicrobial resistance gene profiles were compiled from the fecal metagenomes of all subjects in the study using ARIBA. Individual gene counts were aggregated by antibiotic class to identify broad trends between subjects according to geographic location and antibiotic exposure (Figure 3A). Genes conferring resistance to beta-lactam antibiotics, tetracyclines and macrolides, lincosamides and streptogramins (MLS) were identified in virtually all subjects. Average resistance gene counts aggregated by class were compared between subjects from rural and urban areas, regardless of diarrheal status or antibiotic exposure, indicating that counts for 13 of the 18 classes were significantly higher in urban subjects (Mann Whitney U test, FDR corrected, Figure 3A). Grouping subjects by geography, diarrheal status, and antibiotic exposure revealed a subset of rural subjects whose fecal metagenomes had resistance to the least number of different antibiotic classes, while some of the urban subjects were carrying antibiotic resistance genes to virtually every class of antibiotic (Figure 3A). This included resistance to glycopeptides (predominantly vanA genes) and two classes from the World Health Organization essential medicines reserve group; fosfomycin and lipopeptides (daptomycin). Compared with other antibiotic classes, metronidazole resistance was rare and only detected in a single subject.

Of the gene clusters with increased counts in urban subjects, many encoded clinically relevant beta-lactamases, including extended spectrum beta-lactamases (CTX) and carbapenemases (NDM). Prevalence of key beta-lactamase genes was analyzed by comparing the number of subjects in which the gene cluster was detected in their metagenome. The CFX gene cluster, encoding an Ambler class A beta-lactamase, was the most prevalent cluster detected, identified in 94 of 105 subjects. The prevalence of several clinically relevant beta-lactam gene clusters was higher in urban subjects when compared to rural subjects, including CTX, NDM, and OXA (Supplementary Table 5). Gene clusters encoding the other clinically important carbapenemases, KPC, VIM, and IMP, were not detected in any of the subjects.

Differentially abundant metabolic pathways between urban and rural subjects and their predicted taxonomic contributions were identified with FishTaco (Figure 4). A total of 28 pathways were enriched in urban subjects, with the majority (24/28) in the following categories; xenobiotics biodegradation and metabolism (16/28), lipid metabolism (6/28) and amino acid metabolism (2/28). Several Bacteroides spp., Parabacteroides distasonis, Klebsiella pneumoniae, and E. coli were identified as potential contributors to the enrichment of these pathways in urban subjects.

Although no differences were identified in pathway enrichment between C. difficile positive and negative diarrheal subjects, 54 pathways were enriched in control non-diarrheal subjects when compared with diarrheal subjects. These included multiple pathway categories relating to amino acid metabolism (14/54), carbohydrate metabolism (10/54), cofactors and vitamins (8/54), and energy metabolism (6/54).

A total of 8,746 non-redundant viral sequences were detected in the whole community metagenomic sequencing data for 105 Indian fecal samples. These viruses group into 1,344 Viral Clusters (VCs), which are concordant with viral genera.22 Network visualization of the shared protein clusters between VCs shows the majority of Indian fecal viruses identified are connected to previously described Caudovirales (Figure 5A). Several Microviridae, Inoviridae, and archaeal viruses of the Rudiviridae and Bicaudaviridae families, were also detected. Unknown viruses were observed which did not share protein clusters with previously characterized viruses.

CRISPR spacers were used to link VCs to their potential bacterial hosts. The relative abundance of VCs and the number of CRISPR spacers against specific VCs demonstrate that urban subjects contain a greater abundance of phages targeting Bacteroides, Parabacteroides, Bifidobacterium and Escherichia spp., while there are trends toward more Eubacterium and Prevotella-infecting VCs amongst rural-residing individuals (Figure 5E). The enterotypes of Indian microbiomes (n = 105) are dominated by Bacteroides (n = 50), Prevotella (n = 34), and Escherichia (n = 21). When Indian fecal viromes are analyzed in the context of microbiome enterotypes, Bacteroides-, Prevotella-, and Escherichia-infecting phages are prevalent in the corresponding microbial enterotypes (Supplementary Figure 4a & B). Similarly, a trend toward more crAss-like phages predicted to infect Prevotella spp. are observed in rural samples (Supplementary Figure 4b; Kruskal–Wallis test, p-value 0.059).

While the Indian fecal virome composition analysis was conducted on VCs present in two or more individuals, all viral-associated auxiliary metabolic functions were assessed on VCs present in 10 or more individuals. These criteria were implemented in order to focus on the functions associated with the most abundant Indian fecal viruses. There were 723 VCs shared by 10 or more individuals. Of these VCs, the majority (419/723 VCs, 57.95%) are detectable amongst both rural and urban habiting individuals (Figure 6A). However, urban and rural-specific VCs were also observed (240 and 64 VCs, respectively).

In order to assess the energy harvesting metabolic potential or urban and rural viral communities, eggNOG categories E and G (‘Amino acid transport and metabolism,’ and ‘Carbohydrate transport and metabolism,’ respectively) were investigated. The rurally abundant VCs encode at statistically higher frequency genes involved in amino acid and carbohydrate transport and metabolism (Figure 6D-E).

The composition of the gut microbiome in the context of health and to a much lesser extent, disease, in Indian populations is not well understood. This study is the first to utilize shotgun metagenomics sequencing to comprehensively characterize the gut bacteriome, resistome, and virome of rural and urban diarrheal and control populations without diarrhea living in two geographically and culturally distinct regions of Central India, Nagpur and Melghat. Although there are very limited data on the incidence and epidemiology of CDI in India as a whole, a handful of reports mainly conducted in hospitalized patients indicate detection rates in the range of 6–15.7%.19–21 In our fecal metagenome study in which we also sought to characterize the impact of C. difficile, we selected an enriched set of fecal DNA samples derived from diarrheal samples testing positive in diagnostic C. difficile immunoassays for whole-genome shotgun sequencing (WGS). As such, the C. difficile toxin positivity rates presented herein, may not reflect true prevalence rates in the selected study populations. Nevertheless, our results suggest that CDI is an emerging but as yet under-recognized healthcare-associated infection and is associated mainly with urbanization and antibiotic exposure. These findings highlight the need to enhance awareness of and testing of subjects with diarrhea for C. difficile in India, particularly in high-risk individuals with recent or ongoing antibiotic exposure or hospitalization.

There were several limitations to this study. Co-morbidity data were unknown and we were unable to capture BMIs for all participants (see Supplementary metadata). Detailed dietary information was not available using a standard FFQ approach. Further, the control population comprised mainly hospitalized patients without diarrhea and thus do not represent healthy controls. It was also not possible to achieve identical sampling strategies across both rural and urban populations, particularly in view of lack of hospital facilities in Melghat. Due to lack of diagnostic facilities, we were unable to determine the etiological cause of acute diarrhea or in the case of C. difficile positive samples, undertake further strain characterization studies. Finally, due to limitations related to specimen collection and preparation, we were unable to assess other components of the microbiome, including RNA viruses and intestinal parasites.

Here we report the most comprehensive study to date that has simultaneously examined the enteric bacteriome, DNA virome, and antibiotic resistome in divergent populations in Central India, a region of the world that has been grossly understudied. Together, these data suggest that not all rural traditional societies display a healthy gut microbiota as exemplified by a lack of significant difference in bacterial diversity between our rural and urban cohorts and the presence of a core set of AMR genes. Our findings will help assess progress toward meeting the goals of global and national action plans to tackle AMR and the burden of infectious diarrhea in India, including CDI. These results may also be useful in laying the foundations for implementing culturally acceptable One Health-inspired interventions to improve health-care outcomes in this region of the world.

The main aim of this observational cohort study was to use shotgun metagenomics to characterize the gut bacteriome, DNA virome, and antibiotic resistome of two highly divergent populations in Central India; rural agriculturalists in Melghat and an urban population in Nagpur. We also sought to investigate comparative differences in microbiome profiles in subjects with and without diarrhea, including the impact of CDI.

During participant selection, inclusion criteria were (i) adults aged from 18 to 70 years who could provide written or thumb-print acknowledged informed consent, (ii) HIV, hepatitis B or C negative, and (iii) not pregnant or breast-feeding.

Potential participants from Nagpur were identified with the assistance of project fellows at the Central India Institute of Medical Sciences (CIIMS) who approached all consecutive cases of diarrhea presenting to CIIMS as either an in-or outpatient. Similarly, all non-diarrheal cases were recruited to this study via the assistance of inpatient or outpatient clinical teams who closely liaised with the project fellows at CIIMS. All rural participants who provided stool samples in this study were directly recruited by community village health-care workers trained by MAHAN Trust, which is a non-governmental organization providing medical expertise to the disparate tribal population of the Melghat region in their own homes.

Nagpur is the third largest city of the Indian state of Maharashtra and the 13th largest city by population (2.5 M) in India. It is located at the exact center of the Indian peninsula (zero milestone) and enjoys a tropical savannah climate where temperatures can reach in excess of 48°C in the summer months. Hinduism is the main religion followed closely by Buddhism and Islam, with smaller contributions from Christianity, Jainism, and Sikhism.

Nagpur is an emerging metropolis attracting significant commercial inward investment and is a major education hub in Central India. It is also home to the Central Indian Institute of Medical Sciences (CIIMS). Nagpur was declared open defecation free in January 2018 and is one of the cleanest and most livable cities in India, as a leader in healthcare, green spaces, and public transportation. The majority of households have good drinking water and sanitation facilities, and use clean fuel for cooking.

Melghat Tiger Reserve, with its diverse flora and fauna, is located in Amaravati district of Maharashtra and is home to approximately 250,000 members of the Korku tribe spread across two talukas, Dharni and Chikaldhara and 300 villages, and extends across 4,000 square km. By road, it is approximately 250 km from Nagpur.

All rural Melghat subjects within the Melghat Tiger Reserve of Maharashtra identify as members of the Korku Scheduled Tribe and practice Hinduism mixed with ancestral worship. The Korku are an Adivasi ethnic group, speak Korku dialect, and are primarily an agriculturalist community of low socioeconomic status, high rates of illiteracy and malnutrition and possess poor access to medical and educational facilities. They live in small huts typically made of mud, grass, and bamboo frames which lack an electricity or running water supply or proper sanitation systems and possess unique and distinct cultural knowledge, beliefs, and customs.

Site-specific project coordinators were assigned to review health records form each participant. Basic demographic details including age, gender, geographic location, hospitalization exposure, antibiotic usage during and before (within 3 months) of study recruitment, and C. difficile (GDH positive, toxin-positive) detection rates were recorded for urban and rural diarrheal and control participants.

In addition, BMI, immunosuppression status, and environmental details: type and location of home dwelling, number in family, drinking water supply, hygiene practices, and number and type of domestic animals were also recorded for all participants. A description of the dietary information for the sampled cohorts is presented in the Supplementary methods.

All specimens were anonymized and assigned a study code number linked to participant demographic details. Human fecal samples were collected from urban participants with and without diarrhea that were either in- or outpatients from the Central Indian Institute of Medical Sciences (CIIMS), Nagpur or from other hospitals within a 20 km radius of CIIMS. Similarly, fecal samples were also collected from participants with and without diarrhea in Melghat with the assistance of research fellows based at the Mahatma Gandhi Tribal Hospital, which hosts a CIIMS satellite laboratory and other neighboring hospitals within Melghat. Suitable recruits were identified by the research fellows who interacted daily with village health-care workers to facilitate participant recruitment and sample collection. Up to two samples (3–5 g each) were collected in UV sterilized dry plastic containers at the time of recruitment from each participant and placed in a cool box. As per the standard operating procedures, all stool specimens were stored at 4°C immediately after collection to avoid enzymatic degradation prior to the detection of toxigenic C. difficile and genomic DNA extraction which were performed within 24 hours of sample collection.

All diarrheal samples in the metagenome study (58/105) were tested for Clostridioides difficile infection (detection of glutamate dehydrogenase antigen and toxins A/B) using the C. DIFF QUIK CHEK COMPLETE-enzyme immunoassay (QCC; TechLab, Blacksburg, VA, USA) in accordance with the manufacturers’ instructions, including the use of appropriate controls as specified in the package insert. Briefly, ~25 ml of stool sample was added to a tube containing the diluent and conjugate and the mixture was transferred to the device sample well. After incubation for 15 min at room temperature, the wash buffer followed by the substrate was added to the reaction window. The results were read after 10 min. The GDH antigen and/or toxins were reported as positive if a clear visible band was seen on the antigen and toxin side of the device display window, respectively, confirming the presence of toxigenic C. difficile as per manufacturer guidelines.

DNA was extracted from 1 to 1.5 g of feces and homogenized in lysis buffer (Tris HCl, EDTA, NaCl, and SDS). The content was centrifuged at 7,000 x g for 10 min. The supernatant was then transferred to a 1.5 mL tube containing a mixture of Isopropanol and Sodium acetate (5 M) and incubated at −20°C for 30 min. Following removal of the supernatant the pellet was dried for about an hour. The pellet was suspended in 1X Tris EDTA buffer (pH 8) and incubated at 65°C for 15 min. An approximate equal volume (0.5–0.7 ml) of Phenol: Chloroform-Isoamyl alcohol (24:1) was added, mixed thoroughly and centrifuged for 10 min at 12,000 x g. The aqueous viscous supernatant was carefully transferred to a new 1.5 mL tube. An equal volume of Chloroform-Isoamyl alcohol (1:1) was added, followed by centrifugation for 10 min at 12,000 x g. The supernatant was mixed with 0.6x volume of Isopropanol to aid precipitation. The precipitated nucleic acids were washed with 75% ethanol, dried and re-suspended in 50 μL of TE buffer.

Sequencing was carried out by Source Biosciences (Nottingham, U.K.). High-quality genomic DNA was quantified using Qubit Broad Range (Invitrogen, U.K.) and prepared for Illumina paired end sequencing following the TruSeq DNA Nano manufacturers protocol (Rev D, June 2015) (Illumina Inc, San Diego, U.S.A.). The DNA was sequenced using a standard HiSeq 4000 150bp PE flowcell. Raw data have been submitted to the European Nucleotide Archive under the accession number https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/PRJNA564397

Raw Fastq files (average 13,410,735 reads per sample) were assessed for quality using skewer,45 trimming adaptor reads and regions of quality below a phred of 30. The filtered reads (average 10,635,653 reads per sample) were then assessed for taxonomic assignments using Metaphlan246 and for the presence of antimicrobial resistance genes using ARIBA47 with the MegaRes database.48

Functional analysis was performed using MOCAT2 (v2.1.3).49 Briefly, trimmed and filtered reads were assembled into contigs with SOAPaligner (v2.21). These contigs are initially corrected for indels and chimeric reads using BWA (v0.7.5a-r16) and screened against the human hg19 reference to filter out reads which originated from the host using USEARCH (v5/v6). Genes were predicted using Prodigal (v2.60). Single copy marker genes are extracted using fetchMG (v1.0) and clustered using CD-HIT (v4.6). The gene catalogs were annotated using DIAMOND (v0.7.9.58) against multiple functional databases including eggNOG50 and KEGG.51 The abundance of genes annotated to specific KEGG orthologs (KO) was determined using the insert mm dist among unique norm setting in MOCAT2, normalizing by read length and sequencing depth and allowing for multiple mappers.

Functional shifts between groups and predicted taxonomic contributions were calculated using the FishTaco package,52 taking the species-level taxonomic table produced by Metaphlan2 and the normalized KO abundance table from MOCAT2 as inputs. Only 49 taxa which exceeded a minimum proportional abundance of greater than 0.1 in any single sample were included in the final model. Enriched pathways were identified using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test at FDR corrected p < .05. Taxonomic contributions were predicted by de novo inference in FishTaco, inferring genomic content through a permutation-based approach and performing a total of 50 permutations per differentially abundant pathway.

For comparison of gene copy number for enriched metabolic pathways, KO gene copy numbers for 8 gut-associated annotated reference genomes were obtained from the Integrated Microbial Genomes and Microbiomes (IMG) database53 as follows: Prevotella stercorea DSM 18206 (IMG: 2513237318), Prevotella copri CB7 DSM 18205 (IMG: 2562617166), Eubacterium rectale DSM 17629 (IMG: 650377936), Ruminococcus bromii L2-63 (IMG: 650377966), Escherichia coli UM147 (IMG: 2728369554), Klebsiella pneumoniae YH43 (IMG: 2687453226), Bacteroides vulgatus mpk (IMG: 2687453192), Parabacteroides distasonis 2b7A (IMG: 2660238380). KO gene copy numbers associated with each enriched metabolic pathway were aggregated to yield overall pathway gene counts.

Sequencing reads were processed using Trimmomatic (version 0.36),54 to remove Illumina adaptors and prune sequences where the Phred score dropped below 30 across a 4bp sliding window. All surviving reads less than 70bp were discarded. Fastq reads were assessed pre- and post-processing using fastqc.55 Both the paired and unpaired, forward and reverse reads, from samples were assembled individually using metaSPAdes (version 3.11.1).56 Only contigs greater than 1,000 bp were examined further.

Viral contigs were grouped into Viral Clusters (VCs) using vContact2 (version 0.9.8),65 implemented through the CyVerse Discovery Environment. Protein clusters were identified amongst VCs using default settings (Diamond, E-value 0.0001), and with the inclusion of known viruses (Bacterial and Archaeal Viral RefSeq 85, with ICTV and NCBI taxonomy). Following vContact2, only viral clusters that contain viral sequences from two or more of the study’s complete cohort (n = 105) were analyzed further. This was designed to remove singleton and spurious viral sequences that may be transiently associated with diet, but are not abundant or stable components of the fecal microbiome. The final Indian fecal virome was visualized as a network through Cytoscape (version 3.7.1),66 with viral sequences as nodes and shared protein clusters as edges. The edge distance between connected viruses is calculated by Cytoscape as their ‘interaction.’

Quality filtered reads, both paired and unpaired, were mapped onto the final Indian fecal virome using bowtie2 in ‘end-to-end’ mode (version 2.3.4.1).67 The read alignment outputs were converted to sorted bam files through samtools (version 1.7).68 The abundance and breadth of coverage of reads mapping to each contig were determined using the bedtools coverage function (version 2.26.0).69 Subsequently, in order to determine if a viral sequence was indeed present in a fecal virome, a breadth of coverage filtering was applied. This was designed to remove viruses where potentially 100 s of reads could map onto a single conserved region. Therefore, for viral sequences ≤5kb, 75% of the genome needed to be covered by aligned reads; sequences >5kb and ≤50kb, 50% of the genome needed to be covered; and >50kb, 25% of the genome needed to be covered.

Any viral sequence from a fecal microbiome sample which failed the breadth of coverage filtering was recorded as zero reads, while if the filtering step was passed, the observed number of reads aligned was used to populate the read count matrix. Due to differences in sequencing depth between samples, the read count matrix was normalized per sample using the DESeq2 ratio of means method.70 The reads aligned to individual viral sequences were aggregated by their vContact2 determined VCs. DESeq2 was subsequently used to calculate the VC changes between cohorts. The normalized VC read count matrix was used to determine the diversity and statistical differences observed between Indian fecal microbiome cohorts (see ‘Statistical Analyzes’ below).

CRISPR spacers from bacterial contig assemblies were predicted using PILER-CR (version 1.06).71 Putative CRISPR spacer predictions <20 bp and >100 bp were discarded. The CRISPR spacers were queried locally using BLASTn against all individual viral sequences which formed the Indian fecal virome VCs. Due to the use of short nucleotide sequences, only CRISPR spacers with an E-value ≤0.001 and ≤1 mismatch were considered as significant. In order to determine the taxonomy of the original assembled bacterial contigs, or the pre-assembled contigs from the Pasolli et al. (2019) study,72 contig kmer MinHash sketches were queried against JGI taxonomy server using the BBMap sendsketch function (version 38.44).73 The bacterial enterotypes of Indian microbiomes were calculated using the Jensen–Shannon divergence (JSD) to cluster the samples, followed by partitioning around medoids (PAM) to cluster the abundance profiles.27

The functions associated with Indian fecal viruses were determined using eggNOG-mapper v1 (online submission portal) using the eggNOG 4.5.1 database.50 For each VC, the largest viral sequence was chosen as a representative of that VC. In order to avoid the confounding effect of viral abundance fluctuations within the fecal microbiome, the relative abundance of VCs observed at the specific sampling time-point was not taken into consideration. Only the overall presence-absence and abundance of viral-encoded functions were considered. The similarity between virome-encoded functions, with respect to presence-absence, was assessed through PCoA using the Jaccard index. The abundance of specific metabolic genes was compared between cohorts, with statistical difference determined by the Mann–Whitney U test with Bonferroni correction using the ‘ggpubr’ compare means function in R.

All statistical analyzes were conducted in R (64-bit, version 3.6.0; Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna). The package ‘vegan’ was used for measures of taxonomic diversity including alpha diversity (Inverse Simpson Index) and beta diversity (Principal Coordinates Analysis with Bray Curtis Dissimilarity and Jaccard Similarity). Differences in alpha diversity between study groups were assessed by ANOVA with Tukey’s honest significance test. The contribution of categorical variables to beta diversity was tested for using the Adonis function (PERMANOVA) in vegan. Comparisons of proportional carriage of key taxa and resistance genes between groups were assessed using the Chi-squared test. Generalized linear models assuming a negative binomial distribution were used to identify differentially abundant taxa between study groups as implemented in the R package ‘mare.’ Hierarchical clustering of resistance gene abundances and heatmap generation was performed with the package ‘heatmap3ʹ using log-transformed Euclidean distance for distance matrix construction from count data. For comparison of resistance gene and metabolic pathways counts between groups, the Mann–Whitney U test was used. All p values obtained from testing with multiple comparisons were corrected for false discovery rate (FDR, Benjamini-Hochberg). The fold changes observed in the relative abundances of VCs across geographical and diarrheal status cohorts were calculated using the ‘gtools’ package in R. Using the same package, the fold changes were converted to log ratios (base 10). All graphical images were generated using ‘ggplot2ʹ.

T.M.M., T.J.S., S.S., and A.B. designed the study, analyzed the data, and wrote the paper. T.M.M., R.S.K., A.S., developed the clinical sample cohorts and R.B., R.N., S.M., J.G., and P.J. managed sample and metadata collection, DNA extraction, and quantification. A.B., T.J.S., S.S., analyzed the WGS data. T.M.M., T.J.S., and S.S. performed the statistical analyses. S.A., R.D.E., M.W., L.A.D., and C.H., in addition to all other co-authors, reviewed the manuscript, provided feedback, and approved the manuscript in its final form.

No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

TMM is a Consultant advisor for CHAIN Biotechnology. MHW has received consulting fees from Actelion, Astellas, bioMerieux, Da Volerra, Merck, Meridian, Pfizer, Sanofi-Pasteur, Seres, Singulex, Summit, Synthetic Biologics, Valneva, Vaxxilon & VenatoRx; lecture fees from Alere, Astellas, Merck, Pfizer & Singulex; and grant support from Actelion, Alere, Astellas, bioMerieux, Da Volterra, Merck, MicroPharm, Morphochem, AG, MotifBio, Paratek, Sanofi-Pasteur, Seres, Summit & Tetraphase. All other authors declare no competing interests.

This study was approved by the Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences Research Ethics Committee at the University of Nottingham (REC No. 199-1901) and the Ethical Committee of the Central India Institute of Medical Sciences, Nagpur.

Supplemental data for this article can be accessed on the publisher’s website.

Metagenomic sequencing datasets generated and analyzed during the current study are available in the European Nucleotide Archive under accession number: [https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/PRJNA564397]

All sequencing reads that map to the human reference genome have been removed from the sequencing files.

