Controlled Complexity: Optimized Systems to Study the Role of the Gut Microbiome in Host Physiology

The profound impact of the gut microbiome on host health has led to a revolution in biomedical research, motivating researchers from disparate fields to define the specific molecular mechanisms that mediate host-beneficial effects. The advent of genomic technologies allied to the use of model microbiomes in gnotobiotic mouse models has transformed our understanding of intestinal microbial ecology and the impact of the microbiome on the host. However, despite incredible advances, our understanding of the host-microbiome dialogue that shapes host physiology is still in its infancy. Progress has been limited by challenges associated with developing model systems that are both tractable enough to provide key mechanistic insights while also reflecting the enormous complexity of the gut ecosystem. Simplified model microbiomes have facilitated detailed interrogation of transcriptional and metabolic functions of the microbiome but do not recapitulate the interactions seen in complex communities. Conversely, intact complex communities from mice or humans provide a more physiologically relevant community type, but can limit our ability to uncover high-resolution insights into microbiome function. Moreover, complex microbiomes from lab-derived mice or humans often do not readily imprint human-like phenotypes. Therefore, improved model microbiomes that are highly defined and tractable, but that more accurately recapitulate human microbiome-induced phenotypic variation are required to improve understanding of fundamental processes governing host-microbiome mutualism. This improved understanding will enhance the translational relevance of studies that address how the microbiome promotes host health and influences disease states. Microbial exposures in wild mice, both symbiotic and infectious in nature, have recently been established to more readily recapitulate human-like phenotypes. The development of synthetic model communities from such “wild mice” therefore represents an attractive strategy to overcome the limitations of current approaches. Advances in microbial culturing approaches that allow for the generation of large and diverse libraries of isolates, coupled to ever more affordable large-scale genomic sequencing, mean that we are now ideally positioned to develop such systems. Furthermore, the development of sophisticated in vitro systems is allowing for detailed insights into host-microbiome interactions to be obtained. Here we discuss the need to leverage such approaches and highlight key challenges that remain to be addressed.

As a species, humans are surrounded by and inhabited by trillions of microorganisms, encompassing bacteria, fungi, archaea, other eukaryotic organisms such as parasites and protists, as well as viruses (Gill et al., 2006; Parfrey et al., 2011; Hallen-Adams and Suhr, 2017; Koskinen et al., 2017; Nkamga et al., 2017; Gregory et al., 2020) that are collectively referred to as the microbiome. Decades of work have established the profound role of the microbiome in shaping host physiology and its capacity to regulate a wide variety of health and disease states. The rapid growth of microbiome research, spurred by technological innovations, has resulted in remarkable discoveries that have altered our conceptualization of the role played by this complex ecosystem in host health. Furthermore, these efforts have uncovered several features that highlight the therapeutic potential of the microbiome. First, dysfunction of the microbiome or host responses to the microbiome have been implicated in the pathogenesis of myriad human diseases, including, undernutrition and its associated maladies (Smith M. I. et al., 2013; Kau et al., 2015; Blanton et al., 2016; Charbonneau et al., 2016; Wagner et al., 2016; Cowardin et al., 2019), metabolic diseases such as obesity (Ley et al., 2005; Turnbaugh et al., 2006, 2008, 2009b; Hildebrandt et al., 2009; Ridaura et al., 2013), cardiovascular disease (Kelly et al., 2016), cancer and its susceptibility to treatment (Arthur et al., 2012; Buc et al., 2013; Sivan et al., 2015; Vétizou et al., 2015), food allergy (Feehley et al., 2019), multiple sclerosis (Berer et al., 2017; Cekanaviciute et al., 2017), and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) (Manichanh et al., 2006; Frank et al., 2007; Gevers et al., 2014; Britton et al., 2019). Second, there is significant inter-personal variation in microbiome composition and/or function across individuals (Turnbaugh et al., 2009a; Qin et al., 2010; Schloissnig et al., 2013) that can impact host phenotypes, and thus, microbiome composition represents a personalized risk factor for the development of disease (Smith M. I. et al., 2013; Subramanian et al., 2014; Alavi et al., 2020). Third, microbiota repair, where specific microbial taxa or microbial consortia are introduced to communities lacking these microbes, has proven effective in restoration of beneficial microbiome-mediated effects (van Nood et al., 2013; Buffie et al., 2015; Blanton et al., 2016; Caballero et al., 2017; Di Luccia et al., 2020), underscoring the potential of microbiome manipulation for therapy.

While the advances to date have been captivating, there is still a dearth of information regarding the specific gut microbes that mediate the effects of the microbiome on the host. Moreover, despite the enormous progress that they have facilitated, current models have deficiencies that limit their translational relevance. As targeted and rational microbiome manipulation becomes an increasingly attractive approach for therapy, tractable and physiologically relevant model systems to interrogate host-microbiome interactions are needed. Here we will discuss current challenges and describe a path to addressing this need in microbiome research through the creation of new and improved model systems to interrogate host-microbiome interactions. We will focus our attention primarily on the effects of gut bacteria on host physiology. However, it is increasingly clear that intestinal fungi, viruses, archaea, and other eukaryotic species can profoundly impact host phenotypes, such as promoting intestinal immune system maturation and regulating disease susceptibility, often able to imprint phenotypic responses equivalent to gut bacteria (Kernbauer et al., 2014; Chudnovskiy et al., 2016; Escalante et al., 2016; Lin et al., 2020; Yeung et al., 2020; Dallari et al., 2021). Moreover, these agents do not act in isolation, and their direct or indirect interactions may regulate host health as has been demonstrated in murine models of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and parasitic infection (Cadwell et al., 2010; Hayes et al., 2010). It would therefore be remiss to ignore the contributions of these oft-overlooked microbiome members in our conceptualization of the gut ecosystem and its effects on the host, as highlighted by others (Norman et al., 2014; Reynolds et al., 2015; Runge and Rosshart, 2021).

Model systems have been widely employed by researchers going all the way back to the days of Gregor Mendel’s use of pea plants to study inherited traits (Ellis et al., 2011). In order to define paradigms of host-microbiome mutualism, researchers have utilized a variety of organisms (Reyniers and Sacksteder, 1958; Smith et al., 2007; Ericsson, 2019), ranging from Drosophila (Lee and Brey, 2013), Hydra (Augustin et al., 2012), zebrafish (Kanther and Rawls, 2010; Stagaman et al., 2020) and squid (Nyholm and McFall-Ngai, 2004; McFall-Ngai, 2014) to mice and rats (Reyniers and Sacksteder, 1958; Smith et al., 2007), and pigs (Vlasova et al., 2018; Gehrig et al., 2019). This has enabled fundamental insights into the relationship between the host and the resident microbiome and the identification of features that typify these interactions, akin to Koch’s postulates that describe the paradigm that defines microbial pathogenesis (Neville et al., 2018). Systems like Drosophila, Hydra, squid, and zebrafish offer numerous advantages including the relative ease of husbandry, the ability to study large numbers of offspring, less complex and more readily cultivated microbiomes for study than higher organisms, the availability of whole-organism imaging, etc. Pioneering studies in these systems have uncovered principles that govern host-microbiome interactions, including (but not limited to): (i) a role for gut symbionts in the coordination of tissue developmental programs and the microbial components responsible for these effects (particularly microbial cell wall products such as peptidoglycan and LPS, as well as microbial metabolites like acetate) (Koropatnick et al., 2004; Buchon et al., 2009; Shin et al., 2011; Troll et al., 2018), (ii) host adaptations to the microbiome that limit the inflammatory potential of microbiota-derived factors (Bates et al., 2007; Lhocine et al., 2008; Rader et al., 2012), (iii) host regulation of microbiome composition (Rawls et al., 2006; Ryu et al., 2008; Fraune et al., 2009), (iv) gut symbiont factors driving host adaptation (Rawls et al., 2007; Koehler et al., 2018), and (v) microbiome contributions to growth and nutrient acquisition (Storelli et al., 2011; Semova et al., 2012; Schwarzer et al., 2016). Gnotobiotic pigs have now become more widely utilized, which has allowed the study of these processes in an animal system with physiology more similar to that of humans than provided by commonly used murine models. While pig models present many challenges due to their size, they offer several advantages over more commonly used model systems, including more human-like physiology, susceptibility to many human-relevant infectious agents, greater microbiome complexity, and therefore they offer important insights of more translational relevance (Vlasova et al., 2018; Ericsson, 2019; Gehrig et al., 2019). Although less commonly employed due to the more challenging and expensive nature of their husbandry, gnotobiotic pig models are proving to be a highly valuable component of microbiome research.

However, mirroring the interpersonal variation in human microbiomes, model organisms display significant variation in the composition of their microbiomes, which in turn contributes to phenotypic variation reported in mouse models, especially in studies associated with immune activation. Several notable examples highlight how microbiome variation can impact phenotypes in murine models: (i) microbiome mediated spontaneous colitis and metabolic dysfunction has been reported in TLR5-/- mice by some, but not by others (Vijay-Kumar et al., 2007, 2010; Letran et al., 2011); (ii) the aggravation of colitis and development of communicable disease in NLRP6-/- mice is critically dependent on the microbiome context in which it is studied (Elinav et al., 2011; Lemire et al., 2017; Mamantopoulos et al., 2017); (iii) IL-10-/- mice develop a spontaneous colitis in some animal facilities, yet they remain largely free of disease in others depending on the presence or absence of select microbes (Kuhn et al., 1993; Nagalingam et al., 2013; Seregin et al., 2017); (iv) DSS-induced colitis models display significantly varied kinetics and severity depending on microbiome composition (Forster et al., 2021); (v) diabetes in the Non-Obese Diabetic (NOD) type 1 diabetes model is regulated by various parameters, including the presence of specific gut microbes or infectious agents (Wilberz et al., 1991; Takei et al., 1992; Pozzilli et al., 1993; Kriegel et al., 2011; Markle et al., 2013; Yurkovetskiy et al., 2013). Although not an exhaustive list, these examples demonstrate that variation in the gut microbiome can lead to disparate phenotypic outcomes in mice. Experimental variation, whether it be technical or biological in origin, has long been seen as a thorn in the side of researchers, contributing in part to issues of reproducibility in science (von Kortzfleisch et al., 2020). To limit the impact of overt pathogens, and the large-scale microbiome variation across different animal facilities, efforts were made to create a more standardized murine system that would limit issues of reproducibility. Thus, the concept of Specific Pathogen Free (SPF) mice was born. SPF mice are free of certain (but not all) pathogenic organisms or microorganisms capable of interfering with experimental outcomes (Lane-Petter, 1962). These mice provide the advantage of controlling the health status of the animal and allowing for better standardization between experiments, labs, and institutions. While the SPF mouse was adopted with the intention of allowing for more reproducible results, it has been shown that microbiome and phenotypic variability also exists between SPF mouse colonies from commercial vendors, as SPF only determines what is excluded, but not what should be present (Smith et al., 2007; Ivanov et al., 2009; Denning et al., 2011; Rosshart et al., 2017).

To counteract the effects of microbiome variation researchers have turned to the use of defined reference communities. Beginning in the 1960s, Dubos et al. (1965), Schaedler et al. (1965), and Dewhirst et al. (1999) developed small model communities that were used to standardize the microbiome of animal models, mostly to be used in conventionally raised mice (Box 1). In an effort to move toward systems with greater control over community composition an ever-increasing number of researchers have begun to adopt germ-free/gnotobiotic models first established more than 60 years ago (Trexler and Reynolds, 1957; Gordon and Pesti, 1971). Such models allow the study of communities of interest without unwanted invasion by microbes present in the environment. Pioneering studies using small communities, ranging from mono-associations (colonization with a single microbe) that establish the roles of individual genes and metabolic pathways in bacteria (Rey et al., 2010; Koppel et al., 2018; Glowacki et al., 2020) to more complex communities with up to 20 members (Mahowald et al., 2009; Faith et al., 2011, 2014; Geuking et al., 2011; Cahenzli et al., 2013; McNulty et al., 2013; Sefik et al., 2015; Brugiroux et al., 2016; Geva-Zatorsky et al., 2017; Becattini et al., 2021), reduced the complexity of the system (Figure 1). These simplified models have provided high-resolution insights into the ecological, transcriptional, and metabolic responses of microbes to environmental variations (e.g., diet, inflammation) (McNulty et al., 2013; Ridaura et al., 2013; Becattini et al., 2021), uncovered microbe-microbe interactions that shape community function (Mahowald et al., 2009; Caballero et al., 2017), and highlighted a role for microbiome members in host growth (Blanton et al., 2016; Charbonneau et al., 2016; Schwarzer et al., 2016), weight gain and metabolic health (Fei and Zhao, 2013; Ridaura et al., 2013), pathogen resistance (Fukuda et al., 2011; Hsiao et al., 2014; Alavi et al., 2020), as well as specific enzymatic functions that directly impact host health (Skye et al., 2018; Song et al., 2020). Thus, model communities studied in germ-free/gnotobiotic mice have provided key insights into the several facets of microbiome function and host-microbiome interactions.

However, while we and others (Hamilton et al., 2020; Graham, 2021; Kuypers et al., 2021) posit that wild microbiome-elicited phenotypes create a murine system with a more human-like phenotype, different approaches to wilding the microbiome including the specific donor material used, or the creation of environments that more accurately mimic the natural environment of the mouse (Arnesen et al., 2020; Lin et al., 2020; Yeung et al., 2020) vs. co-housing under controlled laboratory conditions (Beura et al., 2016; Rosshart et al., 2017), may lead to disparate phenotypic outcomes in recipients. The use of wild microbiomes thus may not fully humanize the murine response or be fully representative of human phenomena. For example, in the case of allergy development and the hygiene hypothesis, one study (Ottman et al., 2019) suggests that lack of microbe diversity drives such allergic states, while (Ma et al., 2021) contradicts these claims. Undoubtedly, the approach of using wild mice and/or their derived microbiomes does not fully address the nuances of in vivo mouse models vs. humans as discussed in depth elsewhere (Hamilton et al., 2020; Graham, 2021; Kuypers et al., 2021). To address these limitations, more studies are needed with comparative phenotyping of adult human and wild microbiome-exposed murine immune systems to determine whether these responses truly reflect the development of a more human-like response, as opposed to a response that is simply distinct from lab mice. With the advent of approaches that allow for detailed assessment of the non-lymphoid immune compartment in humans (Szabo et al., 2019), such studies are now possible. Moreover, as we discuss below, detailed knowledge of the microorganisms that coordinate the phenotypic features shared between mice harboring wild microbiomes and humans will advance efforts to generate improved murine model systems.

While wild microbiomes offer the potential to shed new light on host-microbiome interactions, currently there is limited information regarding the effector microbes within these communities. There is therefore a need to determine which microbes are responsible for mediating the human-like phenotypic variation that they induce. These efforts need not focus solely on non-pathogenic members of the microbiome but should include controlled pathogen as well as non-pathogen exposures. While defining these effector microbes is a daunting challenge, we and others have described effective strategies to do so in a systematic and efficient manner (Goodman et al., 2011; Ahern et al., 2014; Faith et al., 2014; Palm et al., 2014; Kau et al., 2015; Surana and Kasper, 2017). The generation of culture libraries in arrayed format (i.e., where individual wells of multi-well plates contain distinct microbiome members) from human donor microbiomes that retain the effector functions of the donor community has allowed mechanistic insight into host-microbiome interactions of biological relevance (Ridaura et al., 2013; Faith et al., 2014; Wagner et al., 2016). Such strategies allow the precise delineation of the effects of individual community members, whether they operate in concert with other members or in isolation (Ahern et al., 2014; Faith et al., 2014). Similarly, the isolation in pure culture of the constituents of the wild mouse microbiome represents a key first step toward the generation of more complete synthetic communities that recapitulate wild microbiome imprinted functions and allow for greater manipulability. Likewise, in defining these wild microbiomes, it is important to appreciate that for the past several decades, non-bacterial residents of the gut (fungi, archaea, viruses, parasites, and other non-fungal eukaryotic members) have received scant attention, mostly attributable to technical challenges. Such impediments include the variability of internal transcribed spacer regions (ITS) within fungal ribosomal genes and a general lack of reference genomes to compare species prevalence in metagenomic samples (Paterson et al., 2017). Sequencing challenges have also dampened the ability to get a fully representative picture of the gut virome. Most techniques for nucleic acid isolation and sequencing are biased toward DNA viruses, largely missing RNA viruses, while isolation and propagation of gut viruses is also a challenge that needs to be overcome (Wang, 2020; Khan Mirzaei et al., 2021). This lack of cultivation methods extends to archaeal members as well, with archaea often requiring specific culture conditions (Borrel et al., 2020) which can hamper in vivo studies. The genesis of libraries of isolates of all microbiome-member types in arrayed format from wild-microbiomes that are known to impact host phenotypes, such that consortia of individual library members can be compiled to study their effects on the host will form an essential component moving forward in defining complex host-microbiome interactions (Goodman et al., 2011; Ahern et al., 2014; Faith et al., 2014; Palm et al., 2014). Moreover, this will facilitate the dissemination to other researchers for implementation in their studies. The use of a common library of microorganisms freely available to all researchers that can be leveraged to understand host-microbiome interactions at multiple scales will advance efforts to uncover mechanistic insights into the operations of large diverse communities that reflect the breadth of microbial taxa and viruses that characterize humans and their associated phenotypic effects.

Despite our call for more standardized gut microbiomes, it would be foolish to demand complete homogenization across institutions, or even within an institution. Microbiome variation can itself represent a form of “natural experiment” that can present a challenge to researchers, but that has also proved a rich source of information regarding how the microbiome can mediate interpersonal variation among a population. For example, the varied presence of Th17 cells in the small intestinal lamina propria in C57BL/6 mice from different commercial vendors led to the identification of a single microbe, SFB, which was differentially represented in the microbiomes of these animals and was both required and sufficient for the development of intestinal Th17 cells (Ivanov et al., 2008, 2009; Gaboriau-Routhiau et al., 2009). Similarly, the varying presence of Lactobacillus reuteri in different animal facilities within the same institution led to its identification as a potent modulator of CD4+ CD8αα+ IEL development (Cervantes-Barragan et al., 2017). More recently, the fungus Debaryomyces hansenii was highlighted as a mediator of impaired intestinal healing, which again was differentially represented among different colonies of lab mice at the same institution and directly regulated the intestinal healing potential of mice (Jain et al., 2021). Others have also linked different microbiome composition to the phenotype of various animal models of infectious and autoimmune disease (Wu et al., 2010; Lee et al., 2014; Hilbert et al., 2017; Moskowitz et al., 2019; Velazquez et al., 2019). What these studies highlight is that phenotypic variance can be leveraged, even embraced (Ivanov et al., 2008, 2009; Cervantes-Barragan et al., 2017; Jain et al., 2021), to uncover novel host-microbiome interactions that shape host responses. Consequently, although variation poses challenges for microbiome research, total standardization is itself not without issue. Instead, the utility of such variance is linked to an ability to measure and define the causes of the variation, and the reporting of the microbiome composition that is associated with a phenotype will be of enormous value in linking specific microbes to phenotypes of interest. Such an approach will reveal contextualized roles for host phenotypes that may manifest only in the presence of particular community types. Thus, there remains a prominent place for non-standardized models in illuminating fundamentally important host-microbiome interactions.

In spite of all the advantages of the in vivo mouse models we describe, it is ultimately a system with limitations that demands alternative approaches that augment our understanding. Fundamental differences between mice and humans mean that key aspects of host-microbiome interactions may not be modeled in a murine system. Indeed, the specificity in molecular aspects of host-microbe interactions (Lecuit et al., 1999; Atarashi et al., 2015) demands systems to study human-derived microbes in the context of human cells. The advent of sophisticated in vitro/ex vivo approaches that use human-derived cells that can themselves be genetically manipulated represent attractive alternatives that can be used in parallel to murine models. In addition to overcoming shortfalls in murine systems, these approaches help with the continued efforts to replace, reduce, and refine animals in research.

Human intestinal organoids (HIOs) or enteroids (HIEs) remove the need for a live model organism, and instead rely on primary cells derived from human biopsies or stem cells. This technique was originally pioneered from the use of ex vivo tissue explants of human intestines (Browning and Trier, 1969). Growth factors are used to drive differentiation of Lgr5+ intestinal stem cells into intestinal cell types that mimic the 3D spatial and functional environment of the intestine, allowing for simultaneous differentiation into discrete cell types (Ootani et al., 2009; Sato et al., 2009). HIOs have some advantages over other in vitro systems as they maintain the crypt-villus architecture and allow for multiple columnar cell types to be generated (Hill and Spence, 2017). HIOs permit the study of phenomena that have proved challenging in other in vivo systems, including tight junctions of non-enterocyte cells of the small intestine (Pearce et al., 2018); IBD models of infection and inflammatory processes (Angus et al., 2019; Sarvestani et al., 2021); and models of infection such as human norovirus (Ettayebi et al., 2016) and rotavirus (Finkbeiner et al., 2012), for which no in vivo model organism exists, and in vitro culture efforts had not been successful at the time. Additionally, microinjection of bacterial and parasitic pathogens including C. difficile (Leslie et al., 2015), S. enterica Typhimurium (Forbester et al., 2015; Wilson et al., 2015), E. coli (In et al., 2016; Karve et al., 2017; Rajan et al., 2018), and Cryptosporidium (Heo et al., 2018) have all been performed. This platform has allowed for controlled studies into the interactions these pathogens have with the intestine, however, there are several key challenges that remain. Although bacteria can be injected into these structures, the process has drawbacks such that the specialized technique of microinjection is required to avoid compromising the organoid structure and the lumen within the organoid contains a growth-limiting concentration of nutrients that generally can only support the growth of bacteria for less than 24 h. This nutrient limitation also significantly hinders the diversity of microorganisms that can be cultured together in poly-microbial communities. Other constraints involve the physical structure of organoids, and the lack of immune cells, calling into question how well the system recapitulates in vivo biology with the absence of such features (Blutt et al., 2018). Despite the advantages that organoids provide, the noted limitations suggest that the organoid model is not yet advanced to the point of being able to replicate all aspects found in vivo. Instead, these systems are likely more useful as tools to study parameters such as the permeability of the mucosa, drug kinetics, and bacterial interactions in disease states using tissue derived from patients with IBD or related conditions.

A relatively new approach to studying microbe-microbe and intestinal cell-microbe interactions are “lab-on-chip” technologies. Although systems such as Transwell plates (two-dimensional technology) and Ussing chambers (three-dimensional) have been used for decades (Ussing and Zerahn, 1951; Hidalgo et al., 1989) and have been used to study bacterial-host epithelium interactions and diseases of the intestine (Kurkchubasche et al., 1998; Thomson et al., 2019), both have known limitations. With respect to the microbiome, these technologies are not well-suited for maintenance of both aerobic and anaerobic compartments except in limited circumstances (Ulluwishewa et al., 2015; Jafari et al., 2016). This makes studying gut microbiome-host interactions with obligate anaerobes a challenge. Additional limitations involve the duration in which bacteria can be co-cultured before either they or the epithelial cells die, with most ranging from hours to a few days due to the non-peristaltic nature of these devices (Sadaghian Sadabad et al., 2015). Although other devices, such as the mucosal simulator of the human intestinal microbial ecosystem (M-SHIME), or its derivative, the Host-Microbiota Interaction (HMI)-module, have shown promise in incorporating peristalsis-like flow; they suffer from similar problems of short co-culture incubation times and rely on artificial mucus layers (Van den Abbeele et al., 2012; Marzorati et al., 2014). The SHIME reactors are also large, expensive to produce, and not easily scalable.

Recent advancements have merged organoid and gut-on-chip technologies. First described as an early version of the Intestine Chip, the use of matured organoids containing villus structures and multiple cell types were enzymatically broken down and used to seed extracellular matrix (ECM)-coated membranes of a microfluidic chip (Kasendra et al., 2018). The other half of the chip was then seeded with human intestinal microvascular endothelial cells to examine cell-cell interactions, thus creating a multi-system organ on a chip. Through RNA-sequencing, confocal microscopy, and tissue staining it was shown that the Intestine Chip recapitulates key features of the signaling pathways, cellular differentiation, mucus production, and epithelial-endothelial interactions seen in the human duodenum. A similar platform termed the gut microbiome physiome (GuMI) has been developed, specifically for the culture of extremely oxygen-sensitive microbes such as Faecalibacterium prausnitzii (Zhang et al., 2021). Similar to the Intestine Chip, the gut microbiome (GuMI) ECM is impregnated with cells derived from organoids and the device has inlets for sampling and injection of bacteria. While many other chip-based devices are fabricated using polydimethylsiloxane (PMDS), the GuMI uses polysulfone, which can be autoclaved for sterility and is less permeable to oxygen, allowing for more strict control of oxygen gradients (Shin et al., 2019). Lastly, this chip allows for the independent culture of six different bacteria within the luminal portion. Using organoid-derived cells, this three-layer-chip contains an ECM seeded with both intestinal cells and monocyte-derived macrophages and recapitulates features observed in IBD patients (Beaurivage et al., 2020). While the presence of immune cells is an important advancement, the generation of systems that can maintain interaction with a complex immune system is essential to boost the translational relevance of these systems. Nevertheless, the combination of gut-on-chip and organoids is a promising step forward toward the goal of having a tunable system to interrogate complex interactions that are difficult to perform in vivo (Figure 1).

A wealth of knowledge about gut microbiome-host interactions has been gained through the use of the model systems discussed in this review. Conventionally raised mice (both SPF and non-SPF), and gnotobiotic mice, have been and continue to be essential tools to study interactions between the gut microbiome in host health and disease. While there is a continued use for these models, their limitations hinder efforts to gain the mechanistic insights required to target the microbiome for therapeutic purposes. Development of synthetic, wild mouse gut microbiome communities comprising cultured and genome-sequenced microbiome members derived from wild mice provides an opportunity to gain mechanistic understanding of specific microbe-host phenotypes that recapitulate the interactions of humans with their microbiomes and the associated microbiome imprinted phenotypes. Used in conjunction with ever-improving in vitro/ex vivo model systems that facilitate high-resolution studies of complex host-microbiome interactions, these technologies will advance our understanding of the range of microbiome members that shape host physiology and help define the nature of the interactions that underlie these phenomena.

In conclusion, model systems to study gut microbiome-host interactions continue to evolve. The incorporation of synthetic, wild microbiomes into the suite of model systems provides an opportunity to increase mechanistic insight and translatability. The use of these advanced mouse models and ever-improving alternative model systems to study gut microbiome-host interactions will increase our understanding of the functionality of specific microbes in human physiology and disease, advancing efforts to target the microbiome for therapeutic purposes.

RWPG, MJE, and PPA performed relevant literature searches, critical appraisals of the literature, and wrote the review. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

The authors are supported by a grant from the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health (R01DK126772).

