The interplay between host genetics and the gut microbiome reveals common and distinct microbiome features for complex human diseases

Interest in the interplay between host genetics and the gut microbiome in complex human diseases is increasing, with prior evidence mainly being derived from animal models. In addition, the shared and distinct microbiome features among complex human diseases remain largely unclear.

This analysis was based on a Chinese population with 1475 participants. We estimated the SNP-based heritability, which suggested that Desulfovibrionaceae and Odoribacter had significant heritability estimates (0.456 and 0.476, respectively). We performed a microbiome genome-wide association study to identify host genetic variants associated with the gut microbiome. We then conducted bidirectional Mendelian randomization analyses to examine the potential causal associations between the gut microbiome and complex human diseases. We found that Saccharibacteria could potentially decrease the concentration of serum creatinine and increase the estimated glomerular filtration rate. On the other hand, atrial fibrillation, chronic kidney disease and prostate cancer, as predicted by host genetics, had potential causal effects on the abundance of some specific gut microbiota. For example, atrial fibrillation increased the abundance of Burkholderiales and Alcaligenaceae and decreased the abundance of Lachnobacterium, Bacteroides coprophilus, Barnesiellaceae, an undefined genus in the family Veillonellaceae and Mitsuokella. Further disease-microbiome feature analysis suggested that systemic lupus erythematosus and chronic myeloid leukaemia shared common gut microbiome features.

These results suggest that different complex human diseases share common and distinct gut microbiome features, which may help reshape our understanding of disease aetiology in humans.

Video Abstract video file.(41M, mp4)

Ever increasing evidence has suggested that the gut microbiome is involved in many physiological processes, such as energy harvesting, the immune response and neurological function [1–3]. With successes of investigation into the clinical application of faecal transplants, the modulation of the gut microbiome has emerged as a potential treatment option for some complex diseases, including inflammatory bowel disease and colorectal cancer [4, 5]. However, it is still unclear whether the gut microbiome has the potential to be clinically applied for the prevention or treatment of many other complex diseases. Therefore, it is important to clarify the bidirectional causal association between the gut microbiome and complex human diseases or traits.

In the present study, we performed a microbiome GWAS in a Chinese cohort, the Guangzhou Nutrition and Health Study (GNHS) [17], including 1475 participants. Subsequently, we applied a bidirectional MR method to explore the genetically predicted relationship between the gut microbiome and complex human diseases. To explore novel relationships among complex human diseases based on the gut microbiome, we investigated the shared and distinct gut microbiome features across diverse complex human diseases.

Our study was based on the GNHS, with 4048 participants (40–75 years old) living in the urban area of Guangzhou city recruited during 2008 and 2013 [17]. In the GNHS, stool samples were collected among 1937 participants during follow-up visits, among whom 1475 unrelated participants not taking antibiotics were included in our discovery microbiome GWAS. We then included an additional 199 participants with both genetic data and gut microbiome data as a replication cohort, which belonged to the control arm of a case-control study of hip fracture in Guangdong Province, China [18] (see also Fig. 1).

The heritability of alpha diversity ranged from 0.035 to 0.103 (SE: from 0.174 to 0.193, Supplementary Table S3). Significant heritability estimates were observed for several taxa (see also Fig. 2, Supplementary Table S3), with crude p values < 0.05. To further correct the multiple testing, we calculated the effective number of independent taxa in each taxonomic level (phylum level: 2.3, class level: 2.9, order level: 2.9, family level: 5.5, genus level: 5.6, species level: 3.2), as some taxa were highly correlated with each other. The results suggested that Desulfovibrionaceae and Odoribacter were heritable (p < 0.05/n, where n is the effective number of independent taxa). Notably, among the suggestively heritable taxa in our cohort [Paraprevotellaceae], Veillonellaceae, Desulfovibrionaceae, Pasteurellaceae, Odoribacter, Paraprevotella, Veillonella and Bifidobacterium had nominally significant heritability estimates in prior literature [7, 31–33].

We generated categorical variable enterotypes (Prevotella vs. Bacteroides) of the participants based on the genus-level relative abundance of the gut microbiome [34]. Thereafter, we performed a GWAS for enterotypes using a logistic regression model to explore potential associations between host genetics and enterotypes. However, we did not find any genome-wide significant loci (p < 5 × 10−8).

We subsequently performed a discovery GWAS for individual gut microbes in our own GNHS discovery dataset. For the taxa (n = 114) present in not fewer than 90% of participants, we carried out an analysis based on a log-normal model. For other taxa (n = 88) present in fewer than 90%, we transformed the absence/presence of the taxon into binary variables and used a logistic model to prevent zero inflation (Supplementary Table S1). For all the gut microbiome taxa, the significance threshold was defined as 5 × 10−8 in the discovery stage. We found that 6 taxa were associated with host genetic variants in the discovery cohort (p < 5 × 10−8/n, where n is the effective number of independent taxa in each taxonomic level, Supplementary Table S5); however, these associations were not significant (p > 0.05) in the replication cohort. We then took the genetic loci reported to be associated with individual taxa in prior studies [7, 8, 13, 37] for replication in our GNHS dataset. Although none of the associations of these genetic variants with taxa survived the Bonferroni correction (p < 1 × 10−4), we found that STPG2-rs4699323 had a nominally significant association (p < 0.05) with Clostridiales (Beta: − 0.131 [95% CI − 0.233, − 0.029], p = 0.012; Supplementary Table S6). We then used a threshold of p < 5 × 10−5 at the discovery GWAS stage to incorporate additional genetic variants that might explain a larger proportion of heritability for taxa, and based on this, we constructed a polygenic score for each taxon in the replication. We found that the polygenic scores were significantly associated with 5 taxa, including Saccharibacteria (also known as TM7 phylum), Clostridiaceae, Comamonadaceae, Klebsiella and Desulfovibrio d168, in the replication set (p < 0.05, Methods, see also Supplementary Figure S1, Supplementary Table S9).

While the associations of the microbiome with complex diseases and traits have been widely reported [38], the genetic correlation between the gut microbiome and traits of interest is less clear. Therefore, we applied bivariate GREML analysis to address this question. The traits included BMI, fasting blood sugar (FBS), glycosylated haemoglobin (HbA1c), systolic blood pressure (SBP), diastolic blood pressure (DBP), high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C), low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), total cholesterol (TC) and triglyceride (TG), none of which could pass Bonferroni correction. HDL-C was the only trait that had nominal genetic correlation (p < 0.05) with gut microbes (specifically, Desulfovibrionaceae and [Prevotella], Supplementary Table S4).

Using genetic-variant-composed polygenic scores as genetic instruments, we performed MR analysis to assess the putative causal effect of the microbiome (Saccharibacteria, Clostridiaceae, Comamonadaceae, Klebsiella and Desulfovibrio d168) on complex human diseases or traits. The inverse variance weighted (IVW) method was used for the MR analysis, while the other three methods (weighted median, MR-Egger and MR-PRESSO) were applied to confirm the robustness of the results. Horizontal pleiotropy was assessed using the MR-PRESSO global test and MR-Egger regression. For the analysis of the gut microbiome on complex traits, we downloaded publicly available GWAS summary statistics of complex traits (n = 58) and diseases (type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), atrial fibrillation (AF), colorectal cancer (CRC) and rheumatoid arthritis (RA)) reported by BioBank Japan [19–24]. The results suggested that Saccharibacteria (per 1-SD higher in the log-transformed abundance) could potentially decrease the concentration of serum creatinine (− 0.011 [95% CI − 0.019, − 0.003], p = 0.007) and increase the estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) (0.012 [95% CI 0.004, 0.020], p = 0.003, Supplementary Table S10), which might help improve renal function. We did not find evidence of pleiotropic effects: genetic variants associated with Saccharibacteria were not associated with any of the above traits (58 complex traits and 4 disease outcomes, p < 0.05/62). These taxa were not causally associated with other complex diseases or traits in our MR analyses, which might be due to the limited genetic instruments discovered in our present study.

We subsequently performed a reverse MR analysis to assess the potential causal effect of complex human diseases on gut microbiome features. For the reverse MR analyses, the diseases of interest included T2DM, AF, coronary artery disease (CAD), chronic kidney disease (CKD), Alzheimer’s disease (AD), CRC and prostatic cancer (PCa), and their instrumental variables for the MR analysis were based on previous large-scale GWASs in East Asians [19, 25–30]. The results suggested that AF and CKD were causally associated with the gut microbiome (see also Fig.
3a, b, Supplementary Table S11). Specifically, genetically predicted higher risk of AF (per log odds) was associated with a lower abundance of Lachnobacterium (Beta: − 0.078 [95% CI − 0.148, − 0.006], p = 0.034), Bacteroides coprophilus (Beta: − 0.113 [95% CI − 0.184, − 0.041], p = 0.002), Barnesiellaceae (odds ratio: 0.818 [95% CI 0.686, 0.976], p = 0.026), an undefined genus in the family Veillonellaceae (odds ratio: 0.801 [95% CI 0.669, 0.960], p = 0.017) and Mitsuokella (odds ratio: 0.657 [95% CI 0.496, 0.870], p = 0.003), and higher abundance of Burkholderiales (Beta: 0.079 [95% CI 0.009, 0.150], p = 0.027) and Alcaligenaceae (Beta: 0.082 [95% CI 0.012, 0.152], p = 0.022). Additionally, genetically predicted higher risk of CKD could increase Anaerostipes (Beta: 0.291 [95% CI 0.057, 0.524], p = 0.015) abundance, and a higher risk of PCa could decrease [Prevotella] (odds ratio: − 0.758 [95% CI − 1.354, − 0.162], p = 0.013).

To further investigate the potential complex diseases that may be correlated with the taxa affected by AF, we applied Phylogenetic Investigation of Communities by Reconstruction of Unobserved States (PICRUSt) to predict the disease pathway abundance [39]. We used Spearman’s rank-order correlation to test whether the relative abundances of predicted diseases based on PICRUSt were associated with the aforementioned AF-associated taxa (see also Supplementary Figure S2, Supplementary Table S12). The heatmap indicated that cancers and neurodegenerative diseases, including Parkinson’s disease (PD), AD, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and AF, were correlated with similar gut microbiomes. Although the association among these diseases is highly supported by previous studies [40–42], no study has compared common gut microbiome features across these different diseases.

To validate whether the disease-related gut microbiome features annotated by KEGG would be associated with the risk of the disease in a real-world community-based cohort, we used T2DM as an example, examining the association of predicted T2DM-related microbiome features with T2DM risk in our GNHS cohort. We constructed a microbiome risk score (MRS) based on 16 selected taxa with predicted correlation coefficients with T2DM greater than 0.2. A logistic regression model was used to examine the association between MRS and T2DM risk in GNHS (n = 1886, with 217 T2DM cases). The results showed that MRS was positively associated with the risk of T2DM (odds ratio: 1.176 [95% CI 1.114, 1.244], p = 8.75 × 10−9).

Our study is among the first to investigate host genetics-gut microbiome associations in East Asian populations and reveals that several microbiome species (e.g., Saccharibacteria and Klebsiella) are influenced by host genetics. We found that Saccharibacteria might causally improve renal function by affecting renal function biomarkers (i.e., creatinine and eGFR). On the other hand, complex diseases such as atrial fibrillation, chronic kidney disease and prostate cancer have potential causal effects on the gut microbiome. More interestingly, our results indicated that different complex diseases may be mechanistically correlated by sharing common gut microbiome features but also maintaining their own distinct microbiome features.

We acknowledge several limitations of our study. First, the participants were of East Asian ancestry; thus, factors such as ethnic differences and gene-environment interactions might make it difficult to generalize the prior results to our study and extrapolate our results to different ethnic populations. Second, although our analysis included participants with the identical by descent (IBD) < 0.185, the vertical transmission of the microbiome from parent to offspring might still partially affect the SNP-based heritability estimates and polygenic scores [32, 57]. Third, genetic factors could explain only a small proportion of the variance in gut microbiome features; thus, the power to detect the causal relationship was limited. Therefore, large-scale studies are warranted to reveal potential relationships between the gut microbiome and complex traits.

In summary, we reveal some causal relationships between the gut microbiome and complex human diseases or traits. The disease and gut microbiome feature analysis revealed novel relationships among complex human diseases, which may help reshape our understanding of disease aetiology and provide some clues for extending the clinical indications of existing drugs for different diseases.

Our study was based on the Guangzhou Nutrition and Health Study (GNHS), with 4048 participants (40–75 years old) living in the urban area of Guangzhou city recruited during 2008 and 2013 [17]. We followed up with participants every 3 years. In the GNHS, stool samples were collected from 1937 participants during follow-up visits. Among those with stool samples, 1717 participants had genetic data, and IBD for 1475 participants was less than 0.185.

Blood samples of all participants were collected after overnight fasting, and the buffy coat was separated from whole blood and stored at − 80°C. Stool samples were collected during the on-site visit of the participants at Sun Yat-sen University. All samples were manually stirred, separated into tubes and stored at − 80 °C within 4 h.

For both the discovery and replication cohorts, DNA was extracted from leukocytes using the TIANamp® Blood DNA Kit (DP348, TianGen Biotech Co, Ltd., China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. DNA concentrations were determined using the Qubit quantification system (Thermo Scientific, Wilmington, DE, USA). Extracted DNA was stored at − 80 °C. Genotyping was carried out with Illumina ASA-750K arrays. Quality control and relatedness filters were performed by PLINK1.9 [58]. Individuals with a high or low proportion of heterozygous genotypes (outliers defined as 3 standard deviations) were excluded [59]. Individuals who had different ancestries (the first two principal components ± 5 standard deviations from the mean) or related individuals (IBD > 0.185) were excluded [59]. Variants were mapped to the 1000 Genomes Phase 3 v5 by SHAPEIT [60, 61], and then we conducted genome-wide genotype imputation with the 1000 Genomes Phase 3 v5 reference panel by Minimac3 [62, 63]. Genetic variants with imputation accuracy RSQR > 0.3 and MAF > 0.05 were included in our analysis. We used the Pan-Asian reference panel, consisting of 502 participants, and SNP2HLA v1.0.3 to impute the HLA region [64–66].

Microbial DNA was extracted from faecal samples using the QIAamp® DNA Stool Mini Kit per the manufacturer’s instructions. DNA concentrations were determined using the Qubit quantification system. The V3–V4 region of the 16S rRNA gene was amplified from genomic DNA using primers 341F (CCTACGGGNGGCWGCAG) and 805R (GACTACHVGGGTATCTAATCC). At the step of amplicon generation, 2 μL sterile water was used as negative controls in the PCR reaction system. At the subsequent step of sequencing, no sequencing negative controls were included, since no contamination of PCR products was observed. The pooled amplicons were sequenced using MiSeq Reagent Kits v2 on the Illumina MiSeq System with 2 × 250 bp pair-end sequencing.

Fastq files were demultiplexed by MiSeq Controller Software. Ultra-fast sequence analysis (USEARCH) was performed to trim the sequence for amplification primers, diversity spacers, sequencing adapters and merged paired-end reads [67]. The low-quality reads (Phred quality scores ≤ 30) were removed. Operational taxonomic units (OTUs) were clustered based on 97% similarity using UPARSE [68]. We removed the OTUs present only in one sample. OTUs were annotated with Greengenes 13_8 (https://greengenes.secondgenome.com/) [69]. After randomly selecting 10000 reads for each sample, Quantitative Insights into Microbial Ecology (QIIME) software version 1.9.0 was used to calculate alpha diversity (Shannon diversity index, Chao1 diversity indices and the observed OTU index and phylogenetic diversity) based on the rarefied OTU counts [70].

We used the GREML method in GCTA to estimate the proportion of variance explained by all SNPs [71]. The taxa were divided into two groups based on whether the taxa were present in ninety percent of participants. Our model was adjusted for age and sex. The power of GREML analysis was calculated with the GCTA power calculator [72].

For each of the GNHS participants and the replication cohort, we clustered participants based on genus-level relative abundance, estimating the JSD distance and PAM clustering algorithm, and then we defined two enterotypes according to the Calinski-Harabasz index [34, 73]. We calculated the genetic principal components of ancestry from genome-wide genetic variants to estimate the population structure. PLINK 1.9 was used to perform a logistic regression model for enterotypes and taxa present in fewer than ninety percent, adjusted for age, sex, sequencing batch and the first five genetic principal components of ancestry.

Alpha diversity was calculated after randomly sampling 10,000 reads per sample. For the taxa present in no fewer than 90% of participants and alpha diversity, we used Z-score normalization to transform the distribution and carried out analysis based on a log-normal model. A mixed linear model-based association (MLMA) test in GCTA was used to assess the association, fitting the first five genetic principal components of ancestry, age, sex and sequencing batch as fixed effects and the effects of all the SNPs as random effects [74–76]. For other taxa present in fewer than 90% of participants, we transformed the absence/presence of the taxon into binary variables and used PLINK1.9 to perform a logistic model, adjusted for the first five genetic principal components of ancestry, age, sex and sequencing batch. For all the gut microbiome features, the significance threshold was defined as 5 × 10−8/n (n is the effective number of independent taxa in each taxonomic level) in the discovery stage. QUANTO software was used for power calculations (http://biostats.usc.edu/Quanto.html). We estimated genomic inflation factors with LDSC v1.0.1 at the local server [77].

We used GCTA to perform a bivariate GREML analysis to estimate the genetic correlation between the gut microbiome and traits in GNHS participants [74, 78]. The gut microbiome was divided into two groups according to the previous description. We used continuous variables for taxa present in no fewer than 90% of participants. For taxa present in fewer than 90% of participants, we used binary variables according to the absence/presence of taxa. This analysis included traits such as BMI, FBS, HbA1c, SBP, DBP, HDL-C, LDL-C, TC and TG. The power of bivariate GREML analysis was calculated with the GCTA power calculator [72].

We selected lead SNPs using PLINK v1.9 with the ‘—clump’ command to clump SNPs with a p value < 5 × 10−5 and r2 < 0.1 within 0.1 cM. We used beta coefficients as the weight to construct polygenic scores for taxa and alpha diversity. For alpha diversity and taxa present in no fewer than 90% of participants, we constructed weighted polygenic scores and performed the analysis on a general linear model with a negative binomial distribution to test for association between the polygenic scores and taxa, adjusted for the first five genetic principal components of ancestry, age, sex and sequencing batch. We used weighted polygenic scores and logistic regression to the absence/presence taxa, adjusted for the same covariates as in the above analysis. Taxa with significance (p < 0.05) in the replication cohort were included for further analysis.

As some taxa were correlated with each other, we used an eigendecomposition analysis to calculate the effective number of independent taxa for each taxonomic level [79, 80]. Matrix M is an m × n matrix, where m is the number of participants and n is the number of total taxa in the corresponding taxonomic level. Matrix A is the variance-covariance matrix of matrix M. P is the matrix of eigenvectors. diag{λ1, λ2, ⋯, λn} is the diagonal matrix composed of the ordered eigenvalues, which can be calculated as

The effective number of independent taxa can be calculated as

In the analysis of the potential causal effect of gut microbiome features on diseases, we used independent genetic variants (selected as part of the polygenic score analysis) as the instrumental variables. For each trait, we excluded instrumental variables that showed a significant association with the trait (p < 0.05/n, where n is number of independent genetic variants). In the analysis of the potential causal effect of diseases on gut microbiome features, we selected genetic variants that were replicated in East Asian populations as instrumental variables. As all instrumental variables were from East Asian populations, we chose independent genetic variants (r2 < 0.1) based on the GNHS cohort. We identified the best proxy (r2 > 0.9) based on the GNHS cohort or discarded the variant if no proxy was available. We used the inverse variance weighted (IVW) method to estimate the effect size. To confirm the robustness of the results, we performed three other MR methods, including weighted median, MR-Egger and MR-PRESSO [81–83]. To assess the presence of horizontal pleiotropy, we performed the MR-PRESSO global test and MR-Egger regression. The magnitude of the effect of the gut microbiome on traits was dependent on the units of traits (Supplementary Table S1). The results of the effects of complex human diseases on the absence/presence of specific gut microbes are presented as the risk of the presence (vs. absence) of the microbe per the log odds difference of the disease. The results of the effects of diseases on other gut microbes were presented as changes in the abundance of taxa (1-SD of log transformed) per the log odds difference of the respective disease.

The statistical significance of the effects of the gut microbiome on traits and diseases was defined as p < 0.0008 (0.05/62). In addition, the statistical significance of the effects of diseases on gut microbiome features was defined as p < 0.05/n (where n is the effective number of independent taxa on the corresponding taxonomic level). The results that could not pass Bonferroni adjustment but p < 0.05 in all four MR methods were considered potential causal relationships. We performed MR analyses with R v3.5.3.

We used OTUs by QIIME and annotated the variation of functional genes with Phylogenetic Investigation of Communities by Reconstruction of Unobserved States (PICRUSt) [39]. The pathways and diseases were annotated using KEGG [84–86]. We used Spearman’s rank-order correlation to investigate the association of the predicted pathway or disease abundance with AF-associated taxa and genus-level taxa. In the heatmap, diseases were clustered with the ‘hcluster’ function in R. To test whether the non-normalized pathway or disease abundance were associated with each other, we used SPIEC-EASI to test the interaction relationship and then used Cytoscape v3.7.2 to visualize the interaction network [87, 88].

The microbiome risk score was constructed to validate the accuracy of the association between the predicted disease-related gut microbiome features and the corresponding disease. As we have a large sample size for T2DM cases (n = 217 cases) in our cohort, we constructed a microbiome risk score of T2DM as an example. We used Spearman’s rank-order correlation to select taxa with an absolute value of correlation coefficient higher than 0.2. The score for each taxon abundance in the < 5% quantile in our study was defined as 0. For those above 5%, the score for each taxon showing an inverse association with T2DM was defined as − 1; the score for each taxon showing a positive association with T2DM was defined as 1. We then summed values from all taxa. We selected a logistic regression model to estimate the association of the MRS with T2DM risk and a linear model to estimate the association of the MRS with the continuous variables, adjusted for age, sex, dietary energy intake, alcohol intake and BMI at the time of sample collection.

The clustering analysis was carried out with ‘cluster’ and ‘factoextra’ for plot in R. We performed the PAM algorithm based on the predicted abundance of diseases or the average relative abundance after Z-score normalization [89]. The PAM algorithm searches k medoids among the observations and then finds the nearest medoids to minimize the dissimilarity among clusters [90]. Given a set of objects x = (x1, x2, …, xn), the dissimilarity between objects xi and xj is denoted by d(i, j). The assignment of object i to the representative object j is denoted by zij. zij is a binary variable and is 1 if object i belongs to the cluster of the representative object j. The function to minimize the model is given by

The letters a, b, c and d represent the numbers of S1, S2, S3 and S4, respectively. The Jaccard similarity coefficient can be calculated by the following formula:



Publisher’s Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Fengzhe Xu and Yuanqing Fu contributed equally to the work.

Supplementary information accompanies this paper at 10.1186/s40168-020-00923-9.

