Diet, obesity, and the gut microbiome as determinants modulating metabolic outcomes in a non-human primate model

The objective of this study was to increase understanding of the complex interactions between diet, obesity, and the gut microbiome of adult female non-human primates (NHPs). Subjects consumed either a Western (n=15) or Mediterranean (n=14) diet designed to represent human dietary patterns for 31 months. Body composition was determined using CT, fecal samples were collected, and shotgun metagenomic sequencing was performed. Gut microbiome results were grouped by diet and adiposity.

Diet was the main contributor to gut microbiome bacterial diversity. Adiposity within each diet was associated with subtle shifts in the proportional abundance of several taxa. Mediterranean diet-fed NHPs with lower body fat had a greater proportion of Lactobacillus animalis than their higher body fat counterparts. Higher body fat Western diet-fed NHPs had more Ruminococcus champaneliensis and less Bacteroides uniformis than their low body fat counterparts. Western diet-fed NHPs had significantly higher levels of Prevotella copri than Mediterranean diet NHPs. Western diet-fed subjects were stratified by P. copri abundance (P. copriHIGH versus P. copriLOW), which was not associated with adiposity. Overall, Western diet-fed animals in the P. copriHIGH group showed greater proportional abundance of B. ovatus, B. faecis, P. stercorea, P. brevis, and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii than those in the Western P. copriLOW group. Western diet P. copriLOW subjects had a greater proportion of Eubacterium siraeum. E. siraeum negatively correlated with P. copri proportional abundance regardless of dietary consumption. In the Western diet group, Shannon diversity was significantly higher in P. copriLOW when compared to P. copriHIGH subjects. Furthermore, gut E. siraeum abundance positively correlated with HDL plasma cholesterol indicating that those in the P. copriLOW population may represent a more metabolically healthy population. Untargeted metabolomics on urine and plasma from Western diet-fed P. copriHIGH and P. copriLOW subjects suggest early kidney dysfunction in Western diet-fed P. copriHIGH subjects.

In summary, the data indicate diet to be the major influencer of gut bacterial diversity. However, diet and adiposity must be considered together when analyzing changes in abundance of specific bacterial taxa. Interestingly, P. copri appears to mediate metabolic dysfunction in Western diet-fed NHPs.

Video abstract video file.(35M, mp4)

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s40168-021-01069-y.

Gut microbiome dysbiosis is associated with many adverse health outcomes including multiple sclerosis, cancer, diabetes (types 1 and 2), asthma, allergies, inflammatory bowel disease, obesity, and autism [1–6]. Composition of the gut microbiome is influenced by several factors including maternal delivery method, ethnicity, geography, and lifestyle [7]. Of the multiple factors associated with the term “lifestyle,” diet in particular has a major influence on the microbial composition within the gut. Bacterial abundance is modulated by dietary macronutrient consumption, including proteins, carbohydrates, and fats [6, 8, 9]. Poor diet and obesity often are linked, making it difficult to determine which variable is the major driver of the gut microbiome composition.

This study examines the impact of a translationally relevant humanized Western and Mediterranean dietary patterns on the gut microbiota, and association with obesity, in female middle-aged cynomolgous macaques. Application of these diets has been shown to significantly influence the gut populations of cynomolgous macaques [18]. Mediterranean diet consumption increased the genera Lactobacillus, Clostridium, Faecalibacterium, and Oscillospira while decreasing Ruminococcus and Coprococcus representation [18]. However, the aforementioned report relied on 16S rRNA sequencing. In the study reported here, we instead utilize metagenomic sequencing, the methodology used in Human Microbiome Project [21]. 16S sequencing is useful in studies where many samples are available, but has poor resolution compared to metagenomics [22]. Shotgun metagenomic sequencing offers enhanced functional and taxonomic resolution to allow identification of specific bacterial species and strains [21–23]. This has allowed us to report bacterial species as well as virulence factor clusters modulated by dietary exposure in cynomolgous macaques, improving understanding of the similarities and differences between NHPs and humans with the respect to influence of diet on the gut microbiome. In addition, we assessed complete metabolic profiling data for each of the animals to correlate gut microbiota populations with body weight (BW), body adiposity, plasma cholesterol levels, insulin tolerance testing, and metabolite signatures in plasma or urine. This enabled the identification of specific microbes that may potentially influence metabolic syndrome development.

Adult female Macaca fascicularis were obtained (SNBL USA, Ltd., Alice, Texas) and housed in groups of 4 animals per pen with daylight exposure on a 12/12 light/dark cycle. Animals were aged at study initiation by dentition to be approximately 8.8 years old. The subjects were habituated to their social groups and were metabolically characterized for group randomization during a 7-month baseline phase while consuming standard monkey chow (monkey diet 5037/5038; LabDiet, St. Louis, Missouri). Animal groups were randomized so that no differences in age, body weight (BW), body mass index (BMI), or plasma triglyceride concentrations were observed. No gastrointestinal differences or other health concerns were observed at baseline before animals were randomized to dietary pattern. Animals were then assigned to a dietary pattern (Western n=21 or Mediterranean n=17) for 31 months. All animal manipulations were performed according to the guidelines of state and federal laws, the US Department of Health and Human Services, and the Animal Care and Use Committee of Wake Forest University School of Medicine.

Experimental diets were formulated to be isocaloric with respect to protein, fat, carbohydrates, and cholesterol content. Experimental diets translationally represent humanized Western and Mediterranean dietary patterns. For further details on diet formulation and ingredients, see Supplemental Table 1 and references [24, 25].

Metabolic parameters were measured in each subject and previously reported [24, 25]. Briefly, BW (kg) and body length (BL, m) were measured throughout the study. BMI was calculated as BW/(BL)2. BW and BMI reported in Table
1 were measured at the endpoint of the dietary intervention study (31 months) in all subjects and subjects were categorized into tertiles by BMI. For this particular analysis, only animals classified in the lowest (N=14) or highest (N=15) tertiles underwent microbiome analysis and comprise the sample included in this report. Body composition was measured by computed tomography in anesthetized subjects during various intervals throughout the study. Body fat composition reported in Table
1 was measured at month 27 of the treatment phase. The fat compartment was defined as tissue with attenuation between −190 and −30 Hounsfield units, and total fat was then determined across the whole body. Intravenous glucose tolerance tests with insulin responses were performed during month 26 of the treatment phase as previously described [18]. In brief, subjects were fasted for 18 h, sedated with ketamine HCl (15 mg/kg), and dosed with 500 mg/kg dextrose. Blood samples were taken at 0, 5, 10, 20, 30, 40, and 60 min. Insulin area under the curve (AUC) was calculated using insulin responses between 10 and 40 min. Insulin was determined using a commercial enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA; Mercodia, Uppsala, Sweden).

Total plasma cholesterol (TPC) and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) were measured at 24 months from plasma collected after an 18 h fast. TPC and HDL-C levels were determined by the Wake Forest Comparative Medicine Clinical Chemistry and Endocrinology Laboratory using reagents (ACE cholesterol and ACE HDL-C standards) and instrumentation (ACE ALERA auto analyzer) from Alfa Wasserman Diagnostic Technologies (West Caldwell, NJ). TPC and HDL-C were standardized to calibrated controls from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention/National Institutes of Health Lipid Standardization Program [26]. Blood samples for cortisol assay were drawn in the morning within 9 min of staff entering NHP housing, and serum was assayed with RIA kits from DiaSource (IBL America, Minneapolis, MN).

Urine and fecal samples were collected after 26 months of dietary treatments. Animals were moved to metabolic cages with wire bottoms, and sample cups were checked every 15 min for feces. Fecal samples were immediately placed in sterile tubes under aseptic conditions and stored at −80 °C until further processing. As soon as adequate urine samples were available, they were collected, and stored at −80 °C until analysis.

DNA was isolated from 100 mg of frozen feces using the Qiagen DNeasy PowerSoil Pro kit (Valencia, CA), and metagenomic sequencing was performed by CosmosID Inc. (Rockville, MD). In brief, DNA libraries were prepared using the Illumina Nextera XT library preparation kit (San Diego, CA), with a modified protocol [27, 28]. Library quantity was assessed with a Qubit Fluorometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Wilmington, DE). Libraries were then sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq platform to generate 150-bp paired-ends reads.

Unassembled sequencing reads (≥12M read depth; see Supplemental Figure S1 for individual sample read statistics) were analyzed using the CosmosID bioinformatics platform described elsewhere [29–32] for multi-kingdom microbiome analysis, profiling of antibiotic resistance and virulence genes, and quantification of microbial relative abundance. Briefly, the system utilizes curated genome databases and a high-performance data-mining algorithm that rapidly disambiguates hundreds of millions of metagenomic sequence reads into the discrete microorganisms engendering the particular sequences. CosmosID bioinformatics utilizes high performance data mining algorithms and highly curated dynamic comparator databases (GenBook®). GenBook® comprises 150,000+ bacteria, viruses, fungi and protist genomes, and gene sequences. The GenBook database is organized as phylogenetic tree and comprised of libraries of hundreds of millions of marker sequences, representing both coding and noncoding sequences shared or uniquely identified across different taxa and/or distinct nodes of phylogenetic trees. Comparative metagenomic analyses (principal component analysis, double hierarchical clustering, centroid classification, and other statistical analyses) were done to determine temporal changes, geographical diversity, and shifts in diversity correlated with treatment and to differentiate datasets of the different cohorts. Monkey group housing (pen effect) had no significant effect on microbiota populations (Supplemental Figure S2).

Untargeted metabolomics from urine and plasma samples collected at 26 months were performed by Metabolon (Raleigh, NC) as previously described [24]. In brief, all experiments used a Waters ACQUITY ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) and a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive high resolution/accurate mass spectrometer interfaced with a heated electrospray ionization (HESI-II) source and Orbitrap mass analyzer operated at 35,000 mass resolution. The scan range varied slightly between methods but covered 70-1000 m/z. Raw data were extracted, peak- identified, and processed for quality control using Metabolon’s hardware and software. Compounds were identified by comparison to library entries of purified standards or recurrent unknown entities. Peaks were quantified using area-under-the-curve. The informatics consisted of the Laboratory Information Management System (LIMS), the data extraction and peak-identification software, data processing tools for quality control and compound identification, and a collection of information interpretation and visualization tools for use by data analysts. The hardware and software foundations for these components were the LAN backbone, and a database server running Oracle 10.2.1.1 Enterprise Edition. Values were then log transformed, and missing values, if any, were imputed with the minimum observed value for each compound.

Metabolic parameters were summarized using means and standard deviations. Microbiome diversity and bacterial populations were compared by diet group using two group t tests allowing for unequal variance using the Satterthwaite method for degrees of freedom. Principal coordinates analysis (PCoA) of bacterial beta diversity based on the Bray-Curtis dissimilarity matrix using relative abundance was used to distinguish groups. Diversity analyses were performed using species taxonomy level. Comparisons by diet and body weight group were assessed by two-way ANOVA of diet, group, and their interaction, estimating different variance components by diet and group; we used linear contrasts to make pairwise comparisons within diet group if the interaction p value was <0.10. Within the Western diet group, animals were split into P. copriLOW and P. copriHIGH groups based on whether they were below the median, and Welch’s two-sample t test was used to compare microbiota and metabolites shifts between Western diet P. copriHIGH and Western diet P. copriLOW experimental groups. Correlations between gut microbial populations and metabolic parameters were summarized by Pearson correlation and expressed as r. A p value of p<0.05 was considered statistically significant in all analyses with the exception of the evaluation of diet × group interaction in the two-way ANOVA which used alpha=0.10.

Western and Mediterranean dietary pattern drives gut microbiome populations. While dietary pattern consumption had no significant effects on bacterial richness (Choa1; Fig.
1a), subjects fed a Mediterranean diet displayed higher microbial diversity as indicated by Simpson index (Fig.
1b) and Shannon diversity score (Fig.
1c). PCoA of gut microbial populations by relative abundance indicates that subjects separate by dietary pattern consumption (Fig.
1d). The bulk of the microbial biomass at the phyla level are derived from Bacteroidetes (20-40%), Firmicutes (40%), and Proteobacteria (15-30%). Proportional abundance of each phylum within each animal is shown as bar graph (Fig.
1e). Consumption of a Western diet significantly elevated Bacteroidetes abundance (Fig.
1f), but had no effect on Firmicutes populations (Fig.
1g). Mediterranean diet-fed subjects displayed increased Proteobacteria abundance when compared with Western diet-fed animals (Fig.
1h).

Gut microbiota populations correlate with metabolic parameters. Regardless of dietary pattern consumption, certain gut microbiota populations correlated with plasma cortisol levels; gut Ruminococcus champanellensis positively correlated with plasma cortisol (Fig.
7a) and with percent body fat composition (Fig.
7c), while E. hallii abundance negatively correlated with plasma cortisol (Fig.
7b). Furthermore, we observed L. animalis abundance negatively correlated with percent body fat composition (Fig.
7d) and gut E. siraeum positively correlated with plasma HDL levels (Fig.
7e).

Our data indicates that diet composition impacts gut microbiota structure and that a Mediterranean diet pattern is associated with increased gut bacterial diversity in female cynomolgous macaques. In accordance with human diet studies in which subjects with high adherence to a Mediterranean diet display elevated Proteobacteria populations [33], Mediterranean diet-fed NHPs also show increased Proteobacteria phyla proportional abundance in response to this diet. While NHPs have similar gut microbiota populations in comparison to humans [34] and respond to translationally relevant diets concordantly in regards to alpha diversity, the response to Western diet at the phyla level appears to differ. In humans, consumption of high fat animal-based Westernized diet leads to decreased Bacteroidetes: Firmicutes ratio, mainly due to enrichment of Firmicutes. We confirmed previous results from 16S sequencing data demonstrating that Western diet-fed NHPs displayed increased proportional abundance of Bacteroidetes phylum with no significant shifts in Firmicutes populations [18]. Consumption of a Western-like diet in the African green monkey led to a similar outcome, although important to note that this study relied on 16S sequencing and was unable to identify species level classifications [35]. The elevated Bacteroidetes abundance observed in the NHPs is driven by an enrichment in P. copri. Gut P. copri displays an interesting case of duality in human health and disease. Non-westernized lifestyle is associated with increased gut P. copri abundance [36]. Literature strongly supports the association of gut P. copri abundance with improved glucose and insulin tolerance when diets are also fiber rich [37, 38]. On the other hand, in studies from Westernized populations Prevotella dominated enterotypes (in particular P. copri) have been linked with autoimmune disease, new onset rheumatoid arthritis, hypertension, and diabetes [39–42]. Taken together, these data suggest that any potential health benefits from P. copri could be dependent on host diet background.

It is important to note several key limitations of our current study. This study only includes female NHP; sex differences may exist impacting dietary influences on the gut microbiome and metabolic outcomes in males. Baseline fecal samples were not collected during the metabolic characterization phase while the NHP were on standard monkey chow. Therefore, the data we show in this study does not accurately reflect a response to diet, but reports metabolic and microbiome patterns associated with dietary pattern consumption.

In conclusion, our study demonstrated several similarities and key differences in the gut microbiome mediated by human translationally relevant diet administration. However, the key difference (stimulation of P. copri by Western diet administration) may represent a potential model to elucidate signaling differences observed in human Westernized populations with gut P. copri associations with several disease states. Furthermore, our metabolomic data indicates potential deleterious metabolite regulation in the urine and plasma of P. copriHIGH Western diet-fed subjects, suggesting that the P. copriHIGH enterotype in subjects eating a Westernized diet may potentiate the development of metabolic disease.



Publisher’s Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

