Dynamic Colonization of Microbes and Their Functions after Fecal Microbiota Transplantation for Inflammatory Bowel Disease



For fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) to be successful in immune diseases like inflammatory bowel disease, it is assumed that therapeutic microbes and their beneficial functions and immune interactions must colonize a recipient patient and persist in sufficient quantity and for a sufficient period of time to produce a clinical benefit. Few studies, however, have comprehensively profiled the colonization and persistence of transferred microbes along with the transfer of their microbial functions and interactions with the host immune system. Using 16S, metagenomic, and immunoglobulin A (IgA) sequencing, we analyzed hundreds of longitudinal microbiome samples from a randomized controlled trial of 12 patients with ulcerative colitis who received fecal transplant or placebo for 12 weeks. We uncovered diverse competitive dynamics among donor and patient strains, showing that persistence of transferred microbes is far from static. Indeed, one patient experienced a dramatic loss of donor bacteria 10 weeks into the trial, coinciding with a bloom of pathogenic bacteria and worsening symptoms. We evaluated the transfer of microbial functions, including desired ones, such as butyrate production, and unintended ones, such as antibiotic resistance. By profiling bacteria coated with IgA, we identified bacteria associated with inflammation and found that microbial interactions with the host immune system can be transferred across people, which could play a role in gut microbiome therapeutics for immune-related diseases. Our findings shed light on the colonization dynamics of gut microbes and their functions in the context of FMT to treat a complex disease—information that may provide a foundation for developing more-targeted therapeutics.

Buoyed by early success in recurrent Clostridium difficile infections (1, 2), researchers are exploring whether fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT)—the transfer of entire fecal microbial communities from a healthy donor to a sick patient—can treat other microbiome-associated conditions. One of the most promising candidates is inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), a chronic condition characterized by periods of relapse (i.e., “flares”) and remission, which suggests that longitudinal dynamics are key to understanding and treating the disease (3). Compared with healthy individuals, patients suffering from IBD (ulcerative colitis or Crohn’s disease) have distinct gut microbial communities (4, 5). Thus, it has been hypothesized that manipulation of the gut microbiome and its interactions with the gut immune system might improve patient symptoms. Clinical trials have demonstrated that FMT is moderately effective in patients with ulcerative colitis (UC), but the factors driving patient response or nonresponse remain unknown (6).

We comprehensively profiled the colonization dynamics of microbes and functions from a small randomized controlled clinical trial of 12 patients who had mild to moderate ulcerative colitis and were treated with FMT (24). By bringing together analysis of microbial taxa, strains, functions, and immune interaction in this focused clinical cohort, we sought to deeply understand colonization in a limited number of patients and reveal some of these dynamics in the context of a complex disease.

We obtained samples from a small clinical cohort recruited at the University of Vermont Medical Center (24). In brief, two fecal transplant donors were chosen for high stool butyrate content—measured by gas chromatography—because loss of butyrate-producing microbes has been associated with inflammation and IBD (25). After a course of broad-spectrum antibiotics (oral pills: 250 mg of ciprofloxacin twice daily and 500 mg of metronidazole three times daily for 7 days) and a standard bowel preparation, patients received colonoscopic delivery (120 ml at a concentration of 1 g of stool/2.5 ml in the cecum and terminal ileum), followed by 12 weeks of daily capsules, of either fecal transplant material (550 μl of FMT capsule or ∼0.5 g of stool from one of our two donors) or placebo (sham colonoscopic and capsule FMT designed to visually mimic FMT; summarized in Fig. 1a and Fig. S1 in the supplemental material; for details, see Crothers et al. [24]). The choice of antibiotic pretreatment with two transplant delivery methods was intended to maximize each patient’s exposure to donor material and to increase the likelihood that donor bacteria would successfully colonize their new host (24). A subset of fecal transplant recipients (n = 4) received capsule fecal transplant material from an alternate donor for 4 weeks in the middle of the clinical trial, after which they returned to taking material from their original donor (Fig. 1a), providing an opportunity to test whether a previously established microbial community could be infiltrated by new bacteria from low-dosage capsules. Near-weekly preserved stool samples were collected by mail from these patients during the trial and an 18-week follow-up. At four time points (baseline before antibiotics and 4, 12, and 18 weeks after fecal transplant), fresh stool samples were also collected during clinical check-ins from a subset of patients (n = 8, see the supplemental material).

We sequenced DNA from these stool samples at the Broad Institute (Cambridge, MA) using 16S ribosomal DNA (rDNA) sequencing and shotgun metagenomic sequencing, producing data sets comprising an average of ∼250,000 16S rDNA sequences and ∼30.5 million metagenomic DNA sequences per sample (see Table S1). (Table S1 and all other supplementary tables are available at https://github.com/nathanieldchu/uc_fmt/tree/master/supplemental_materials.) To identify the abundance of different amplicon sequence variants (ASVs, akin to a bacterial species), we processed the 16S rDNA sequences using QIIME 2 (26) and DADA2 (27). To track the abundance of bacterial species, we processed the metagenomic sequences using Metaphlan2 (28). We did not observe any significant differences in overall microbial diversity metrics between stool samples collected in the clinic versus by mail (see Fig. S1f) and further found that both 16S and metagenomic sequencing resulted in highly correlated data sets across samples (Mantel test using Spearman’s correlation: r = 0.837, P < 0.001).

Global diversity metrics indicated robust transfer and persistent colonization of donor bacteria in patients who received a fecal transplant. From our PCoA analysis of beta diversity, we found that each patient’s samples tended to cluster (permutational multivariate analysis of variance [PERMANOVA] pseudo-F = 9.55, P < 0.001), samples from both donors clustered together (PERMANOVA pseudo-F = 3.00, P < 0.001), and patient-to-patient differences drove most of the variance in both 16S and metagenomic analyses (Fig. 1b; see also Fig. S2a and b). The gut microbiomes of fecal transplant recipients clearly shifted toward the donor’s microbiome community during the trial, as indicated by the decreasing Bray-Curtis distance from donor samples; those of placebo-treated patients did not (Fig. 1c; see also Fig. S2d). This difference persisted for the ∼150-day trial period, although not for every transplant patient. Crothers et al. (24) categorized three patients receiving fecal transplants as “responders” because they showed consistent clinical, endoscopic and histologic evidence of disease improvement (Fig. 1; see also Table S6) and categorized the other patients as “nonresponders” (24). Although the clinical cohort was not large enough for robust analysis comparing these patient populations, we observed no qualitative difference in donor similarity between the groups (see Fig. S2h to m). Indeed, individual patients had divergent trajectories during the clinical trial, with many patients experiencing a strong shift in their gut microbiota in response to antibiotics, and then patients appeared to variously shift back to their initial community structure, shift toward the donors, or even settle in a new community composition (see Fig. S3).

Unlike previous studies, ours did not find greater alpha diversity in fecal transplant versus placebo recipients. Shannon index and richness in 16S and metagenomic data were similar in both treatment groups over the study period (Fig. 1d; see also Fig. S2e and f), as was the change in bacterial community from baseline samples, according to the Bray-Curtis distance (Fig. 1e; see also Fig. S2g). The similarities between these groups appear to be driven by sizable shifts in the microbiomes of placebo patients (Fig. 1e), which resulted in microbiome community shifts comparable to those of FMT recipients. These results contrast with multiple studies’ reports of increased diversity and change in gut microbiome composition in fecal transplant recipients compared with placebo recipients in diseases such as C. difficile infection (29, 30). Although it is possible that our cohort was too small for us to observe a significant difference between placebo and FMT patients, the results exemplify how FMT and even antibiotics can have varied effects in different diseases.

With such frequent sampling, we could next profile not only the microbial taxa that colonized transplant recipients but also their downstream dynamics, both of which likely underpin clinical response.

Patient FMT A provides an intriguing clinical case: a sharp decrease in transferred donor bacteria coincided with a bloom of E. coli and associated virulence factors in this patient’s gut (Fig. 2c). In fact, the data suggested that the loss of donor bacteria may have preceded the bloom. Furthermore, these changes appeared to track clinical outcomes (Fig. 2c). The patient reported feeling better during the early stages of treatment (week 4)—as measured by the standardized, clinically validated Inflammatory Bowel Disease Questionnaire (IBDQ) that summarizes the patient’s symptoms over four domains of functioning and well-being (33)—but later reported worsening of symptoms (a flare at week 12), which required administration of a steroid (prednisone) (Fig. 2c). In addition, other clinical measures taken only at the beginning and the end of the trial (Mayo score, UCEIS, histology, lactoferrin, and calprotectin) also indicated a deterioration of disease over the course of the trial (see Table S6). Although we can only speculate whether the Escherichia coli bloom or the symptomatic change was the cause or the effect of losing donor bacteria, this case exemplifies the variability of bacterial persistence after FMT. We acknowledge that a single clinical case does not necessarily reflect a broader pattern, but we speculate that perhaps monitoring persistence of colonizing donor bacteria may help predict FMT treatment outcomes.

By looking at the subset of patients who took capsules from an alternate donor partway through the study (Fig. 1a), we were able to ask whether changing donor material resulted in additional colonization by new microbes after a new gut microbiome had been established. Although the vast majority of newly colonized bacteria came from the original donor used for colonoscopic delivery and the first month of capsules, we were nonetheless able to identify evidence of novel bacteria colonizing from the alternate donor (see Fig. S4d). These results suggest that even after transplantation and establishment of a donor microbial community, UC patients remain receptive to further colonization and persistence of bacteria from additional donors.

We then sought to profile the dynamics of individual strains within bacterial species to understand how conspecific strains (strains of the same bacterial species) from the donor, patient, and environment compete and coexist in treated patients. Previous reports have demonstrated that recipient and donor strains of the same bacterial species can coexist within fecal transplant recipients. Our analysis of frequent longitudinal samples allowed us to ask how the dynamics of this coexistence unfold over time. In particular, we sought to determine whether donor strains could dominate over patient strains—which, because they are endogenous, may have a competitive advantage—and whether the competitive balance of strains changes over time.

Taken together, these results demonstrate not only that donor and recipient strains can coexist (32) but also that the balance of this coexistence changes over time. In many cases, donor strains were able to outcompete endogenous patient strains, but this dominance was dynamic, with donor and patient strains often competing with strains from unknown and possibly environmental sources later in the trial.

Beyond the microbes themselves, the functions those microbes perform in the gut ecosystem may be important to restoring gut health. Therefore, we tracked colonization by functional genes implicated in maintaining health. We observed the transfer from donor to patient of genes involved in complex carbohydrate metabolism (glycoside hydrolase, Fig. 4a; see also Fig. S6a), mucin digestion (Fig. 4b; see also Fig. S6b), and butyrate production (Fig. 4c; see also Fig. S6c), and many of these genes persisted in their new hosts. These transferred genes included genes from health-associated commensals, such as F. prausnitzii and Bacteroides (see Table S5) (25, 35). Like the microbes themselves, these functional genes were transferred at different rates and had variable dynamics across patients (Fig. 4), and these dynamics largely mirrored patterns of microbial colonization (Fig. 2).

Overall, fecal transplant recipients showed greater richness in glycoside hydrolase genes than did placebo-treated patients, suggesting increased capacity to digest dietary polysaccharides (Fig. 4f). On the other hand, fecal transplant recipients showed similar levels of butyrate biosynthesis (Fig. 4g) and mucin digestion genes (Fig. 4h). This, although donors were chosen for high butyrate production—reflected in high diversity of butyrate biosynthesis genes in donor samples (Fig. 4c, dashed lines)—fecal transplant did not result in wholesale transfer of these genes; transplant recipients had similar butyrate gene diversity compared with their baseline samples and with placebo-treated patients. Two fecal transplant recipients—but no placebo-treated patients—reached comparably high butyrate gene diversity, but these changes were temporary. Thus, fecal transplants can effectively transfer beneficial microbial functions across hosts but may not result in persistent colonization or an overall increase in the diversity of genes related to those functions.

Not all microbial functions transferring to fecal transplant recipients are beneficial. Although, clinically, fecal transplants can effectively clear patients of antibiotic-resistant infections, debate continues as to whether the therapy could introduce novel resistance genes, with negative clinical effects (15). We observed the transfer from donors to patients of numerous antibiotic resistance genes—including those for resistance to all major classes of antibiotics—and many of these genes were maintained for the full trial period (Fig. 4d; see also Fig. S6d, blue lines). Nevertheless, we found that the resulting diversity and abundance of antibiotic resistance genes in fecal transplant recipients did not exceed those in our healthy donors (Fig. 4i; see also Fig. S7a and b) and that transferred resistance genes were generally outnumbered by endogenous ones (Fig. 4d). Thus, although the transfer of resistance genes results unavoidably from the complexity of this therapy, no clinical or bioinformatic evidence indicates that fecal transplants increase the overall risk of antibiotic resistance. Indeed, many case reports suggest that FMT can help rid patients of antibiotic-resistant infections (36, 37).

Similar to antibiotic resistance, we observed the transfer of virulence factors. Despite a lower incidence of virulence factor genes in donors than in patients (Fig. 4j), we observed colonization and persistence of such genes, which made up a significant portion of the virulence factor pool (Fig. 4e; see also Fig. S6e, blue lines). Many patients exhibited an increase in the abundance of virulence factors during or shortly after antibiotics (see Fig. S6f). Two patients had an inordinate burden of virulence factors, including the patient FMT A, who had a bloom of E. coli, and patient placebo V (see Fig. S6g). Patient placebo V’s health declined during the trial (see Table S6), and this patient had one of the most dramatic microbial turnovers in response to antibiotics (see Fig. S8)—resulting in a microbiome dominated by newly acquired Proteobacteria and associated virulence factors from unknown sources (see Fig. S6h). In sum, although we observed the transfer and persistence of donor-derived virulence factors and antibiotic-resistance genes, these transfers were modest and often outweighed by the endogenous microbial community’s own virulence and resistance.

In the context of IBD, interaction with the host immune system is perhaps the most important microbial function. Although it is reasonable to expect that transferring microbes would also transfer their endogenous metabolic capacities, it is much less certain whether transferred bacteria will elicit similar immune interactions—particularly adaptive immune responses—in a new host with a different immune system.

Bacteria that were reliably uncoated by IgA across patients (n = 14, P < 0.0001 by a permutation test) were less phylogenetically diverse and tended to represent known commensals. All of these bacteria were Firmicutes, including known butyrate producers and immuno-modulatory taxa like Faecalibacterium, Alistipes, Roseburia, Oscillibacter, Butyricicoccus, and other Lachnospiraceae species (Fig. 5c; see also Table S7). On the basis of these results, we hypothesize that being uncoated by IgA may be more specific than being coated. Together, these data hint that bacteria eliciting strong or very low IgA responses across individuals could play important roles in regulating host gut immunity and that in some cases transferring these bacteria can replicate microbe-host immune interactions in a new host.

We observed a final category of diverse bacteria that were sometimes IgA coated and sometimes uncoated across different individuals or even within the same individual across time (Fig. 5c; see also Fig. S10 and Table S7). If confirmed, such variable immune effects across patients could complicate FMT treatment, which currently assumes the transfer of microbial functions from donors to patients. If the same microbe can elicit an IgA response in one person while avoiding it in another—which may lead to proinflammatory or anti-inflammatory responses (44)—then FMT may be less effective and less predictable than assumed at transferring immune function.

These results suggest that exactly matching strains may trigger more-similar immune responses than do mixed strains with identical 16S sequences, indicating that variable IgA coating of bacteria could in part be explained by strain specificity. Although in one patient the correlation of IgA coating scores of exactly matching strains was still weak (Pearson r = 0.3), this finding further established that immune functions of transferred microbes may be broadly replicated in fecal transplant recipients, bolstering the prospects of engineering the gut microbiome to modulate host immunity and disease.

Our results illustrated a range of microbes and functions that can persistently colonize fecal transplant recipients. Only a small subset of rare bacteria appeared to never transfer (see Table S4), suggesting that essentially all bacteria can be transferred between people. This finding reaffirms that the gut microbiome can be clinically engineered by transplanting whole gut microbial communities. It remains unknown, however, whether more-targeted therapeutics using synthetic communities will show the same ability to colonize recipient hosts.

In addition, patient FMT A offered an example of how patient health can affect the colonization of donor bacteria. After more than a month of stable colonization, this patient lost a large portion of transferred strains in a short period, which coincided with—or potentially preceded—a bloom in pathogenic bacteria and severe worsening of symptoms. This dramatic decline warns us that continued patient monitoring may be needed to maintain treatment efficacy, particularly with chronic diseases like IBD. Patients who lose colonized donor bacteria could be retreated, restarting the clock on donor-strain persistence and intended clinical effect. Furthermore, although it remains unknown which of these shifts came first—loss of donor bacteria, bloom of pathogens, or worsening of symptoms—the progressive unfolding of these events raises the possibility that real-time tracking of patient microbiomes may enable early intervention and prevention of IBD flares.

We found that specific beneficial functions transferred from donors to patients and could also persist. Many gut microbiome studies have focused on the benefits of butyrate production, for example, and we were able to track the transfer of butyrate production genes from donor to patient. But even after receiving new butyrate genes from a donor, fecal transplant recipients did not show higher butyrate gene diversity compared to placebo-treated patients. This observation suggests that it may be difficult to increase overall genetic capacity for butyrate production via fecal transplants. Of course, the diversity of genes related to a function does not necessarily reflect the activity of those biochemical pathways or the resulting amount of butyrate in the colon. Indeed, best-practice methods to measure clinically relevant butyrate production are not well established, since butyrate is continually produced by the microbiome and absorbed by the epithelium. Instead, it may be more fruitful to focus on which butyrate-producing organisms are present (Are some microbes more productive than others?) and which nutrients (e.g., dietary fibers) are available to those bacteria. Examining how colonization, persistence, and environmental context alter the activity of transferred gut bacteria is likely to bring us closer to understanding the pharmacokinetics of gut microbiome engineering.

In summary, our study offers a first look at the dynamics of colonization and persistence of microbes, their metabolic functions, and their immune functions in UC patients treated with FMT. Our dense time series analysis revealed surprising complexity in microbial transfer and emphasized that for chronic diseases like IBD, continuing patient care may be necessary to maintain newly colonized bacteria. Our observations of broad transfer of microbes and their functions further demonstrate the power of FMT to alter a patient’s gut microbiome and begin to set the stage for developing targeted drugs that introduce and maintain specific microbes and functions to treat disease.

We obtained samples from a clinical cohort recruited at the University of Vermont Medical center in Burlington, VT (24). Patients collected approximately weekly stool samples at home or in the clinic, storing samples in RNAlater solution (Thermo Fisher) and mailing them to a processing facility at OpenBiome in Somerville, MA. During clinical evaluations at University of Vermont Medical Center, fresh stool samples were also collected at baseline and at 4, 12, and 18 weeks after the initiation of FMT. Fecal samples were either produced during the clinical visit or less than 24 h before the appointment. The latter samples were kept in a fridge and then transported on wet ice to the clinic. At the clinic, fresh samples were then mixed with a glycerol buffer (1× PBS [phosphate-buffered saline], 25% glycerol, 0.05% l-cysteine) and stored at −80°C (24).

We triple-washed RNAlater from samples in 1× PBS and extracted DNA using a MoBio Powersoil DNA extraction kit. 16S rDNA libraries were prepared and sequenced by the Broad Institute Genomic Platform, using the Earth Microbiome Project protocols and paired-end 250-bp reads on an Illumina MiSeq (51). Shotgun metagenomic libraries were likewise prepared by the Broad Institute using Nextera protocols and sequenced on an Illumina NextSeq.

Samples were processed as described previously (17). We centrifuged glycerol-stored stool samples at 50 × g at 4°C for 15 min and then washed them three times in 1 ml PBS/1% BSA at 8,000 × g for 5 min. We collected the presort fraction as 20 μl after resuspension before the final wash and stored the washed samples at −80°C. We then resuspended the cell pellet in 25 μl of 20% normal rat serum (Jackson ImmunoResearch) in PBS/1% bovine serum albumin (BSA) and incubated the samples for 20 min on ice. After incubation, we added 25 μl of 1:12.5 α-mouse-IgA-PE (eBioscience; clone mA-6E1) to each sample and incubated samples on ice for 30 min. Finally, we washed samples three times in 1 ml PBS/1% BSA, resuspended them in PBS/1% BSA, and transferred them to blue filter-cap tubes (VWR 21008-948) for flow sorting. We sorted an average of 50,000 cells from the IgA-positive and IgA-negative bacteria into sterile microcentrifuge tubes on the BD FACSAria II at the MIT Koch Institute Flow Cytometry Core (Cambridge, MA). We then centrifuged the samples, removed the supernatants, and resuspended the pellets in a final volume of 10 μl of sheath fluid. Samples were stored at −80°C until DNA library prep, in which 2 μl (∼10,000 cells) was used directly as the template for PCR.

We analyzed 16S data using Qiime2 (26), DADA2 (27), and custom Python scripts. We assigned taxonomic labels to 16S sequences using the SILVA database (52). We quantified the abundance of microbial species from shotgun metagenomic sequencing using MetaPhlAn2 (28). To visualize changes in alpha and beta diversity, we calculated the mean values of samples within 5-day windows and compared these values across treatments using a Mann-Whitney U test.

To understand host-immune interactions, we analyzed 16S data from IgA-seq using Deblur (62). We calculated IgA coating scores as the log2-fold change between the IgA-coated and -uncoated fractions. We observed that IgA coating scores somewhat followed a normal distribution (see Fig. S6f); thus, for each sample, we categorized strongly IgA-coated or -uncoated bacteria as those bacteria that were more or less than the mean ± 1 standard deviation. To identify bacteria that were reliably IgA coated or uncoated across all samples or across all patients, we used a one sample t test, with an FDR-adjusted P value of <0.1. We further evaluated whether these reliably IgA-coated or -uncoated ASVs were statistically significant by a permutation test, in which we randomly shuffled the ASV labels in each sample 10,000 times and counted the occurrences of the same or higher number of reliably IgA-coated or -uncoated ASVs. We constructed a phylogenetic tree of 16S sequences using FastTree (63) and visualized it using iTOL (64).

We deposited raw sequence files of 16S, metagenomic, and IgA-sequencing results in NCBI’s SRA database (BioProject PRJNA475599). Metadata are included as supplementary tables which can be found at the accompanying GitHub repository (https://github.com/nathanieldchu/uc_fmt/tree/master/supplemental_materials). Additional 16S ASV tables and metagenomic species tables, as well as the code used to generate the figures and analyses, can be found at https://github.com/nathanieldchu/uc_fmt.

Citation Chu ND, Crothers JW, Nguyen LTT, Kearney SM, Smith MB, Kassam Z, Collins C, Xavier R, Moses PL, Alm EJ. 2021. Dynamic colonization of microbes and their functions after fecal microbiota transplantation for inflammatory bowel disease. mBio 12:e00975-21. https://doi.org/10.1128/mBio.00975-21.

