Metformin elicits antitumour effect by modulation of the gut microbiota and rescues Fusobacterium nucleatum-induced colorectal tumourigenesis

The effect of metformin on gut microbiota has been reported, but whether metformin can suppress colorectal cancer (CRC) by affecting gut microbiota composition and rescue F. nucleatum-induced tumourigenicity remains unclear.

To identify microbiota associated with both CRC occurrence and metformin treatment, first, we reanalyzed the gut microbiome of our previous data on two human cohorts of normal and CRC individuals. Subsequently, we summarized microbiota altered by metformin from published literatures. Several taxa, including Fusobacterium, were associated with both CRC occurrence and metformin treatment. We investigated the effect of metformin on APCMin/+ mice given with or without F. nucleatum. 16S rRNA gene sequencing was performed.

We summarized 131 genera altered by metformin from 18 published literatures. Five genera reported to be changed by metformin, including Bacteroides, Streptococcus, Achromobacter, Alistipes and Fusobacterium, were associated with CRC in both of our human cohorts. Metformin relieved the symptoms caused by F. nucleatum administration in APCMin/+ mice, and showed promise in suppressing intestinal tumour formation and rescuing F. nucleatum-induced tumourigenicity. Administration of F. nucleatum and/or metformin had effect on gut microbiome structure, composition and functions of APCMin/+ mice.

This study pioneers in predicting critical CRC-associated taxa contributing to the antitumour effect of metformin, and correlating gut microbiome with the antitumour effect of metformin in experimental animals. We presented a basis for future investigations into metformin's potential effect on suppressing F. nucleatum-induced tumor formation in vivo.

This work was supported by grants from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (31701250).

Accumulating evidences from experimental animals and patients with CRC have demonstrated that specific bacteria like Fusobacterium nucleatum (F. nucleatum) may promote colorectal carcinogenesis. Metformin, a first-line antidiabetic drug, has been widely used in clinic for more than 60 years with minimal side-effects and low cost. Recent studies suggest that metformin also acts through pathways in the gut, and intestinal microbial changes might be responsible for the therapeutic effect of metformin. Apart from the effect on gut microbiota, metformin was also effective for chemoprevention of multiple cancers including CRC in animal experiments and clinical trials. However, it is still not known whether metformin can suppress CRC by affecting gut microbiota composition.

In this study, we discovered that Fusobacterium was enriched in CRC samples and could also be altered by metformin. Our results showed that metformin relieved the symptoms caused by F. nucleatum administration in APCMin/+ mice, and showed promise in suppressing intestinal tumour formation and rescuing F. nucleatum-induced tumourigenicity. We found that gut microbiota was altered when comparing APCMin/+ mice treated with or without metformin, and APCMin/+ mice given F. nucleatum with and without metformin, which indicated that modulation of the gut microbiota might contribute to the antitumour effects of metformin. Our work revealed the structural, compositional, and functional dysbiosis of the gut microbiome after F. nucleatum and/or metformin administration. In addition, we demonstrated correlations among taxa and involvement of gut microbiome in functional activities. To the best of our knowledge, this study pioneers in implicating that altered gut microbiota may mediate some of metformin's antitumour effects using both analyses of published data and experimental methods.

This study proposed the possibility that F. nucleatum might be a site of metformin treatment action in CRC. We intend to undertake follow-up studies to investigate the association between the antitumour effect and other promising microbial therapeutic targets of metformin predicted in this study.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common cancer and the second leading cause for cancer-related deaths worldwide [1]. With the advancement in metagenome sequencing, recent studies have demonstrated that an altered microbiome environment in the gut is associated with colorectal tumourigenesis [2], [3], [4]. Accumulating evidences from experimental animals and patients with CRC have demonstrated that specific bacteria like enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis, Fusobacterium nucleatum (F. nucleatum), and Peptostreptococcus anaerobius, may promote colorectal carcinogenesis [5]. We have previously demonstrated that F. nucleatum accumulated in colorectal adenomas and colorectal carcinomas, and played a vital role in colorectal tumour initiation and development [6,7]. We also showed that CRC patients with high amount of F. nucleatum had shorter recurrence free survival (RFS) and shorter five-year recurrence survival than the F. nucleatum low group [7]. In The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) cohort, poorer overall survival was observed in correlation with tumour Fusobacterium load in patients with cecum and ascending colon tumours [2]. Yang et al. demonstrated that F. nucleatum administration reduced the survival of ApcMin/+ mice [8].Other studies showed that F. nucleatum had good performance in diagnosing CRC [9,10]. Most studies investigating F. nucleatum concentrated on its performance in CRC diagnosis or its effect on intestinal cancer progression, and few of them regarded F. nucleatum as a site of treatment action [10].

We hypothesized that metformin could suppress colorectal carcinogenesis by modulation of gut microbiota. First, we reanalyzed our previous data on gut microbiome of normal and CRC individuals to identify CRC-associated taxa. Subsequently, we summarized the bacteria altered by metformin after reviewing 18 literatures. We observed that Fusobacterium was enriched in CRC samples and could be altered by metformin treatment. We assumed that metformin could exert its antitumour effect by modulating F. nucleatum. 28 C57BL/6-APCMin/+ mice were randomly divided into 4 groups: negative control (NC), F. nucleatum (FN), F. nucleatum plus metformin (FM), and metformin (MET). 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene sequencing was performed in 4 groups of APCMin/+ mice given F. nucleatum and/or metformin. We analyzed the structure, composition, and functions of the gut microbiome after F. nucleatum and/or metformin administration. In addition, we demonstrated correlations among taxa and involvement of gut microbiome in functional activities.

The data was originally published by Yu et al. [6]. Patients who had undergone colonoscopy or colorectal carcinoma surgery in the Shanghai Jiao-Tong University School of Medicine, Renji Hospital were recruited. Fecal samples and left colonic tissues were collected. The protocol had the approval of the Ethics Committee of the Shanghai Jiao-Tong University School of Medicine, Renji Hospital. Informed consent was obtained from all the subjects. An independent data and safety committee monitored the trial and reviewed the results.

4- to 5-week-old C57BL/6-APCMin/+ mice, used extensively for intestinal cancer studies, were purchased from Shanghai Model Organisms Center and housed in specific pathogen-free (SPF) and barrier conditions with controlled temperature (20–26 °C) and humidity (40–70%). After 1-week period of adaptive breeding, all mice were randomly divided into 4 groups: negative control (NC), F. nucleatum (FN), F. nucleatum plus metformin (FM), and metformin (MET). F. nucleatum was administrated at 109 colony forming units (CFU) suspended with PBS twice per week via gavage. Metformin (Sangon Biotech, China) was fed at a dose of 250 mg/kg by oral gavage every day for 12 weeks. PBS was acted as the control treatment. All mice were sacrificed at 18 weeks. The whole intestinal tract was removed and longitudinally opened to estimate tumour progression. Tumour numbers and sizes (diameter) were carefully recorded. The mouse experiment was conducted according to guidelines approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Renji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiaotong University.

Fusobacterium nucleatum strain (ATCC 25586) was obtained from American Type Culture Collection. F. nucleatum was cultured overnight at 37°C in an anaerobic glove box (DG250, UK) with 80% N2, 10% H2 and 10% CO2 in brain heart infusion (BHI) broth supplemented with hemin, Vitamin K1, K2HPO4, and L-Cysteine.

F. nucleatum was streaked onto BHI agar plates supplemented with hemin, Vitamin K1, K2HPO4, and L-Cysteine in the presence or absence of 10 mM metformin in a 37 °C anaerobic glove box for 2days. For growth curve, F. nucleatum was cultured in BHI broth supplemented with hemin, Vitamin K1, K2HPO4, and L-Cysteine in an anaerobic glove box in the presence or absence of 10 mM metformin and OD600 value was measured.

Intestinal tissues of the colorectum removed from the abdomen was slit open and then rolled up longitudinally, with the mucosa outwards, using a wooden stick. Next, the proportions were carefully placed in 10% formalin solution immediately. Then, the tissues were embedded into paraffin, blocked, cut into 4–5 μm long pieces, and were deparaffinized in xylene, which was followed by Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) staining.

For immunohistochemistry, paraffin-embedded tissues were used to analyze the expression of Ki-67. All sections were deparaffinized and hydrated using graded concentrations of ethanol to deionized water. Tissue sections were subjected to quenching of endogenous peroxidase and antigen retrieval using microwaving in low pH citrate buffer. Anti-Ki-67 (CST, 12202s, dilution 1:400) was then applied to the tissues and incubated overnight at 4 °C. Next, bound antibody was visualized with DAB chromogen (MXB), and later followed by incubating with hematoxylin. The proportion of Ki-67 positive cells was evaluated using ImmunoRatio in ImageJ, determined by counting immunostain-positive cells as a percentage to the total number of nuclei in the field.

F. nucleatum quantification was performed as described previously [7]. DNA from CRC tissue were extracted using QIAamp DNA Mini Kit (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany). The amounts of F. nucleatum was determined by qPCR. Relative abundance was calculated by 2−ΔCt method. Universal 16s was used as reference gene. The following primer sets were used:

Universal 16S-R, 5’-TACGGCTACCTTGTTACGACTT-3’.

Fresh stool samples were collected carefully from each mouse into sterile tubes before sacrifice and immediately stored at −80°C until extraction. Genomic DNA was extracted from fecal samples by QIAamp Fast DNA Stool Mini Kit (Qiagen, Germany) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The concentration and purification of bacterial DNA was measured using Nanodrop 2000 (Thermo Scientific, USA).

For APCMin/+ mice, the V3–V4 hypervariable region of the bacteria's 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene was amplified by PCR with barcode-indexed primers 338F (5′-ACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAG-3′) and 806R (5′-GGACTACHVGGGTWTCTAAT-3′), using FastPfu Polymerase. Amplicons were further purified by gel extraction (AxyPrep DNA GelExtraction Kit, Axygen Biosciences, Union City, California, USA) and quantified using QuantiFluor-ST (Promega, USA). Purified amplicons from PCR were pooled in equimolar concentrations and paired-end sequencing was performed based on an Illumina MiSeq platform (Illumina, San Diego, USA). Using the Quantitative Insights into Microbial Ecology (QIIME2, v2019.7.0), 16S rRNA gene sequences were demultiplexed and quality filtered. Operational taxonomic units (OTUs) were picked at 97% similarity cut-off, and the identified taxonomy was then aligned using SILVA (Release 132). Only OTUs and genera present in at least 25% of samples were remained for subsequent analysis. Additionally, rarefaction was performed on the OTU table to prevent methodological artefacts arising from varying sequencing depth. α-Diversity was measured by community richness from the rarefied OTU table by using R package vegan. β-Diversity was estimated by computing unweighted Unifrac, weighted Unifrac, Euclidean and Euclidean binary distances respectively. Significance of clustering was determined by Adonis test with 999 permutations. Then results of β-Diversity was visualized with principal coordinate analysis (PCoA). Functional contributions of the microbial communities were predicted based on OTU using R package Tax4Fun [22] with the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database [23]. The Tax4Fun tool is based on SILVA-labeled OTU abundances. We used UProC model for computation of functional reference profile in terms of KEGG orthologs (KOs) of bacterial origins [24]. Differences in bacterial relative abundances were determined by Mann–Whitney U test [25].

Three 16S rRNA sequencing datasets were respectively accessed through the BioProject (accession number PRJNA325931) at the NCBI, the European Nucleotide Archive (ENA) (accession number ERP117168), and the Sequence Read Archive (SRA) (accession number SRP099828). These sequences were demultiplexed and quality filtered using QIIME2 (v2019.7.0). Operational taxonomic units (OTUs) were delineated at the frequently used 97% similarity threshold. The OTUs were assigned to taxa by matching to the Greengenes database (Release 13.8). The R package DESeq2 was used to calculate genera that differed significantly between metformin untreated groups and metformin treated groups [26]. The community function was predicted from the OTU table using Phylogenetic Investigation of Communities by Reconstruction of Unobserved States (PICRUSt)(27) with KEGG database [23].

To identify gut microbiota significantly altered after metformin treatment, PubMed searches were performed with combinations of the terms “microbiome” and “metformin”. Full texts of all articles were screened. Articles with 16S rRNA gene or metagenomic raw sequences, processed sequences or differential analysis results of control group and metformin treatment group were remained for further evaluation. Author/Year, DOI, model, sample group, metformin dosage, subject age, weight/BMI, gender, sample used, sequencing method, region amplified, platform, reference database, source of data and calculation of statistical significance were extracted from the included studies. The altered genera in each article were recorded. Unclassified genera changed after metformin treatment were excluded.

The analyses were carried out to distinguish metformin-untreated and metformin-treated patients or rodents by bacterial genera. To evaluate the effect of metformin on multiple genera, we defined and computed the metformin score (MFV) for each human or rodent on the basis of the frequently altered genera identified by literature screening. For each human or rodent, MFV equals to the sum of abundances of the genus more frequent in metformin-untreated humans or rodents subtracted by the sum of the abundances of genus more frequent in metformin-treated humans or rodents. MFV was used to generate ROC curve. By using the pROC package of R software [28], area under receiver operating curve (AUROC) was calculated. Pairwise comparison of ROC curves was performed using the bootstrap percentile method.

Statistical analyses were performed with R (V.3.5.1), GraphPad Prism or SPSS version 26.0. 2*2 factorial analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to determine interactions between F. nucleatum and metformin. Differences in diversity, KEGG pathways abundances, KOs abundances were determined by Mann–Whitney U test [25]. We conducted linear discriminant analysis effect size (LEfSe) analysis to identify taxa differentially abundant between cases and controls [29]. This method first uses the non-parametric factorial Kruskal–Wallis sum-rank test or Wilcoxon sum-rank test to detect features with significant differential abundance and then applies linear discriminant analysis (LDA) to calculation of the effect size of each feature. Indicator genera specific to a given group were identified based on the normalized abundances of genera using the R package indicspecies, and the significant indicator value (IV) index was calculated by the 9999-permutation test [30]. Larger IV indicates greater specificity of taxa and P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. The abundances of genera in the samples were standard normalized using the Rhea pipeline [31]. Spearman's correlation coefficient and significance were calculated using the R package Hmisc. Correlation network within genera was constructed using R package igraph, then visualized with Cytoscape (ver. 3.7.2).

To examine alterations of gut microbiome in CRC, we re-analyzed our previous data [6]. 16S rRNA gene sequencing data using a Roche 454 GS FLX obtained from the mucosal samples of 32 normal Chinese individuals and 33 CRC Chinese patients (Fig. 1(a), Cohort 1), and 16S rRNA gene sequencing data using a Roche 454 GS FLX obtained from the fecal samples of 51 normal Chinese individuals and 42 CRC Chinese patients (Fig. 1(c), Cohort 2) were respectively analyzed. Only genera with a mean of relative abundance greater than 0.01% were included in the analysis. We used the LEfSe algorithm [29] and comparative analysis based on Wilcoxon sum-rank test to identify microbiota associated with CRC occurrence. Results of LEfSe analysis showed that Achromobacter, Serratia and Fusobacterium were more enriched in CRC patients of Cohort 1 (Fig. 1(b)), and Bacteroides and Alistipes were more enriched in CRC patients of Cohort 2 (Fig. 1(d)). Results of comparative analysis showed that Parvimonas, Pelomonas, Peptostreptococcus and Fusobacterium were the most significantly changed genera in Cohort 1 (Fig. 1(e)). Peptostreptococcus, Parvimonas and Fusobacterium were the most significantly changed genera in Cohort 2 (Fig. 1(f)).

To identify microbiota correlated with metformin treatment, we summarized taxa significantly altered by metformin from 18 literatures. Raw sequences from 3 articles [13,32,33] were processed and differential analyses between metformin-treated and metformin-untreated humans or rodents were performed. Notably, de la Cuesta-Zuluaga et.al [13] reported a cohort with 28 diabetes patients, of which 14 were taking metformin. According to the patient information provided by the authors in the supplementary materials, two diabetes patients without metformin were taking other anti-diabetes drugs (MI-236 taking glibenclamide and MI-315 taking insulin). To avoid confounding factors, these two patients were excluded from the following analyses. Differential analysis was performed based on the OTU table achieved from supplementary files of 1 literature [17]. 7 articles [14,16,[34], [35], [36], [37], [38]] provided results of differential analysis in tables or supplementary tables. Significantly changed microbiota were collected from the figures of 7 articles [12,[39], [40], [41], [42], [43], [44]]. Characteristics of included studies were presented in Supplementary Table. S1. Genera altered by metformin in 18 articles involving 22 metformin treatment models were presented in Fig. 2 and Supplementary Table. S2. In total, 131 genera altered by metformin were achieved from literatures. Akkermansia was significantly more abundant in 10 models and was a genus most frequently increased by metformin treatment. Other frequently altered genera (altered in no less than 4 models) among all models were Alistipes, Allobaculum, Bacteroides, Blautia, Clostridium, Escherichia, Lactobacillus and Parabacteroides. Frequently altered genera (altered in no less than 2 models) of T2D models included Akkermansia, Bacillus, Collinsella, Escherichia, Helicobacter, Bacteroides, and Fusobacterium. Frequently altered genera of HFD models (altered in no less than 2 models) included Akkermansia, Clostridium, Lactobacillus, Lactococcus, Allobaculum, Bacteroides and Parabacteroides. Frequently altered genera (altered in no less than 2 models) of normal healthy models included Akkermansia, Alistipes and Escherichia.

To identify key taxa associated with the beneficial effect of metformin, we evaluated the performance of discriminating metformin-treated and metformin-untreated humans or rodents with the frequently altered genera summarized above. These frequently altered genera were considered as bacterial biomarkers. For example, the 9 frequently altered genera (altered in no less than 4 models) of all models, including Akkermansia, Alistipes, Allobaculum, Bacteroides, Blautia, Clostridium, Escherichia, Lactobacillus and Parabacteroides, were considered as biomarkers for discrimination of all different metformin models. The 7 frequently altered genera (altered in no less than 2 models) of T2D models, including Akkermansia, Bacillus, Collinsella, Escherichia, Helicobacter, Bacteroides and Fusobacterium, were considered as biomarkers particularly for discriminating metformin-treated and metformin-untreated T2D humans or rodents. We defined and calculated the metformin value (MFV) to evaluate the performance of biomarkers combinations. Detailed definitions of biomarkers combinations (MFV1-all, MFV2-T2D, MFV3-T2D, MFV4-HFD, MFV5-HFD, MFV6-Healthy) were shown in Supplementary Table. S3. ROC curves were generated to assess the performance of single biomarkers and biomarkers combinations in 3 articles [13,32,33] with raw 16S rRNA gene sequences (Supplementary Fig. S1(a)–(f)). Performances of biomarkers particularly for T2D, obese and healthy humans or rodents were assessed alone or combined in three datasets published by de la Cuesta-Zuluaga et al. [13], Adeshirlarijaney et al. [33] and Ma et al. [32], respectively. Notably, not all bacterial biomarkers were detected in the 3 datasets. Therefore, we were unable to evaluate the performance of some genera in discriminating metformin-treated and metformin-untreated humans or rodents.

Subsequently, we predicted functional characterizations in 3 datasets [13,32,33] using PICRUSt [27] with KEGG database [23]. Overlapping significantly (Wilcoxon test, P < 0.05) altered pathways in 3 datasets were plotted in Supplementary Fig. S1(g). Pathways involved in genetic information processing, cellular processes and signaling, lipid metabolism, glycan biosynthesis and metabolism, biosynthesis of some secondary metabolites were highly associated with metformin treatment. These results were consistent with current published studies. The association between metformin and lipid metabolism has been widely reported [12,34,42,45]. For example, metformin could improve glucose homeostasis in obese mice [12]. In addition, it has been reported that in newly diagnosed T2D patients naively treated with metformin for 3 days, bile acid glycoursodeoxycholic acid (GUDCA) was increased in the gut [46].

To predict potential microbiota critical for the antitumour effect of metformin, we intersected the significantly altered genera between normal and CRC samples in Cohort 1 and Cohort 2 with the 131 genera obtained from literatures that were altered by metformin. 11 and 26 overlapping genera were identified for Cohort 1 and Cohort 2 respectively (Fig. 6(a) and (b)). Bacteroides, Streptococcus, Achromobacter, Alistipes, Granulicatella and Fusobacterium were enriched in CRC patients from both Cohort 1 and Cohort 2 (Fig. 6(c)). Notably, results of LEfse analysis also showed that Fusobacterium enriched in CRC samples (Fig. 1(b)). Our previous work demonstrated that F. nucleatum colonization in the intestine prompted colorectal tumourigenesis [6]. Also, F. nucleatum was associated with CRC reoccurrence and patient outcome [7]. An abundant number of researches have revealed the significant role of F. nucleatum in CRC diagnosis [10]. It has been reported that Fusobacterium could be altered by metformin (Supplementary Table. S2). Moreover, a research published in 2018 reported that metformin would inhibit F. nucleatum at a colon concentration of 1.5 mM [47]. Therefore, we hypothesized that metformin exerted its antitumour effect by modulating F. nucleatum.

To confirm our hypothesis, first, we cultured F. nucleatum in the presence or absence of 10mM metformin to investigate whether metformin can suppress the growth of F. nucleatum in vitro. Interestingly, metformin inhibited the growth of F. nucleatum both in broth tube (Supplementary Fig. S2(a)) and on agar plate (Supplementary Fig. S2(b)) under anaerobic conditions. To investigate whether metformin can suppress intestinal tumour formation and rescue F. nucleatum-induced tumourigenicity, 6-week-old APCMin/+ mice were given 109 CFU F. nucleatum and/or 250 mg/kg/d metformin [20], which was roughly equivalent to 2000 mg per day in human (Fig. 3(a)). Although the amount of metformin we used in this study was higher than that used in diabetes patients (30–50 mg/kg), previous reports investigating the antidiabetic and antitumour effects of metformin in the mouse model used a higher amount of metformin (250–350 mg/kg) because of the different drug sensitivity between rodent and human [20]. Therefore, we used metformin at the dose of 250 mg/kg in this study. Although metformin is associated with modest weight loss, we did not obverse significant body weight alteration by metformin during the period (Supplementary Fig. S2(c)). 12 weeks after treatment, 2 groups of mice exposed to metformin showed lower incidence of adenoma (Fig. 3(b) and (c)). In detail, NC developed 3.00 ± 0.58 colon tumour per mouse while metformin reduced this number to 1.29 ± 0.42 per mouse (Fig. 3(c)). Additionally, a decrease in tumour size (the number of tumours smaller than 3 mm; Fig. 3(e)) were identified in MET compared with NC. Consistently, histopathological examinations showed that metformin attenuated the colonic neoplasia in APCMin/+ mice (Fig. 3(f)). Metformin-treated APCMin/+ tumours showed decreased cell proliferation, as evidenced by lower proportion of Ki-67+ cells compared with tumours from NC group (Fig. 3(g) and (h)). What is more, we surprisingly found that metformin could reverse the F. nucleatum-induced tumourigenicity. After F. nucleatum introduction, 6 APCMin/+ mice presented serious bloody diarrhea while none of the mice in FM developed this complication. FM showed a decrease in tumour number (2.29 ± 0.64 versus 4.43 ± 0.53, Wilcoxon test, P = 0.0244, Fig. 3(c)) compared with FN. We further discovered that the colorectum showed decrease in tumour load (2.47 ± 0.69 versus 9.9 ± 2.3, Wilcoxon test, P = 0.0097, Fig. 3(d)), and tumour size (the number of tumours larger than 3 mm; Fig. 3(e)) when comparing FM with FN. Metformin also alleviated F. nucleatum-induced neoplasia histologically (Fig. 3(f)). A higher percentage of Ki-67+ cells was discovered in FN compared with NC. Metformin could attenuate F. nucleatum-induced cell proliferation, as evidenced by lower proportion of Ki-67+ cells in FM compared with FN (Fig. 3(g) and (h)). Further factorial analyses showed interactions between metformin and F. nucleatum for tumour load (2*2 factorial ANOVA, P = 0.04). In addition, the small intestine demonstrated similar results (Supplementary Fig. S2(d)–(g)).

To explore the effect of metformin on gut microbiota, 16S rRNA gene sequencing was performed in 4 groups of APCMin/+ mice. In total, 1,377,375 high-quality sequences were generated from 28 samples, with an average length of 420.05bp per sequence, yielding 634, 602, 583 and 628 OTUs at a 97% identity cut-off in NC, FN, FM and MET respectively (Supplementary Fig. S3(a)). PCoA based on Euclidean binary distances (Adonis P = 0.001, R2 = 0.188) at the OTU level revealed the most significant separation among groups (Fig. 4(a)) compared with PCoA on weighted Unifrac and unweighted Unifrac distances (Adonis weighted Unifrac: R2 = 0.207, P = 0.002, Supplementary Fig. S3(b); unweighted Unifrac: R2 = 0.307, P = 0.001, Supplementary Fig. S3(c)). In addition, PCoA on weighted Unifrac distances showed a clearer separation than unweighted Unifrac distances. PCoA on Euclidean distances demonstrated an unclear separation between groups (R=0.122, P=0.003, data not shown). Results of PCoA indicated a more significant difference in evenness than richness of microbiota communities among groups. No significant change in alpha diversity was detected by pairwise comparison (Supplementary Fig. S3(d)).

We obtained the indicator taxa based on genus level profiles of the 4 groups (Fig. 4(e)). Higher indicator values (IV) suggested better performances in signature taxa. Parvibacter, Coriobacteriaceae_UCG−002, Ruminococcaceae_UCG−007 and Terrimonas were highly specific for metformin treated APCMin/+ mice, with IVs of 0.843, 0.835, 0.807, 0.776, respectively. Prevotellaceae_UCG−001 and Rikenellaceae_RC9_gut_group were highly specific for metformin untreated APCMin/+ mice with IVs of 0.760 and 0.757, respectively. We then evaluated the performance of indicator taxa in discriminating NC and MET using ROC curves. Parvibacter exhibited the highest AUROC of 0.98. MFV was used to evaluate the performance of all indicators of MET and NC. MFV-indicator presented an AUROC of 1 (Supplementary Fig. S4(a)). Then, the performances in discriminating APCMin/+ mice fed with and without metformin were evaluated using biomarkers that were obtained from literatures for all metformin models (Supplementary Fig. S4(b)). Akkermansia gave the highest AUROC of 0.878, which was higher than all biomarkers combined. We then compared the performance of Akkermansia and Parvibacter, and no significance was identified between the two biomarkers (Supplementary Fig. S4(c)).

Functional characterizations were explored in this study to disclose the effect of metformin on APCMin/+ mice with or without F. nucleatum introduction. A total of 5943 KO functional categories were yielded. Pairwise comparisons of the functional differences were quantified using a two-tailed Wilcoxon test, and P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant (Supplementary Table S4). The significantly altered KOs were filtered with the criterion of abs(logFC) ≥0.2 and visualized in Supplementary Fig. S5(a)–(c). Through this filter, the greatest variations in KO functional categories were discovered when comparing MET with NC. In pairwise comparisons, 1649 KOs were significantly enriched in MET and 94 were significantly enriched in NC (Supplementary Fig. S5(a)). 804 KOs were significantly enriched in FN and 195 KOs were significantly enriched in NC (Supplementary Fig. S5(b)). 152 KOs were significantly enriched in FM and 262 KOs were significantly enriched in FN (Supplementary Fig. S5(c)).

We further explored KEGG pathways in which KO functional categories were involved. Pairwise comparisons were performed with a two-tailed Wilcoxon test, and P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Representative altered pathways with the highest relative abundances were visualized in Supplementary Fig. S5(d)–(f).

To investigate whether metformin would promote the interactions among gut bacteria, we inferred pairwise taxonomic correlations in significantly altered genera in APCMin/+ mice. Spearman's correlation coefficients among genera were calculated, and correlations with absolute coefficients ≥ 0.3 and P < 0.05 were retained. Results showed that metformin increased positive taxonomic correlations in APCMin/+ mice either given without (Fig. 5(a)) or with F. nucleatum (Supplementary Fig. S7(a)). F. nucleatum administration could also change the interactions among gut bacteria (Supplementary Fig. S6(a)). To provide possible explanations for the relationships between taxa, we examined the correlations between taxa and significantly altered KEGG pathways to obtain an overview of how significantly altered taxa act during dysfunction (Fig. 5(b), Supplementary Fig. S6(b), Supplementary Fig. S7(b)). Only KEGG pathways with mean relative abundances over 0.03% and genera with a sum of relative abundance greater than 0.5% were included in the analysis. Spearman's correlation coefficients were calculated between KEGG pathways and taxa, and P < 0.05 was considered significant. Results showed that positively correlated genera usually had synergy in functional pathways while negatively correlated genera often presented opposite associations with specific functional pathways. Moreover, within group interactions were often positive while between groups relationships were often negative. Members of the same phylum were more likely to form strong relationships with one another.

To further explore bacteria co-varied with Fusobacterium, we classified CRC patients of both cohorts into Fusobacterium-high and Fusobacterium-low groups based on the median relative abundance of Fusobacterium. We conducted LEfse analysis (Supplementary Fig. S9(a)–(d)) as well as differential analysis based on the genus level (Supplementary Fig. S9(e) and (f)). LEfse analysis showed that Streptococcus was significantly enriched in Fusobacterium-high group of Cohort 2 (Supplementary Fig. S9(c) and (d)) and was also elevated in FN compared with NC (Fig. 4(c)). Results of differential analysis showed that Streptococcus was significantly elevated in F. nucleatum-high patients compared with F. nucleatum-low patients of Cohort 1 (Supplementary Fig. S9(e)) and was also significantly increased in FN compared with NC (Fig. 4(c)). A study [2] reported significantly enriched genera in F. nucleatum “High” (>1% relative abundance) colon adenocarcinoma (COAD) from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA cohort) [48]. We observed that Desulfovibrio was significantly enriched in both F. nucleatum “High” TCGA patients and FN (Fig. 4(c)). We inferred from above results that Streptococcus and Desulfovibrio were vital bacteria co-varied with F. nucleatum.

To reveal the relationship between gut microbiota and the antitumour effect of metformin, we intersected the significantly altered genera in MET and NC, significantly altered genera in normal samples and CRC samples in Cohort 1 and Cohort 2, 131 significantly altered genera by metformin achieved from literature (Fig. 6). Only 1 genus, Alistipes, was overlapped when intersecting results from these 4 sections (Fig. 6(d)). Alistipes was more enriched in CRC patients, and decreased after metformin treatment in APCMin/+ mice. In Cohort 1, 2 genera, Alistipes and Odoribacter, were significantly increased in CRC patients (Fig. 6(e)) while decreased after metformin treatment in APCMin/+ mice (Fig. 4(c)). In Cohort 2, Alistipes was significantly elevated in CRC patients (Fig. 6f) while significantly decreased after metformin treatment in APCMin/+ mice (Fig. 4(c)). Bifidobacterium and Turicibacter significantly reduced in CRC patients (Fig. 6(f)) while significantly increased after metformin treatment in APCMin/+ mice (Fig. 4(c)). In addition, Bifidobacterium, Turicibacter and Odoribacter were among the 131 genera altered by metformin achieved from literature (Fig. 6(e) and (f)). These results suggested that Alistipes, Bifidobacterium, Turicibacter and Odoribacter might played critical roles in the suppression of colonic tumourigenicity by metformin.

6 overlapping genera, Bifidobacterium, Clostridium_sensu_stricto_1, Turicibacter, Akkermansia, Odoribacter, Alistipes, were identified when intersecting the significantly altered genera in MET and NC, with 131 significantly altered genera by metformin achieved from literature (Fig. 6(g)). This indicated the effect of metformin on these taxa had been reported previously.

In this study, we reanalyzed our previous data on gut microbiome of normal and CRC individuals. Subsequently, we summarized bacteria altered by metformin after reviewing 18 literatures. We discovered that Fusobacterium was enriched in CRC samples and could also be altered by metformin. We hypothesized that metformin exerted its antitumour effect by modulating F. nucleatum. To confirm this hypothesis, we conducted experiments on APCMin/+ mice given F. nucleatum and/or metformin. Results showed that metformin relieved the symptoms caused by F. nucleatum administration in APCMin/+ mice, and showed promise in suppressing intestinal tumour formation and rescuing F. nucleatum-induced tumourigenicity. Additionally, metformin had interactions with F. nucleatum. Our findings that gut microbiota were significantly altered when comparing NC with MET, and FN with FM indicated that modulation of the gut microbiota might contribute to the antitumour effects of metformin. Our work revealed the structural, compositional, and functional dysbiosis of the gut microbiome after F. nucleatum and/or metformin administration. In addition, we demonstrated correlations among taxa and involvement of gut microbiome in functional activities. To the best of our knowledge, this study pioneers in implicating that altered gut microbiota may mediate some of metformin's antitumour effects using both analyses of published data and experimental methods.

In summary, through data collection from literatures and analyses of previous CRC cohorts, we observed that Bacteroides, Streptococcus, Achromobacter, Alistipes and Fusobacterium might be critical for the suppression of colonic tumourigenicity by metformin. We examined the antitumour effect of metformin on F. nucleatum and demonstrated that metformin showed promise for suppressing intestinal tumour formation and rescuing F. nucleatum-induced tumourigenicity in APCMin/+ mice. Administration of F. nucleatum and/or metformin had effect on gut microbiome structure, composition, and functions of APCMin/+ mice. We presented a basis for future investigations into metformin's potential effect on suppressing F. nucleatum-induced tumor formation in vivo. We intend to undertake follow-up studies to investigate the association between the antitumour effect and other promising microbial therapeutic targets of metformin predicted in this study, including Odoribacter, Bifidobacterium, Turicibacter, Bacteroides, Streptococcus, Alistipes, Achromobacter, Akkermansia, Blautia, Clostridium, Escherichia, Lactobacillus, etc.

Xiaowen Huang searched the literature. Hua Xiong, Jingyuan Fang, Jilin Wang, Tiantian Sun designed the experiment and supervised the study. Xialu Hong performed the experiments. Xiaowen Huang, Xialu Hong, Yanan Yu and TaChung Yu collected the data. Xiaowen Huang and Xialu Hong analyzed and interpreted the data. Xiaowen Huang and Xialu Hong drafted the manuscript.

None declared.

Xiaowen Huang and Xialu Hong are Co-first authors.

Supplementary material associated with this article can be found in the online version at doi:10.1016/j.ebiom.2020.103037.

