Association of Gut Microbiota with Inflammatory Bowel Disease and COVID-19 Severity: A Possible Outcome of the Altered Immune Response

Inflammatory bowel disease could be induced by SARS-CoV-2, involved in alteration of gut microbiota during the respiratory viral infection. Presence of viral RNA in fecal samples for longer period, even after the clearance of the virus from respiratory tract, is suggestive of dysbiosis leading to the poor prognosis of COVID-19 in hospitalized patients. Gut microbiome (GM) plays a significant role to stimulate the modulated antiviral immune response against invading pathogens regulating the physiological homeostasis. GM profile of COVID-19 patients has revealed the drastic depletion of dominant families of commensals in the gut such as, Bacteroidaceae, Lachnospiraceae and Ruminococcaceae to be replaced with Enterococcus, Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, Serratia etc. Immune dysfunction of Th1–Th17 cells along gut-lung axis impairs the mucosal lining translocating the microorganisms including commensals and metabolites to other body organs like lungs, brain, kidney through circulation. These events may cause hyper inflammations associated with excessive secretion of cytokines and chemokines to form the cytokine storm causing ARDS. Gut virome could interact with microbiome and immune cells, help establishing the antiviral immune signaling, important for health maintenance/ or in disease progression. Essentially, these immunological strategies are needed to use in future prospective therapeutics to control the severity events.

Human physiological homeostasis and onset of disease largely depends on the interactions among the resident microbiome of different habitats, such as skin surface, oral cavity, respiratory tract, gastrointestinal system, genital area, and host’s protective immunity [1, 2]. The gut dysbiosis could also be linked with various diseases like, rheumatoid arthritis, cancer, obesity, diabetes, cardiovascular diseases and infectious diseases [1].

The common symptoms of SARSCoV-2 infection are fever, cough, fatigue, headache, diarrhoeas etc., where abdominal pain is referred to the GI symptoms. A developed state of interstitial pneumonia with high viral loads, and activated macrophages, monocytes producing pro-inflammatory cytokines could result into ARDS along with the complications of GI, neurological, thrombotic, thromboembolic diseases and multiorgan failure [11–13]. The disease severity in COVID-19 is reported higher in terms of morbidity and mortality [14], which principally explains the virulent nature of the virus evading the host’s immune system and even becoming more transmissible by producing relevant mutations in spike (S) protein/ or receptor binding domain (RBD) [6, 11, 12, 15, 16]. A range of emergency drugs, vaccines and antibodies are being used at present to control the infection [6, 17].

During the past decades, the microbiome research has been given more attention, especially in regard to its relevance in maintaining the physiological balance. Human GIT contains up to 2000 bacterial species, and classified in 12 different phyla such as Protobacteria (Escherichia), Firmicutes (Lactobacilllus, Bacillus, and Clostridium), Actinobacteria (Bifidobacterium), and Bacteroides (Bacteroides) [18, 19]. In addition, the gut microbiome constitutes appx. 3 million genes are 150 times more than the human genome [10]. The relevance of GM realized, when the 50% hospitalized COVID-19 patients in Italy were detected with viral RNA in their stool and the GM profile signatured with depletion in commensals such as, Bacteroidaceae, Lachnospiraceae, and Ruminococcaceae, substituted by Enterococcus, Staphylococcus, Serratia, and Collinsella along with Lactobacillus, Lactococcus, Actinomycetes etc. ICU patients were also reported to develop enterococcal septicemia [20].

The antiviral effects of Lactobacillus planatarum has been studied, in animal model, to control the SARSCoV-2 infection. Previously, L. plantarum experimented on porcine enterocytes cells (IPEC-J2) to control the porcine epidemic diarrhea virus and gastroenteritis virus [31, 35]. Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG is also reported to regulate the intestinal permeability, spleen-colon homeostasis, inflammatory response modulation to increase the regulatory T (Treg) cells with concomitant decrease in the pro-inflammatory cytokines production and apoptosis along the lung-gut region against Pseudomonas aerogenosa pneumonia. Many other non-communicable disorders such as, obesity, diabetes, hypertension, and heart diseases are known to be linked with dysbiosis, increasing the COVID-19 complications [31].

Lung microbiome is dynamically transient ecosystem; its microflora basically builds from inhaling air, oral sphere, and micro-aspiration. Most frequent phyla are observed as, Protobacteria, Firmicutes, and Bacteroidetes. However, the genus Pseudomonas, Streptococcus, Prevotella, Fusobacteria, Porphyromonas, and Veillonella have been mainly studied [31] (Table
1). A study based on 16S rRNA sequence of lung tissues of deceased patients reported that Acinetobacter was the most common bacterial genus followed by Chryseobacterium, Burkholderia, Brevundimonas, Sphingobium and Enterobacteriaceae. Cryptococcus, Issatchenkia, Wallemia, Cladosporium and Alternaria are the prevalent fungi identified. Another case study reported the co-infection of Capnocytophaga and Veillonella spp. with unknown pathogenicity were obtained from two COVID-19 patients [3, 34].

de Mai et al. [33], noticed the resilience in the bacterial community of nasopharynx belong to the phyla Fermicutes, Bacteroidetes, Protobacteria, Actinobacteria, and Fusobacteria. Global functional profiling has shown that 44 coded enzymes characterized in COVID-19, community acquired pneumonia (CAP) patients and healthy controls [36]. Metaproteome study has revealed the EC features in the COVID-19 respiratory samples with increasing activity of diaminopimelate decarboxylase. But glycan biosynthesis, lipid and sphingolipid metabolisms were limited. Less alpha-gal contents supported the negative correlation between anti-gal antibody titres and COVID-19 severity. In addition, bacteria associated with lesser content of host glycosaminoglycan heparan sulfate modification were linked to COVID-19 susceptibility [36]. This specific area that needed to be explored in regard to enzymes/ proteins regulating microbial functions is yet to be discovered.

The microbe-mediated cross talk along the gut-lung axis has been evidenced by intestinal barrier disruption, spread of microbes, endotoxins and other metabolites could increase the severity events of COVID-19. Most of the immune cells and microbiota in the intestine play an important role in regulating the immune response. Altered gut microbiota can enhance the etiologies of metabolic, neurodegenerative, non-communicable disorders and infectious diseases. It’s role in affecting the metabolic system is yet to be elucidated [3, 36–39]. COVID-19 severity enhanced by altered microbiota led to the secondary pulmonary infections,by establishing the regular fecal–oral route to regularize them [21].

The older patients exhibited the decreased microbial diversity and heterogenous microbiota suggested age dependent dysbiosis and susceptibility to SARSCoV-2 infection. Indeed, pharyngeal heterogenous microflora influence the virus adherence, changed immune response, allowing pathogens/or commensals from gut to re-translocate systemically and to the other organs to exacerbate the respiratory illness [33, 34, 44, 45]. Hence, it is speculated that commensals and pathogenic microbes aggravate the COVID-19 under different conditions, depicted in Table
1.

The most crucial character associated with COVID-19 is the different clinical outcomes; could be affected by genetics, life style and environment. Interaction of SARS-CoV-2 with gut could trigger the deleterious biological pathways inducing pro-inflammatory cytokines, as it enters the T-cells [11, 12, 18]. Pathogenic and protective effects are elicited due to MAMPs engaging with PRRs to regularize the innate and adaptive host immune response, along with subsequent pro/ or anti -inflammatory response [46]. Commensal microbes signal the Treg cells to naive T-cells through DCs, prompting the secretion of anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10, disseminating the local/ and systemic tolerance (Figs. 1,
2).

Gut microbiome/ virome during IBD activates the DCs, through secretion of inflammasomes, allowing them to migrate through circulatory & lymphatic system, hence influencing the T-cell response in the lungs in case of influenza. Similarly, the possible alteration of gut microbiome/ virome could affect the outcome of COVID-19 disease [47, 48]. SARSCoV-2 produce type I-III IFN in human enteroids to activate the cytokine genes such as, CCR1, CCR8, IL16, IL3 and CXCL10(IP10) observed to be upregulated, but CCR2, CCR5, and IL5 were seen downregulated [28]. Type I IFN (IFNα and IFNβ) prevent the viral replication evidenced in GF mice failed to produce IFNα, IFNβ, IL-6, TNF-α, IL-12 and IL-18 against viral infections [49, 50].

Lymphocytes regulate the immune surveillance & defense, and goblet cells synthesize the functional mucosal layer in gut. Naïve T-cells differentiated into Th1 and Th17 to raise pro-inflammatory response by pathogens. Epithelial injuries occur by systemic endotoxemia translocating the bacterial components; causing the immune imbalance and systemic inflammation to establish ‘hypercytokinemia’ and dysbiosis. Lymphocytopenia and exhausted T-cells increase the secretion of IL-2, IL-6, IL-7, IL-10, TNFα, GCSF, MIP-1, MCP-1 and 10 kD IFN- IP10, in severe infection [46]. The plausible role of microflora in dictating dysbiosis, inflammation and susceptibility to SARS CoV-2 infection is outlined in Figs. 1 and
2.

Absent in melanoma 2 (AIM2) generates signals through IL-18, IL-22 and STAT3 pathways to control homeostasis. Synergistic effects NOD2 help control the colitis via signals of IL-18, IL-22 and STAT3 pathway and mammalian peptidoglycan recognition proteins (PGRPs) to control the colitis by balancing cytotoxic IFNγ produced by NK cells [57, 58]. NOD-LLR family of proteins recognizes the intracellular flagellin protein and also activates the inflammasome, which stimulate capcase-1 and promotes IL-1β in TLR-5 independently in Salmonella infected macrophages. PRRs regulation of host-microbiome symbiosis needs more studies on inducible gene RIG-like receptors and OLRs [52, 59]. DC driven Th1 and Th 17 immunity activates, when Trichomonas musculis protects against the enteric bacterial infection in mice via activation of inflammasomes [60]. Microbiota driven polysaccharides induce anti-inflammatory response in intestinal macrophages in mice. Butyrate can drive monocytes to macrophages differentiation through HDAC3 inhibition through amplifying antimicrobial mechanisms. Trimethylamine N-oxide can drive murine macrophage polarization in an NLRP3 inflammasome dependent manner [61, 62]. Innate Lymphoid cells (ILCs) help repair the mucosal layer to combat enteric infection and help proliferate Ffar2. In mice model, ILCs with Helicobacter negatively regulate the RORγt. ILCs are important for host immunity and inflammation. Type 3ILC mediates the immune surveillance in microbiota through transcriptional factor ID2 -dependent regulation of IL-22.

CD4 + and CD8 + T-cells production is negatively correlated with IL-6, IL-10 and TNF- α induction. However, T-cells function eventually gets fully restored after recovery reducing the cytokine and chemokine production. Gut microbiota is the key regulator of CD8 + cell function, by producing SCFAs, butyrate and propionate directly to modulate the CD8 + and Tc17 cells. IFNγ and granzyme B expression promote Tc17 cell towards cytotoxic function in COVID-19 infection [2]. Notably, antiviral immunity involves the TLR4 against the lipopolysaccharides (LPS) from the gram-negative microflora signaling the pathway through NFkB; and the enteric viruses to protect against the intestinal damage and pathogenic bacteria [48].

In Peyer's patches, Tfh cells lower the access to IL-2 to CD4 + T-cells, hence amplifying the Bcl-6 on Tfh cells. But Tfh cells can also boost the autoantibody formation to induce arthritis [67]. DCs are the important class of APCs, which directly send the dendrites to outside epithelium to capture the pathogens. Spleen tyrosin kinase (Syk) signaling pathway is critical for adaptive immune signaling to induce of IL-17 and IL-22 in CD4 + T-cells. NFkB is also a crucial kinase for DC functions, to alter the secretion of IgA with changed microbiota rendering the mice vulnerable to enteric pathogens [68, 69]. GF mice showing less mature phenotype iNKT with exposure to Bacteroide fragilis were able to regain the activity of iNKT cells and protected the animals from oxazolone-induced colitis [70].

The human gut virome, an emerging concept, is composed of prokaryotic viruses /or bacteriophages and eukaryotic viruses to share the required genomic information with microflora and host cells, which may influence the composition and function of gut microbial community [71]. Constant sharing of genes between bacteriophages and bacteria may help sustain the important functions like, oxidative stress & antibiotic use tolerance. Nayfach et al. [8], reported that > 75% genome composed of DNA phages to infect Bacteroidis and Clostridia classes and suggested a new gut database could help explore the functionality of gut virome and other associated retro elements for diversifying the phage community and bacterial hosts. It is possible to transplant the fecal microbiome (FMT) consists of bacteriophages because patients with C. difficile infection have altered bacteriophage abundance than the normal controls. A successful transplantation appears to be associated with implantation of Caudovirales spp. [72]. In opposite, the eukaryotic viruses such as, norwalk, rotaviruses, enteroviruses and now SARS CoV-2 can cause IBD. [18, 73]. Evidences have shown that virome related immune response is different from individual to individual, contributing to the gut physiology and homeostasis [74, 75].

Virome and susceptible genes interact to aggravate the IBD, this experiment is performed by using murine norovirus, which showed that viruses are the functional members of microbiome. Autophagy Related 16-Like 1 (ATG16L1) gene is involved in cellular degenerative pathway by autophagy, and is linked with increased susceptibility to form IBD. For example, mice deficient in IL-10 and multi-drug resistance mutation 1 (MDR1), a toxin transporter colonized by Helicobacter bilis may accelerate the intestinal inflammation [84, 85]. Intestinal virome could also influence the autoimmune disorders, if they extend beyond the GIT. Experimental mice were given the infection with rotavirus increase the IFN I dependent activation of lymphocytes in the pancreatic lymph nodes and initiate the progression of type 1 diabetes (T1D) due the spread of the virus to mesentery and pancreatic lymph nodes [86, 87]. The virome-host interaction along with microbiome could contribute to the health maintenance, disease prognosis and regulation of the immune response, to get the beneficial or detrimental outcome for the host [84, 88–90]. Therefore, virome does play a significant role in regulating the gut balance / or causing dysbiosis, can’t be ruled out.

Gut microbiota including viruses and bacteriophages are important to carry out the systematic balance in gut, circulatory and respiratory systems; certainly warrants the further studies on the interactions with SARSCoV-2. It could provide clues for new diagnostics biomarkers related to dysbiosis, modulation of microbiota to design new treatments to help control the hyperinflammatory response safely and effectively. Development of personalized medicines to control the immune response in comorbid, immunocompromised/or immunosuppressed individuals.

Publisher's Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

