Comparative analysis of oral-gut microbiota between captive and wild long-tailed macaque in Thailand

Long-tailed macaques (Macaca fascicularis), distributed in Southeast Asia, are generally used in biomedical research. At present, the expansion of human communities overlapping of macaques’ natural habitat causes human-macaque conflicts. To mitigate this problem in Thailand, the National Primate Research Center of Thailand, Chulalongkorn University (NPRCT-CU), was granted the permit to catch the surplus wild-born macaques and transfer them to the center. Based on the fact that the diets provided and the captive environments were different, their oral-gut microbiota should be altered. Thus, we investigated and compared the oral and fecal microbiome between wild-born macaques that lived in the natural habitats and those transferred to and reared in the NPRCT-CU for 1 year. The results from 16S rRNA high-throughput sequencing showed that the captive macaques had distinct oral-gut microbiota profiles and lower bacterial richness compared to those in wild macaques. The gut of wild macaques was dominated by Firmicutes which is probably associated with lipid absorption and storage. These results implicated the effects of captivity conditions on the microbiome that might contribute to crucial metabolic functions. Our study should be applied to the animal health care program, with respect to microbial functions, for non-human primates.

Over the last decade, the study of the microbiome in the digestive system has received dramatically increasing attention1. The gut microbiome composition varies among different species, contributing the specific functions to their host2. Recent studies have reported that the normal gut microbiota has been implicated in beneficial functions including dietary metabolism, vitamin synthesis, modulating gut mucosal integrity, immunomodulation, and inhibition of pathogen infections3,4. Some gut microbes also provide the essential roles for non-digestible carbohydrate fermentation producing the short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) which are critically important to host health, involving energy harvest, glucose homeostasis and promoting the mucosal immune system3,5. Hence, the dysregulation of gut microbiota is associated with many diseases such as obesity6, diabetes7, inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)8, and gastrointestinal cancer9. The gut microbiota can be affected by both environmental factors and host factors. However, environmental factors such as habitats, diets, and antibiotic usage, seem to contribute larger effects on gut microbial compositions10. The oral microbiota, which is generally composed of saccharolytic and/or proteolytic bacteria, can be altered by several factors such as oral hygiene, diet sources, or foreign invasion11. These are both transient and commensal populations which typically form the biofilm on a soft and hard surface in oral cavity12. These oral symbionts have been suggested to contribute to the functions of maintaining the oral homeostasis and inhibiting the invasion of pathobionts13.

The long-tailed macaque (Macaca fascicularis), also known as cynomolgus macaque, is one of the NHPs commonly used in biomedical research18,20, notably in the recent COVID-19 vaccine research21. It is widely distributed in Southeast Asian countries22 and can be found in all regions of Thailand. Regarding their overpopulation status which has caused the human-macaque conflict23, the National Primate Research Center of Thailand, Chulalongkorn University (NPRCT-CU) was granted the permit from the Department of the National Parks, Wildlife and Plant Conservation to catch the wild-borne macaques and use them as breeding founders of the center. These macaques were reared under a well-controlled and hygienic condition and the NPRCT-CU has been awarded the AAALAC International Accreditation since February 2020. Nevertheless, the captivity restricted the roaming and foraging behaviors of captive macaques. In addition, rearing them in the cage may enhance the close contact among macaques and allow the transmission of microbes via oral-fecal route which could affect their microbiome. The shift of diets and the captive living environment could also cause the alteration in their microbiota, as previously observed24. A recent study suggested that the microbiota in wild animals could enhance the host response in inflammatory stimuli and improve disease resistance25. Concordantly, several primate centers have an incidence of idiopathic diarrhea which was possibly caused by dysbiosis in microbiota26. Thus, the studies of microbiome in captive (wild-born) macaques living in NPRCT-CU might elucidate the captivity effects on microbiota composition and their roles in influencing the health of animals. This study aimed to explore the oral and fecal microbiome of the captive macaques compared to those in the wild. The knowledge of this study should be beneficial for translation to animal healthcare and management in the primate centers.

The characteristics of long-tailed macaques were shown in Table
1. The sex ratio between the two populations had no difference, but the difference was detected for the age which was due to the uncontrollable limitation of subject recruitment. The wild group had significantly older age (P = 4.0e−3) and heavier bodyweight (P = 0.01) than the captive macaques (tested by t-test, P < 0.05). The age, sex and body mass sightly influent the beta diversity (Jaccard dissimilarity) of microbiome as showed in Supplementary Fig. S1, but these effects were less than the effect of living condition (wild versus captive). Thus, the comparison of microbiome between wild and captive macaques was the main focus in this study.



Bacterial diversity was evaluated based on Shannon’s diversity index (Fig. 1b) while the richness of bacterial operational taxonomic units (OTUs) was determined by Chao1 index (Fig. 1c). The statistical comparisons of indices between groups were carried out by Mann–Whitney U test with P < 0.05.

To investigate the shared OTUs between groups, the shared OTUs were counted and illustrated in the Venn Euler diagram shown in Fig. 1d. The results showed that about 76 OTUs were shared across all groups suggesting that they constitute the common bacterial populations in the oral-gut environment. Interestingly, 192 sharing OTUs between WO and CO were found, whereas fewer overlapping taxa of WF and CF were noted (comprising only 144 common OTUs). The WO microbiome contained the highest number of unique taxa compared to other groups.

The beta diversity was investigated based on Jaccard dissimilarity index and presented by principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) plot in Fig. 1e. The distance of centroids and dispersion of the groups were statistically evaluated by permutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) with P < 0.05. The findings indicated that the bacterial profiles between wild and captive macaques were significantly different (P = 9.99e−4). It also showed a very high dissimilarity (P = 2.00e−3) between the oral and fecal microbiome. The Fig. 1f presented the comparisons of average distance between groups and within-group which were statistically tested by Mann–Whitney U test, P < 0.05. The result presented significantly higher community distances (P = 8.76e−37) in WO group compared to those in CO group while they were also higher (P = 5.48e−87) in WF than those in CF microbiome.

The oral microbiome was dominated by Firmicute bacteria, contributing the proportion (mean ± SD) of 42.1 ± 17.2% and 43.2 ± 19.6% in captive (CO) and wild (WO) macaques, respectively (Fig. 2a). The second most enriched phylum was Proteobacteria which accounted for 38.7 ± 14.0% in CO and 24.6 ± 13.0% in the WO group. The Bacteroidetes was the third most abundant phylum in CO (14.0 ± 8.4%), while Cyanobacteria was the third most enriched bacteria in WO (18.9 ± 25.5%). It was observed that some of WO have a distinctively high abundance of Cyanobacteria. The remaining community included less abundant phyla such as Fusobacteria, Actinobacteria, Spirochaetes, and Tenericutes. The comparisons of phylum tested by Mann–Whitney U test (P < 0.05) showed that relative abundances of Bacteroidetes and Proteobacteria were significantly greater in the CO than in the WO (P = 1.51e−11 and P = 1.08e−3, respectively) while Cyanobacteria was significantly higher (P = 1.80e−5) in WO.

The most dominant phyla in the fecal microbiome were Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes. This finding shows that the captive (CF) macaques have a significantly higher abundance (P = 4.20e−14) of Bacteroidetes (64.1 ± 6.8%) than wild (WF) macaques (34.4 ± 11.9%). In contrast, the Firmicutes contribute a significantly greater abundance (P = 6.16e−6) in WF (52.8 ± 11.5%) than in the CF (27.6 ± 7.8%). The significant difference in phyla abundance also indicated that the CF has greater proportions of Proteobacteria (P = 1.31e−12) but lower levels of Tenericutes (P = 3.53e−11) than the WF group.

To observe the core structure of the bacterial community in both groups of macaques, the top 18 most dominant taxa were identified and presented in Fig. 2b. These results indicate the distinct major population of microbial profiles between groups. Streptococcus was the most abundant oral bacteria, contributing the proportion of 31.3 ± 17.2% and 36.1 ± 19.6% in CO and WO, respectively. The other predominant bacteria in the oral microbiome were Actinobacillus, Aggregatibacter, Porphyromonas, Fusobacterium, Gamella, and Haemophilus. The proportion of these bacteria were varied among samples and different between wild and captive groups. The major population of the fecal microbiome in captive (CF) macaques was Prevotella from phylum Bacteroidetes, which made up to 60.5 ± 7.7% of bacterial abundance while it accounted for only 27.4 ± 14.4% in the WF group. The remaining enriched fecal bacteria included the family Ruminococcaceae, Faecalibacterium, family Lachnospiraceae, family S24-7, Bifidobacterium, and Blautia.

The differential abundance analysis was performed using the LDA Effective Size (LEfSe) tool28. The significant taxa with LDA score > 3 and P < 0.01 were illustrated in Fig. 3. The oral microbiome of wild (WO) macaques had a greater number of significantly enriched taxa than the captive (CO) macaques, as presented in Fig. 3a. The phylum Bacteroidetes with a high proportion of Prevotella and phylum Spirochaetes were more enriched in the CO microbiome. In addition, the CO group also included high levels of bacteria in the Lactobacillales order, Clostridiales, Campylobaterales, and Pasteurellales. In contrast, the most prominent phyla in WO were Verrucomicrobia, Nitrospirae, and Fusobacteria. The various bacteria in the Alphaproteobacteria class were also more abundant than in the CO. As shown in Fig. 3b, comparing the fecal microbial community, revealed that the fecal microbial community has a lower number of significant taxa than the oral community. We identified the enriched bacteria in CF which were mainly Prevotella, Ruminobacter, Succinivibrio, and order Lactobacillales. In the WF samples, Spirochaetes and Tenericutes were significantly abundant phyla. A significantly greater abundance of Catenibacterium, family Ruminococcaceae and family Clostridiaceae were observed in the WF microbiome.

The functional analysis was carried out using PICRUSt229 following the standard pipeline implemented in QIIME227. Differential pathway abundance comparison was statistically tested by multiple t-test (P < 0.05) with 1% false discovery rate (FDR) correction. The significant differences of KEGG ortholog (KO) pathway abundance in the oral microbiome were shown in Fig. 4a. The pathway enriched in the WO group is mostly involved with amino acid metabolism while that of the CO group was significantly high in the glycan metabolism. The WO microbiome was also enriched with pathways in lipid metabolism, particularly such as the fatty acid biosynthesis pathway and synthesis and degradation of ketone bodies. The differential functional pathways of the fecal microbiome (Fig. 4b) showed that most pathways related to energy metabolism were enriched in CF macaques. In contrast, the WF group had high abundance of carbohydrate metabolism including pentose phosphate pathway, fructose and mannose metabolism, galactose metabolism, propanoate metabolism, and glycolysis/gluconeogenesis. Moreover, the WF group also had higher lipid metabolism such as synthesis/degradation of ketone bodies and glycerolipid metabolism than in the CF macaques.

The Firmicute/Bacteroidetes ratio in fecal microbiome of wild and captive macaques were also compared by t-test with P < 0.05. The wild macaques exhibit the significant higher Firmicute/Bacteroidetes ratio (P = 4.64e−12) as shown in Fig. 5a. The average Firmicute/Bacteroidetes ratios (mean ± SD) were 1.82 ± 0.94 for wild macaques and 0.45 ± 0.19 for captive macaques. The proportion of Firmicute and Bacteroidetes is usually associated with lipid metabolism. Therefore, the skinfolds measured from 3 body sites (belly, suprailiac and subscapular) were analyzed to investigate the relationship between body fat and Firmicute/Bacteroidetes ratio. The skinfold belly, suprailiac and subscapular of wild macaques were significantly higher than those in the captive group (t-test, P < 0.05) as shown in Fig. 5b. The skinfolds of belly and suprailiac (mean ± SD) of wild macaques were marginally higher than the captive macaques (belly: 1.7 ± 0.77 vs. 1.2 ± 0.23 with P = 2.26e−4, and suprailiac: 2.50 ± 0.97 vs. 1.92 ± 0.40 with P = 2.20e−3). However, the skinfold subscapular in wild group (3.03 ± 0.80) was significantly greater (P = 8.94e−6) than the captive group (2.23 ± 0.52). The correlation between Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes and skinfold was analyzed by Spearman’s correlation test with P < 0.05 and showed the significance; skinfold belly (r = 0.41, P = 6.59e−4), skinfold suprailiac (r = 0.27, P = 0.03), and skinfold subscapular (r = 0.50, P = 1.68e−4), as demonstrated in Fig. 5c–e. The association of Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio in oral microbiome and body fat measured by skinfold data was additionally carried out. The result was concordant to that observed in fecal microbiota as shown in Supplementary Fig. S3.

The comparison of microbiome between wild and captive long-tailed macaques presents the perspective knowledge for exploring the bacterial diversity as well as the effects of habitat and captive environments on their oral and fecal microbiota. In this study, the wild macaques showed a greater richness of oral bacteria than the captive macaques, suggesting the higher microbial exposure in their natural habitat. However, the oral microbiota of both macaques was similarly dominated by Streptococcus which is the most common bacteria in oral healthy macaques11,30. The Streptococci group is composed of various species that contribute to different roles such as carbohydrate metabolizer, acid–base regulator, and inhibitor of pathogenic species31. These complex species typically colonize in different sites in the oral cavity depending on their specific niches30. Other common oral bacteria identified in these macaques were Actinobacillus, Aggregatibacter, Porphyromonas and Fusobacterium, some of which are pathogenic to humans30,32. However, they are frequently observed in oral microbiota of animals such as chimpanzee and dog33,34. Thus, they may not cause diseases to animals, but further investigation is needed to confirm their pathogenesis abilities.

In summary, this study presented an overview of the effects of the captive environments on microbiome diversity and the abundance of wild-borne Thai long-tailed macaques. The findings implied that the changes of the environmental exposure and types of diet from the natural habitat to the captivity for only 1 year could alter oral-gut microbiota diversity and abundance in long-tailed macaques. The microbial profiles also suggested their putative metabolic functions. However, the interpretation should be cautious due to the lack of metagenomics and metabolomics data in this study. Moreover, the differences of origin and genetic background between the populations could also be a limitation of our study. Nevertheless, the information gained in this study represents a basis for functional microbiome research in long-tailed macaques, implementing the improvement of animal health care. The proper diet feeding program, or a novel probiotics development may be useful to modulate the microbiota protecting against dysbiosis and pathogen infections in these animals in the captive environment.

All methods were performed in accordance with the relevant guidelines and regulations. The animal use protocol was examined and approved by the committee of animal care and use at NPRCT-CU (Protocol Review No. 1775005). Study design and animal specimen collection were carried out and reported following the ARRIVE guidelines (https://arriveguidelines.org/arrive-guidelines).

Two groups of 80 male and female long-tailed macaques (Macaca fascicularis); wild (n = 37) and captive (n = 43) at the age between 1.5 and 18 years were recruited for this study. The age and body weights of each group of animals were presented in Table
1. The ages of animals were estimated based on the dental eruption pattern established by Smith et al.70. The wild macaques inhabited the Wat Tham Praporthisat, central Thailand. The captive macaques were wild borne at Khaoson-Samae Dam, central Thailand, captured, and translocated to NPRCT-CU for 1 year before the date of sample collection. They were socially housed in strictly hygienic condition. They were housed in semi-opened gang cages (4 × 4 × 3; W × L × H), supplied with hyperchlorinated water (1 ppm) through automatic Lixit, and fed two times a day. The food provisioning program at NPRCT-CU is the standard monkey pellets (Perfect Companion Group Co., Ltd, Thailand) during 9–10 AM and fresh fruits during (2–3 PM). The fresh fruits were, for example, bananas, watermelons, melons, dragon fruits, pineapples, and oranges. The facility has been AAALAC International accreditation. The captive macaque did not received antibiotic, treatments, and not in use for any experiment. The wild macaque capture was approved from the Department of National Parks, Wildlife and Plant Conservation; permission no. 0909.702/1431 (25 Jan 2016) and 0909.302/5369 (25 Mar 2014).

The fecal and oral swabs collection of wild macaques was performed in the field site, while that of the captive (wild-born) macaques was performed during the annual health check. The specimens were collected when the macaques were anesthetized with a mixture of dexmedetomidine hydrochloride (Zoetis, USA) (0.03–0.05 mg/kg) and Zoletil (Virbac, New Zealand) (3–5 mg/kg). The polyester tipped swabs (Puritan, USA) was used for specimen collection performed by experienced veterinarians. The oral swab of each individual was obtained by swabbing on both sides of buccal surface as well as lower and upper gum. The fecal specimen was collected by rectal swab directly from animals. The collected swabs were transferred into 3 mL of viral transport media which was fleshly prepared mixtures comprised of Hank’s balanced salt solution (Gibco, ThermoFisher Scientific, USA), 1% (w/v) of bovine serum albumin (Gibco, ThermoFisher Scientific, USA), 100 U/mL of penicillin G (Calbiochem, Merck, Germany), 50 μg/mL of streptomycin (Calbiochem, Merck, Germany), and 15 μg/mL of amphotericin B (Supelco, Merck, Germany). The collected samples stored at 4 °C, transferred to the laboratory within 12 h. Then, they were aliquot and kept at − 80 °C until used. In addition, the skinfold measurement was also conducted to record the body fat accumulation in these macaques following the procedure described in previous study71.

Total DNA extraction was performed as previously described in Sawaswong et al.37 The V4 region of the bacterial 16S small subunit ribosomal RNA (16S rRNA) gene was amplified based on specific primers 16S-515F (5′-GTGCCAGCMGCCGCGGTAA-3′) and 16S-806R (5′-GGACTACHVGGGTWTCTAAT-3′) containing phasing sequences and TruSeq adaptor modified from previous study72. The 20 µL PCR reaction contained 10 ng of DNA template, 0.2 µM of each primer, 0.2 mM of dNTPs, and 0.4 U of Phusion DNA Polymerase (Thermo Scientific, USA). The PCR reaction was then amplified following thermal condition: 98 °C for 30 s; 25 cycles of 98 °C for 10 s, 55 °C for 25 s, 72 °C for 25 s; 72 °C for 10 min. After that, the product was then performed second round PCR to attach the multiplexing index and adaptors as described previously37. Finally, the library was paired-end (2 × 250) sequenced by the Illumina MiSeq platform (Illumina, USA).

Raw data were demultiplexed by MiSeq reporter software (version 2.6.2.3). The FASTQ sequences were analyzed using the QIIME2 pipeline (version 2018.8). Briefly, the mate paired reads were joined and quality trimmed (> Q30). The deduplication and de-novo clustering (97% similarity) were performed by the VSEARCH algorithm. The chimeric sequences were eliminated by the UCHIME algorithm. Sequences of OTUs were then classified by comparing against Greengenes bacterial rRNA database (version 13.8) using VSEARCH. Differential abundance comparison of bacteria between captive and wild macaques was investigated by Linear discriminant analysis effect size (LEfSe). The significantly different taxa (P < 0.01) with Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) score > 3 were selected to plot the cladogram. The functional inference of bacterial microbiome was analyzed using the Phylogenetic Investigation of Communities by Reconstruction of Unobserved States (PICRUSt2) software. The KEGG ortholog (KO)73 abundances of wild and captive macaques were statistically tested by multiple t-tests with 1% false discovery rate (FDR) correction.



Publisher's note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41598-021-93779-4.

