Varied Composition and Underlying Mechanisms of Gut Microbiome in Neuroinflammation

The human gut microbiome has been implicated in a host of bodily functions and their regulation, including brain development and cognition. Neuroinflammation is a relatively newer piece of the puzzle and is implicated in the pathogenesis of many neurological disorders. The microbiome of the gut may alter the inflammatory signaling inside the brain through the secretion of short-chain fatty acids, controlling the availability of amino acid tryptophan and altering vagal activation. Studies in Korea and elsewhere highlight a strong link between microbiome dynamics and neurocognitive states, including personality. For these reasons, re-establishing microbial flora of the gut looks critical for keeping neuroinflammation from putting the whole system aflame through probiotics and allotransplantation of the fecal microbiome. However, the numerosity of the microbiome remains a challenge. For this purpose, it is suggested that wherever possible, a fecal microbial auto-transplant may prove more effective. This review summarizes the current knowledge about the role of the microbiome in neuroinflammation and the various mechanism involved in this process. As an example, we have also discussed the autism spectrum disorder and the implication of neuroinflammation and microbiome in its pathogenesis.

Inflammation is part of a defense response that strives to protect us; however, the alterations in the inflammatory response are deemed responsible for causing various diseases. The inflammatory cascade has come under the radar due to the mounting impact of inflammation on our daily health. The changing lifestyle, diet, and other environmental factors have added to the inflammatory burden in our daily lives. The resulting research has implicated a dysregulated inflammatory response in neurodegenerative and neuropsychiatric diseases such as depression [1]. This inflammation has been termed neuroinflammation.

Human microbiota or gut microbiota is the plethora of microorganisms with a higher amplitude of bacteria inhabiting primarily on the surface of the oral mucosa or of the intestines. The microbiome and the host organism maintain a mutually beneficial or symbiotic relationship [11]. The genome of these microscopic creatures is estimated to be more than the genome of the host under the radar, the human [12]. Recent studies indicated that the human body accommodates approximately 3.8 × 1012 bacterial cells, with a wide range of them colonizing in the human intestinal tract [13]. However, microbiota comprises bacteria, and other forms of microorganisms such as fungi, archaea, protozoa, and viruses are also accommodated. The microbiome possesses the capability of regulating the development of the brain, dynamics of immunity and blood pressure, and metabolic activities in the body through the microbiome–gut–brain axis [14]. In the human microbiome, the bacteria surpass fungal and archaeal microorganisms by 2–3 folds of magnitude and dominate others [15]. In recent years, there has been a significant awareness of the microbiome for its attractive benefits to human health [16]. Sender et al. have reported the occurrence of 3.8 × 1013 bacterial cells in the gut microbiome (GMB) and 3.0 × 1013 human cells in a human subject of 70 kg [13]. An enormous variety of bacteria has been seen among healthy individuals. However, some bacterial phyla dominate the vast microbial community, for example, Bacteroidetes, Actinobacteria, Proteobacteria, and Firmicutes [17]. The community of these microbes differs significantly among humans, primarily depending on varying body habitats, starting from the neonatal stage unto the whole lifespan, based on lifestyle and the disease condition. Some of the most familiar existing bacterial species include Cladosporium spp, Helicobacter pylori, Lactobacillus bulgaricus, Lactococcus lactis subspp. Cremoris, Bacteroide intermedius, Bifidobacterium, Streptococcus mutans, Clostridium spp. [18]. The microbiome’s diversity and precise composition differ depending on factors, including human genetics and immune interactions during early development, lifestyle, food, and antibiotics’ use [19]. The changes in the microbiome have been correlated with various pathologies, including major depressive disorder [20], inflammatory bowel disease [21], and cancer [22]. The microbiome can trigger the immune system into alternative states and has been linked to the pathology of various autoimmune diseases [23].

Trillions of commensal microorganisms (Microbiota) house different areas of the host, which are exposed to an external environment. Around 1013 to 1014 species of microbes reside in the gut; together with their metabolites and genomic materials, they form the microbiome [24] and spread alongside the intestinal villous epithelium layer [25]. Among the population, the composition of the microbiota is interindividual varied [17]. In healthy adults, the composition is relatively stable and diverse [24,26]. However, the composition tends to be dynamic and less diverse during early-life infancy to toddler age and in elderlies [26,27].

Gut inflammation and BGM axis disturbance (gut dysbiosis) are linked to many metabolic and neurological disorders [74]. Therefore, targeting critical hubs of the GMB network such as SCFAs, serotonergic pathways, VN, and CNS macrophages holds tremendous therapeutic and investigation benefits to ameliorate the consequence of gut dysbiosis.

A broad range of chemokines, cytokines, secondary messengers, and reactive oxygen species (ROSs) contribute toward the overall inflammatory response inside the nervous system and related tissues. CNS resident glia (including both microglia and astrocytes), endothelial cells, and immune cells derived from the peripheral sources produce the aforementioned inflammatory mediators [75]. Although neuroinflammation is usually associated with disease pathogenesis of various neurological disorders, it is primarily a protective phenomenon and has protective, beneficial, and adaptive effects [76]. Firstly, neuroinflammation is the communicator between CNS and the immune system [77]. This can, in turn, help in a coordinated response that propagates through the production of cytokines and secondary signals, leading to appropriate behavioral and physiological changes, including fever, lethargy, hypophagia, decreased activity, and reduced social interaction [78]. These changes, in turn, help in reallocating the host resources to fight the infection [79]. Through a complex interaction, the cytokines orchestrate brain development and plasticity [80,81,82] by learning and memory during long-term potentiation (LTP) [83,84]. IL-1β, IL-6, and TNFα, the significant components of neuroinflammation, have been implicated in maintaining synapses [85,86,87]. In addition, IL-1β bolsters the learning process, whereas IL-6 inhibits it [88]. Neuroinflammation is also an essential part of the repair processes after spinal cord injury or traumatic brain injury by maintaining a balance between nascent and active states of the microglia [89]. Together, the involvement of neuroinflammation in these processes indicates that it is a part of the normal physiological processes occurring in the body. Under physiological circumstances, this response is short-lived and is quickly resolved after restoring homeostasis. However, it is important to explore its mechanisms in detail so that the prolonged inflammation, the eventual matter of concern, may be understood.

Neuroinflammation, thus, appears to be a necessary physiological process. However, prolonged, unchecked, and unregulated neuroinflammation can trigger pathways that may lead to nervous system-related disease manifestations such as anxiety, depression, memory loss, and cognitive impairment. Thus, understanding the neuroinflammatory pathways can help solve the puzzle of pathogenesis as well as aid in designing new drug candidates with more specificity, lesser side effects, and better disease prognosis of these disorders.

Whipps and colleagues coined the term microbiome in 1988 to be a “characteristic microbial community” in a “reasonably well-defined habitat which has distinct physicochemical properties” as their “theatre of activity” [132]. With the advancement in microbiology and research, several modifications have been made to this definition. The current, most cited definition describes microbiomes as a community of commensal, symbiotic, and pathogenic microorganisms within a body space or other environment. Berg and colleagues have recently redefined the microbiome as a “characteristic microbial community occupying a reasonable, well-defined habitat with distinct physicochemical properties” [133]. According to this definition, the microbiome is not limited to microorganisms, but it also encompasses their activities, which together constitute specific ecological niches. These micro-ecosystems are usually integrated into macro-ecosystems, including eukaryotic hosts, where they perform various necessary functions for the host’s functioning and health.

The role of the microbiome in these inflammatory disorders suggests that the microbiome serves as an essential regulator of inflammation and tends to control the pathogenesis of various inflammatory diseases. So now, let us look at the interaction of some critical elements of inflammation with the microbiome that can lead us to the eventual subject of neuroinflammation.

As we have reviewed the evidence in the previous section, the microbiome interacts with the host’s immune system and tends to modulate some of its activities and functions. In doing so, the microbiome also alters the cytokines through the microbial metabolites by dictating the dynamics of pro- and anti-inflammatory T cells. This leads to alterations in the Toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling [179,180,181], leading to the induction and proliferation of Treg cells and TH17 cells [179] and dampening of the intestinal epithelial cells (IEC) responses [180]. The proposed role of the microbiome to regulate inflammatory cytokines concentrations renders the microbiome a vital player in determining the dynamics of the immune response.

The vagus nerve innervates all or most of the gastrointestinal tract and is another connection between the gut and brain [182,183]. Bacteria flora in the gut produces neuroactive compounds that include γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), serotonin, dopamine, and acetylcholine (ACh) [183]. These compounds activate 5-HT3 receptors [24] that lead to recognition of bacterial products such as bacterial lipopolysaccharides (LPS) and short-chain fatty acids SCFAs [184]. In addition, microbiota may also maneuver vagus nerve excitability by altering the concentration of hormones such as ghrelin and orexin, thus deciding the eventual fate of a neurological output [185]. The TLRs are expressed on the vagus nerve and sensing bacterial products, resulting in the activation of nodose ganglia. EECs may also release serotonin on the nerve endings to alter the vagal nerve fibers [186]. In turn, when stimulated, these afferents result in reflex activation of efferents, giving anti- or pr-inflammatory privileges to the microbiome [187]. The inflammatory cascades may eventually result in alterations in the flora itself [188], which is why this interaction route is not physiological. Most of these processes are activated in situations such as endotoxemia which leads to drastic changes in the membrane permeability of the gut and leakage of bacterial products [189]. These processes may also be activated by stress, resulting in an increase in the permeability of the intestinal membrane [190,191,192] and the release of bacterial products and modifications in the gut flora in the long run [193].

The human microbiome affects the immune response, definitely maneuvers inflammatory response, and seems to have the upper hand in regulating inflammatory activity inside the brain, the neuroinflammation [194], becoming a vital candidate for regulating the physiology of the brain, the behavior, and cognition. The patients of irritable bowel syndrome [IBS] have been found to benefit from probiotic Bifidobacterium longum NCC3001 (BL), both in IBS symptoms as well as its depressive component [195]. The probiotic’s positive effects have been associated with the changes in the brain’s activation patterns and reduction in limbic activity.

As discussed earlier in the section on aging, cognitive performance significantly declines with aging. Neuroinflammation is an important accused in this context. A critical insight in this regard has come from the gut microbiome-derived metabolite trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO), which has been implicated in the age-related neurocognitive decline and has also been shown to modulate neuroinflammation in middle-aged and older human subjects as well as mice [210]. In contrast, practical strategies to restore microbiota balance and reduce dysbiosis through the consumption of butyrate and dietary soluble fiber lead to improvement in the parameters of neuroinflammation associated with aging in mice [211]. The microbial dysbiosis in the gut has a bidirectional relationship with the neuroinflammatory response after stroke. On the one hand, it is stated to control the post-stroke neuroinflammatory response [212]. It is also a consequence of the neuroinflammatory process at the same time as large stroke lesions alter the balance in the gut due to dysfunctional regulation, which can, in turn, affect the outcome of the stroke via immune-mediated mechanisms [213]. Animal model studies have shown that the dysbiotic microbiome following a stroke can induce proinflammatory T-cell polarization within the ischemic brain and the intestinal immune compartment [214]. The microbial dysbiosis thus controls the neuroinflammatory response after the stroke. Similarly, synucleinopathies, characterized by the aggregation of α-synuclein (αSyn), can cause motor dysfunction as observed in PD. Sampson et al., in one of the most cited articles on this subject, have reported that alterations in gut microbiota can promote motor deficits, microglia activation, and αSyn pathology, which was reversed by the use of antibiotics suggesting the role of postnatal signaling between the gut and the brain in disease modulation [215]. They further showed that the oral administration of specific microbial metabolites in the absence of germs could promote neuroinflammation and motor symptoms, which justifies the causal association of gut microbes with inflammatory processes in the brain. This relationship has also been highlighted in neurological symptoms following COVID-19 infections. The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection has been proposed to play an essential role in increasing neuroinflammatory and neurodegenerative disorders such as AD and PD [216,217]. This newly reported virus can cause an imbalance of the gut microbiome, intestinal inflammation, and dysregulation of the gut–brain axis. However, more data from clinical studies aimed at estimating the risk of various CNS-related disorders in SARS-CoV-2 infected individuals are still needed to confirm this hypothesis. Together these findings suggest that the gut microbiome can play an essential role in the process of regulation of neuroinflammation. The precise mechanisms through which these microbes play this role are many and not fully understood. However, these studies do connect some dots that can help formulate future therapeutic strategies accordingly.

The microglia are the innate sentinel immune cells in the CNS capable of detecting subtle changes in the associated nervous tissue [90]. Owing to their critical roles, they are of prime importance in neuroinflammation and serve as the producers of various molecular promoters and mediators of neuroinflammation [218]. Microglia constitute about 5–12% of the total brain cells [219]. They are involved in neuroinflammatory events of all origins [220]. In the CNS, microglia also participate in regulating neural patterning and synaptic pruning during development and throughout adulthood [221]. Upon activation, microglia release a wide variety of chemokines and cytokines along with the expression of numerous antigenic markers [222]. They also tend to regulate the production and release of various neurotransmitters and undergo extreme morphological changes in response to local and peripheral tissues [223,224,225]. Microglia respond by assuming an activated phenotype and become highly motile [225]. In this activated phenotype, microglia release pro-inflammatory [226] and anti-inflammatory cytokines to maintain homeostasis [227]. Chronic microglial activation can lead to irreversible neurodegeneration [228].

How does dysbiosis alter the state of immune cells inside the brain? There are bits of pieces of information that may help shape up a theoretical explanation of this connection (Figure 2). The microglia are affected by the secretion of bacterial endotoxin lipopolysaccharide (LPS) from gut flora. LPS is a bacterial membrane component found in Gram-negative bacteria that acts as an endotoxin. It has been shown that LPS directly affects microglial activation and has been implicated in the pathogenesis of subsequent neurological disorders and behaviors. Intraperitoneal administration of LPS can increase serum cytokine levels of TNF-α, MCP-1, IL-1β, IL-6, and IL-10. Additionally, Hoogland et al. have demonstrated increased microglia activation after LPS administration and E. coli infection [236]. The effect of LPS on cytokines’ release essentially explains the connection between the endotoxin and its neurological effects. Based on this fact, LPS is frequently used to investigate the effects of inflammation on behavior in rodent models, as systemic injection of LPS can induce depressive-like behaviors in animals [237]. The LPS induced sickness behavior model, also called the depressive-like behavior model, is also predictively validated as blocking TLR4-LPS recognition can attenuate the sickness behavior observed after the LPS challenge [238]. In addition to stimulating the release of cytokines, LPS also causes activation of the IDO enzyme, which alters the state of microglia from nascent to active [239]. Collectively, these observations suggest pathways under which the causal role of the GMB in altering the neuroinflammatory equation and reiterate its strong position for due consideration in therapeutics.

The HPA axis is the primary response system of the organism when faced with stress [240]. It is duly affected by microbiota, and the dynamics of this influence are determined by bacterial strain and availability of substrates that it metabolizes and host factors such as age and gender [241]. Depending on the strain, this interaction employs a diverse set of mechanisms that result in changes in the HPA response towards stress [242,243,244,245,246]. Given the direct impact of HPA axis alterations on the inflammatory response, the microbiome constitutes a trilateral stress response system with the microbiome, neuroendocrine, and neuroinflammatory components [247]. For example, the STAT5 signaling pathway that connects microbiota and neuroendocrine and neuroinflammatory pathways have the capacity to regulate many cytokines [248], such as IL-3 [249]. Its role has been recognized in neuroprotection, apoptosis, proliferation, and differentiation, as well as hematopoiesis and immunoregulation [250]. The susceptibility of the STAT5 signaling pathway to changes in the microbiome composition [251,252,253] means alterations in microbiome composition affect the neuroinflammatory process and related disorders. Another mechanism of interest to overview here is the de novo synthesis of corticosteroids in the intestine, which is directly influenced by intestinal microbiota [254,255]. These glucocorticoids, along with the CRH and glucocorticoids from the HPA axis, can influence microglial function [256]. Due to its negative feedback nature, glucocorticoids are of crucial importance as higher corticosterone levels suppress macrophage activation (anti-inflammatory).

In contrast, lower corticosterone levels enhance the production of pro-inflammatory factors [257]. Glucocorticoids have been found to alter the inflammatory mediators’ expression, thus acting as an anti-inflammatory in nature [218]. Thus, microglia can be influenced by intestinal glucocorticoids and metabolic cues from the microbiota and the HPA axis, and as such, regulation of microglial functions remains susceptible to changes in the human microbiome.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is diagnosed in children favoring the male gender ratio prevalence [258]. Autism spectrum disorder (ASD), occurring in 14.6 per 1000 children, with a 4:1 male to female ratio, is a complex neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by a deficit in communication and interactions, minimal interests, and repetitive behavior [259]. Multiple genetic and environmental factors are hypothesized to contribute to ASD [258]. Biologically, it is defined by reduced neuronal connectivity, immune dysfunction, microbiome dysregulation, mitochondrial abnormalities, microglial abnormalities, and gastrointestinal distress [260,261]. Up to 90% of ASD children are diagnosed with gastrointestinal distress, which has become a critical player in the disorder and the main topic in recent autism research [262]. The gut microbiota appears to be implicated in the gastrointestinal distress symptoms in ASD [263] through the signaling of the gut–brain axis [264,265]. In addition to the usual stimulation of the immune system by releasing proinflammatory cytokines or through the production of SCFAs, altered gut permeability also plays an important [266,267] ASD pathogenesis.

Since the dream of configuration and restoration of the ideal composition of individual microbiome remains elusive, there are no effective treatments to cure autism to report. However, several therapeutic approaches have been proposed targeting the gut microbiome and the gut–brain axis via multiple approaches considering their central role in autism. One of the therapeutic interventions uses probiotics for children with ASD by using a single strain or a mixture of multiple strains such as Bifidobacterium spp. and Lactobacillus spp., which may stimulate immunity, reduce toxins and pathogens, and increase antioxidants and vitamins. Moreover, it stimulates oxytocin production and positively influences ASD social behavior. In contrast to probiotic treatment, fecal microbiota transplantation is another therapeutic approach that focuses on transferring several hundred bacterial strains from a donor to a recipient, which showed efficiency in recurrent Clostridium difficile infection, and in enhancing ASD behavioral symptoms and gastrointestinal problems. Further investigations remained needed to fully elucidate the molecular mechanisms behind the connection of the gut–brain axis, the microbiota, and inflammation in ASD.

Given the diverse role of the microbiome in neurological function in health and disease reviewed here, it is not wrong to consider the microbiome as a critical determinant of an individual’s behavior. The crosstalk between the brain and the gut can be moderated at four different levels, including (i) the immune system, (ii) the parasympathetic nervous system, (iii) via delivery of the neurotransmitter and neuroactive metabolites produced in the gut via the circulatory system (iv), and via the gut neuroendocrine system. For example, an estimated 90% of all serotonin is produced by enterochromaffin cells in the gastrointestinal tract and is influenced by the gut’s microbiome [46]. Although the circulating serotonin is primarily metabolized by the liver and cannot cross the BBB, it can affect the vagus nerve activity and BBB permeability. Alam et al. have reviewed the role of bioactive nutrients and gut microbiota in altering the DNA methylation and histone signatures and their impact on the gut–brain axis and found out that the gut microbiota can regulate the inflammatory cytokines and affect the epigenome by the generation of SCFAs, nutrient absorption, and vitamin synthesis [316].

While long-term effects of dysbiosis in the critical development window have been documented for many diseases [355], not much data is available for behavioral or personality-related subjects, and therefore, only hypotheses can be made. Early life composition determines the adult distribution of the microbiome in an individual [233]. However, it is an ongoing debate if primary seeding of the microbiome in neonates plays a role in shaping an individual’s long-term mental health and personality. The inoculation of vaginal swabs is being advocated and practiced in parts of the world for babies delivered through cesarean section [356,357]. For centuries, however, cultural rituals have been performed that have presumably benefited newborns in establishing a healthy flora in their gut. In the Punjab area of Pakistan and India, a peculiar variation of an otherwise worldwide known ritual exists for newborn children that merit a mention in this discussion. The inoculation ritual is commonly referred to as the administration of ghutti. An elder member of the family, usually the most likable person in terms of temperament and personality, is asked to administer first food to the newborn. The ritual goes like this: the elder takes something sweet and soft, e.g., a date, then chews it in their own mouth to make it even softer and subsequently inoculates the chewed soft and sweet date onto the upper palate of the new-born with their thumb or finger of the right hand. The act of chewing in one’s own mouth is peculiar to Punjab and may possibly be the oldest version of the act. As far as the discussion among the authors yielded, the ritual exists in Arab culture as well with the name of tahnik, where first food is administered by a chosen one and is believed to bless the child with their excellent personality and habits. Of course, there is no empirical evidence so far that there is any correlation between the gut microbiome composition and the oral microbiome of the person who is doing the ritual, and the practice has largely been given up probably for concerns about hygiene and appropriateness for the baby. It is believed that the agreeable elder will transmit good features of his or her personality to the newborn by this inoculation. The authors have wondered how the ancient cultures connected the desired personality features of the elder person being transferred to the newborn with food. It may, in fact, not be the food but the microbiome that can make a difference. The authors, being from different cultures, discussed it at length and postulate it might be this first inoculation of the microbiome that determines the relative composition of the gut microbiome in adult lives and be responsible for the reflection of temperamental and personality features and/or behavior of the baby. Elders in Punjab often ask for a reminder about the administrator of ghutti when they observe something extraordinary in their subsequent generations. A study on microbiome composition found a strong correlation between enterotypes and temperament and personality in the adult life in healthy Korean adults, which was attributed to biochemical signature determined by early colonizers of the gut [358]. Another notable Korean study found that disbalance in gut microbiota and neuroticism may have a close association, and this relationship can be exploited for potential microbiome-based interventions [359]. Many other studies have validated similar ideas [360,361,362,363,364,365,366,367,368]. The subject of primary inoculation and cultural practices needs more basic research for the proper building of the evidence, but the first bricks are laid.

As with many theories underlying biological disorders, the causative analogy between alterations in microbiome composition and a particular disease state is as tricky as it looks. The primary reasons are the diversity of the microbiome and the limitations of data required for establishing a causal link. The microbiome is so diverse that each of the seven billion humans on earth may have a particular composition that no one else has. The phenomenological advances have been promising, and the microbiome does seem to have the potential of becoming a discipline with therapeutic potential [369]. It appears as if microbiome signature research will have to go through computational models if it ever wants to make it to therapeutics. The data has led to many clinical trials [344,370,371]. The studies based on forward genetic techniques are encouraging but inductive in nature, which means they project specific results on the whole. Inductive inferences have long haunted biological research, and a diverse field such as microbiome makes inductive reasoning more of a problem for scientists. Of course, a philosophical discussion of the subject is not in the scope of the review. However, computational models can help solve this puzzle. Individual bits of information can be computationally put together for building up the hypotheses and interventions. Direct interventions, e.g., using specific species of good bacteria to restore the ideal composition, have led to failure in highly expensive clinical trials [372], although it was based on some extraordinary results obtained in earlier phases [373]. Instead, fecal microbial transplant offers a whole other level of diverse and balanced composition that can re-establish the lost equilibrium [374]. An auto-transplant of a previously preserved fecal sample can prove even better during recovery from a potential state of disease that has altered the composition of a person’s intestinal microbiome (Figure 3).

In addition to the previously cited Korean studies linking microbiome with different aspects of neurocognitive aspects of human personality, two microbiome-related projects carried out in Korea merit to be mentioned here. Carried out between 2010 and 2015, the Korean Microbiome Diversity Using Korean Twin Cohort Project and Fecal Microbiome Projects have added great value to the existing knowledge in this area of immense therapeutic interest. This includes newer species of microbiota found in the feces of the animals, as well as building a database of the fecal microbes that, in the future, prove beneficial in redefining the actual value of microbiome in therapeutics.

In summary, microbiome is a crucial part of human physiology that plays a vital role in various critical biological pathways. Perturbations in the normal microbiota can lead to various diseases. The microbiome has the ability to regulate the immune system, maintain intestinal and BBB integrity, modulate parasympathetic nervous system, brain function, and neuroinflammation. Understanding the regulatory mechanisms that govern the microbiome–CNS interaction can help understand the pathological mechanisms that underlie various neurological disorders, including depression and anxiety. The results from the various animal models and human studies have shown that probiotics and microbial transplants can positively influence anxiety, stress response, and depression and can thus help patients suffering from various neurological diseases. However, the mechanisms that influence the role of microbiota in the pathogenesis of these diseases need to be further elucidated. The understanding of these mechanisms can help in the identification of the microbial organisms that can have a significant impact on depression. The studies conducted to date are minimal, and none has been conducted exploring the role of probiotics and microbial transplants in TRD patients. The design and conduct of such studies are a promising field that can be explored to help patients that are not responding to any of the current treatment regimes.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

