The food-gut axis: lactic acid bacteria and their link to food, the gut microbiome and human health

Lactic acid bacteria (LAB) are present in foods, the environment and the animal gut, although fermented foods (FFs) are recognized as the primary niche of LAB activity. Several LAB strains have been studied for their health-promoting properties and are employed as probiotics. FFs are recognized for their potential beneficial effects, which we review in this article. They are also an important source of LAB, which are ingested daily upon FF consumption. In this review, we describe the diversity of LAB and their occurrence in food as well as the gut microbiome. We discuss the opportunities to study LAB diversity and functional properties by considering the availability of both genomic and metagenomic data in public repositories, as well as the different latest computational tools for data analysis. In addition, we discuss the role of LAB as potential probiotics by reporting the prevalence of key genomic features in public genomes and by surveying the outcomes of LAB use in clinical trials involving human subjects. Finally, we highlight the need for further studies aimed at improving our knowledge of the link between LAB-fermented foods and the human gut from the perspective of health promotion.

The lactic acid bacteria (LAB) group is phylogenetically located in the Clostridia branch of Gram-positive bacteria and includes non-sporing cocci, coccobacilli or rods, and aero-tolerant anaerobes, with a molar DNA base composition of less than 50% G + C (Pot et al. 1994). LAB are among the most widely studied microorganisms worldwide. Given the important role that LAB play in different biotechnological processes, it is not surprising that they have received much attention from the scientific community for decades. A search for the term ‘lactic acid bacteria’ in the title, keywords and abstract in the scientific database Scopus (www.scopus.com) (Burnham 2006) returned approximately 32,700 documents at the time of this review (May 2020). In addition, using ‘lactic acid bacteria’ AND ‘food’, ‘lactic acid bacteria’ AND ‘gut’ or ‘lactic acid bacteria’ AND ‘environment’ as search terms, 11,800, 1,500 and 1,700 documents can be retrieved, respectively, which clearly indicates that food is the most widely studied environment in association with LAB.

In this review, we discuss the occurrence of LAB species in both food and the human gut. Moreover, we assess the availability and information retrievable from available genomic and metagenomic data for LAB from food and humans. Finally, we discuss the effect of LAB on the gut microbiome on the basis of the currently available results from clinical trials and highlight future perspectives for exploiting the currently available genome-wide data that can help bridge the gap between food and the gut microbiome and can improve our understanding of the potential of FFs as vehicles for probiotic LAB.

LAB are widely distributed in nutrient-rich habitats associated with food, plants, soil, animals and human hosts (Duar et al. 2017b; Wels et al. 2019). In recent years, the availability of a very large number of genomes of isolates from different sources has allowed comparative and evolutionary studies. Advancements made over the last few years were reviewed by (Duar et al. 2017b). In this work, the lifestyles of Lactobacillus sensu lato (i.e. including lactobacilli and related pediococci) were deduced by combining phylogenomic data with information about metabolism and data from the literature. The > 200 species (Sun et al. 2015) were first grouped in main clades based on the phylogeny according to Zheng et al. (2015a) and then assigned to three main clusters: free living (i.e. associated with plant material or the environment without relying on a eukaryotic host), host adapted (i.e. specialized for living in association with eukaryotic hosts, with adaptive traits that facilitate persistence), and nomadic (i.e. with a dynamic, generalist lifestyle that involves both environmental and host niches, with no signs of specialization) (Martino et al. 2016). Interestingly, lifestyle allocation overlaps with phylogenetic grouping at both the species and subspecies levels, suggesting the occurrence of adaptive genomic evolution in different niches (Duar et al. 2017). To elaborate, the Lb. brevis, Lb. buchneri, Lb. collinoides, Lb. perolens, Lb. sakei, and Lb. vaccinostercus groups were composed of species rarely found in animals and human hosts and therefore considered free living. Among the groups found to be nomadic, those species that, although not strictly autochthonous, exhibited adaptation to niches associated with humans or animals that could contribute to their persistence are of interest. These species could adapt to the gut and persist for at least a limited duration (Duar et al. 2017b). This is the case for Lb. casei/paracasei (Cai et al. 2007, 2009; Broadbent et al. 2012), Lb. plantarum (Siezen et al. 2010; Martino et al. 2016), and Lb. rhamnosus (Ribbera et al. 2013; Ceapa et al. 2015, 2016). Lb. amylovorus, Lb. iners, Lb. johnsonii, Lb. reuteri, Lb. ruminis, and Lb. salivarius were found to be adapted to vertebrate hosts, although some of them are also relevant in food fermentation (Vogel et al. 1999; Zheng et al. 2015b). The Lb. delbrueckii group comprised two main subclusters, one adapted to insects (e.g. Lb. bombicola, Lb. apis) and the other one to vertebrates (e.g. Lb. johnsonii, Lb. gasseri). Finally, the vertebrate gut was proposed as the real habitat of Lb. helveticus, despite its wide use in cheese production. Notably, host-adapted species or strains may have high ecological fitness in their respective hosts and therefore may be highly competitive when administered as probiotics (Duar et al. 2017a,b). On the other hand, species that did not undergone joint evolution with the host may be more appropriate for stimulating the immune system (Duar et al. 2017b). Notably, the lifestyle of pediococci remains unknown (Duar et al. 2017b), a problem that also exists for other LAB species that diverged from lactobacilli. The genus Streptococcus includes several pathogenic species, but the main food-related species, Streptococcus thermophilus, must have followed a divergent evolutionary path from that of its pathogenic relatives, and its genome has adapted to a well-defined and constant ecological niche, milk (Bolotin et al. 2004). This led to the loss of virulence factors and genes involved in the utilization of different carbohydrates, with the organism adapting to an environment in which the main carbohydrate source is lactose (Bolotin et al. 2004). Within the Lactococcus genus, Lc. lactis is of primary importance in the food industry. Lc. lactis taxonomy is currently based on phenotypic differentiation of two subspecies, lactis and cremoris. While the cremoris phenotype was found exclusively in dairy products and related environments, strains within the lactis subspecies have been isolated from different sources, including plants, vegetables and dairy environments (Wels et al. 2019). However, in Lc. lactis subsp. cremoris, a discrepancy between phenotype and genomic clustering was observed, and studies have shown that some strains with a cremoris genotype show a phenotype more similar to that of the lactis subspecies (Wels et al. 2019).

Although the urgent need for a reclassification was frequently highlighted and endorsed by an expert committee organised by the Lactic Acid Bacteria Industrial Platform (LABIP), a final decision was not taken yet. The renaming might have a strong impact on industry, consumers, regulators, as well as on the scientific and medical communities (Pot et al. 2019).

By transforming carbohydrates provided by the raw materials to mainly lactic acid, LAB have contributed to food quality and safety for decades, although this has occurred with highly variable degrees of human awareness. In fact, knowledge of the actual contribution and potential of LAB in food fermentation has evolved over time, from popular but uninformed use of fermentation to well-thought-out selection and application of LAB as starter cultures for the food industry.

Therefore, an additional benefit of FFs is that they are natural sources of LAB, and as such, they can be regarded as ‘naturally potential’ functional foods. Regardless of the origin of the raw material, be it milk, vegetable or even meat, FFs can contain high loads of live LAB at the end of fermentation and in the final product. This does not apply simply to any FF. In fact, many foods obtained through fermentation do not contain live bacteria because they are inactivated by heat, as in the case of bakery products, or are physically removed, as in the case of alcoholic beverages (Rezac et al. 2018). Nevertheless, fermented milks, cheeses, fermented vegetables, meats, etc., do contain a considerable amount of live bacteria at consumption, which increases the number of microbes in the diet by up to 10 000-fold (Lang, Eisen and Zivkovic 2014). Diets rich in FFs offer remarkable microbial exposure in contrast with highly processed foods provided in societies with a high level of westernization and hygienic practices. Rezac et al. (2018) surveyed the amount of live LAB occurring in a variety of FFs at retail and found loads ranging between 105 and 109 CFU/g or ml, with dairy products containing the highest levels. Such high amounts of live LAB are therefore ingested with FFs and reach the human gastrointestinal tract (GIT). What happens after ingestion depends on the specific genetic and functional traits of the LAB strains and on their ability to resist the stress conditions to which they are exposed. High concentrations of pepsin and low pH (<3) are the principal barriers in the stomach, while bile and pancreatin are the typical adversities encountered in the small intestine. However, if they are able to endure to such stress factors, these bacteria can reach the colon and join the complex environment of the gut microbiome (see below).

Overall, the numerous enzymatic activities that can be carried out during food fermentation by LAB can change the biochemical composition of foods, releasing bioactive compounds that can provide health-promoting properties that the same matrix would not display without fermentation (Marco et al. 2017). Indeed, some LAB strains may exert health-promoting activity even if inactivated. The term ‘postbiotic’ was recently coined, indicating microbial metabolites or components of bacterial cell walls released in a matrix from which microbes are removed or inactivated and conferring health benefits when administered in sufficient amounts (Aguilar-Toalá et al. 2018). Such compounds include β-galactosidase for improved lactose digestion; conjugated linoleic acid, bioactive peptides and polyamines; and phenolic compound derivatives for oxidative stress improvement (Marco et al. 2017). LAB can also produce exopolysaccharides (EPSs) with potential cholesterol-lowering, antidiabetic, antioxidant, and immunomodulatory properties (Nampoothiri et al. 2017; Şanlier, Gökcen and Sezgin 2019). Several LAB produce B-group vitamins during fermentation and can effectively increase vitamin levels (LeBlanc et al. 2011). For example, Lb. casei KNE-1 was shown to synthetize thiamine (B1) and riboflavin (B2) in fermented milk drinks, while some strains of S. thermophilus, Lb. delbrueckii and Lb. amylovorus can be used to produce yogurts or fermented milks that are naturally rich in folate (B9), which is particularly important during pregnancy (Linares et al. 2017). In addition, some Lc. lactis strains can produce menaquinone (K2) in cheese and kefir (Walther et al. 2013). Other strains can produce neuroactive molecules, among which gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) is the most well studied. GABA acts as a neurotransmitter in mammals and performs additional functions, such as lowering blood pressure, relaxing muscles, and reducing psychological stress (Pessione and Cirrincione 2016; Şanlier, Gökcen and Sezgin 2019). The ability to produce GABA is recognized in several bacteria of gut origin (Wall et al. 2014), but fermented products rich in GABA have also been developed using specific strains of Lb. casei, Lb. plantarum, S. thermophilus, Lb. brevis and Lc. lactis as starters in fermented dairy products, legumes, cereals, and chocolate (Pessione and Cirrincione 2016; Linares et al. 2017).

Besides exerting health-promoting activities and producing beneficial metabolites, some LAB strains are recognized as the main producers of biogenic amines (BA) in fermented foods from amino acids decarboxylation (Barbieri et al. 2019). The consumption of products containing high levels of BAs, depending on individual sensitivity or the concomitant assumption of specific drugs or ethanol, can cause headache, heart palpitations, vomiting, diarrhea and hypertensive crises (Barbieri et al. 2019). Moreover, several LAB strains have been shown to carry out genes responsible for antibiotic or antimicrobial resistance, that might be transferred to pathogens or GIT microbes (Campedelli et al. 2019). Therefore, in-depth and rigorous genomic characterization of food-related LAB strains is desirable to identify the presence of potentially dangerous activities.

Fermentation has been traditionally used as an empirical method to improve food stability, and in recent years, it has been used to enhance the flavour, texture, and functional properties of food (Dimidi et al. 2019). LAB from several genera are commonly predominant in FFs, but other bacteria (e.g. propionibacteria and acetic acid bacteria), as well as fungi, also contribute to specific food fermentation processes.

S. thermophilus, Lc. lactis, Leuconostoc species, and several Lactobacillus species are the LAB most commonly found in FFs, either as naturally occurring bacteria or deliberately added as starter cultures. These species are among the most common commercially used bacteria, contributing to the production of yogurt, kefir, cheese and other dairy products; sauerkraut, kimchi and pickles; cured meat and fish; sourdough-based baked products; and many other traditional fermented foodstuffs around the world (Tamang et al. 2020). The main metabolic activity of interest for food production is the ability of these bacteria to carry out lactic acid fermentation, an anaerobic process that converts pyruvate molecules from glycolysis to lactic acid (homolactic fermentation) or lactic acid and other compounds, such as acetic acid, ethanol, and CO2 (heterolactic fermentation). These species can also activate several secondary metabolic processes that lead to the production of flavour compounds or typical textures. Combination of these metabolic processes leads to hundreds of different products, some of which are globally widespread, while many others are locally produced, often according to a traditional manufacturing practice (Chilton, Burton and Reid 2015; Tamang et al. 2020). Different food matrices can be considered specific ecological niches in which well-adapted LAB species finalize the fermentation process. In recent years, hundreds of studies have described microbial dynamics during the fermentation of different foodstuffs by high-throughput sequencing (HTS), extensively reviewed elsewhere (Ercolini 2013; De Filippis, Parente and Ercolini 2017, 2018b). Most of these studies are based on amplicon sequencing of taxonomically relevant genes and merely provide a survey of the microbial diversity occurring during food fermentation. Most of these studies have been collected in the FoodMicrobionet repository (http://www.foodmicrobionet.org; Parente et al. 2016; Parente et al. 2019). FoodMicrobionet contains data on microbial taxonomic composition from 44 HTS studies on food microbial ecology, including 29 datasets on food fermentation. To date, this repository includes a total of 2234 samples from food or food environments covering dairy, meat, fruits, vegetables, cereal-based foods, and ready-to-eat foods, with 806 samples of FF products. The samples are labelled according to the FoodEx classification (http://www.efsa.europa.eu/en/data/data-standardisation). Due to the availability of an app built with the Shiny R package, even inexperienced users can easily explore data, access external resources, filter samples based on multiple predefined criteria, aggregate samples and bacterial taxa, extract the taxonomic composition of specific groups of samples, and use them in comparative studies. We considered 806 samples spanning multiple FF matrices, extracted the prevalence of different LAB genera and species (collated in taxonomic groups, as defined by Salvetti et al. 2018), and grouped them according to the type of product or ripening time (Fig. 1). The niche specificity of Lactobacillus species is highlighted: Lb. delbrueckii group is prevalent mainly in dairy products, while the Lb. plantarum and Lb. sakei groups showed 100% prevalence in fermented vegetables and meat samples, respectively. Lb. buchneri group (including Lb. buchneri, Lb. sanfranciscensis, Lb. brevis) prevailed in sourdough, where Lb. sanfranciscensis is a well-known member of the microbial community (Ripari, Gänzle and Berardi 2016). Among other LAB genera, Weissella is found exclusively in naturally leavened sourdough, while Streptococcus and Lactococcus are found in cheeses and kefir. In addition, while most fresh and short-ripened cheeses contain thermophilic LAB, such as Streptococcus, high variability in LAB composition was found in ripened cheeses, in which mesophilic lactobacilli and Lactococcus are also present (Fig. 1). Some commonly consumed dairy products with a simple and defined microbiota structure (i.e. yogurt) are obviously not considered in Fig. 1 as they have not been studied by HTS approaches. LAB are often deliberately used for inoculation to start fermentation, as either selected commercial cultures or natural starters obtained according to a back-slopping procedure. Nevertheless, several artisanal products are fermented without the addition of starter microbes, but they arise from raw materials or from the facility environment, equipment and tool surfaces. Indeed, the food processing environment harbours a resident and complex microbiota that can be transferred to the product and represent a primary source of beneficial LAB (Montel et al. 2014; Stellato et al. 2015; Bokulich et al. 2016). Unfortunately, taxonomic identification at the species level is often not achievable with common amplicon-based HTS technologies, and many studies have reported genus-level identification (Fig. 1). This is a substantial limitation considering the wide species and subspecies diversity existing within LAB and the specific roles that these microbes can play during food production. This limitation may be overcome using a complex shotgun HTS approach, which remains underexploited in food-related microbiome studies. The use of metagenomics can be of invaluable importance for the identification of microbial genes and pathways leading to the production of metabolites associated with the typical sensorial profile of specific FFs, as well as for detecting potential health-related activities (De Filippis, Parente and Ercolini 2018b). In fact, in addition to producing lactic acid during fermentation, LAB confer important desirable properties to FFs. By degradation of carbohydrates, proteins and lipids, LAB can synthesize molecules positively associated with the flavours of FFs or modify the texture of some products by proteolysis, lipolysis or EPS production (Galle and Arendt 2014; Di Monaco et al. 2015; De Filippis et al. 2016; Gänzle and Ripari 2016; McAuliffe, Kilcawley and Stefanovic 2019). Nevertheless, it should be pointed out that identification by HTS does not imply that the microbes are alive at the moment of consumption, since these studies are usually based on DNA, which may be derived from dead or inactive cells. Viable counts of LAB in several FFs have also been reported (Rezac et al. 2018). It is estimated that between 108 and 1012 CFU of bacteria may be ingested daily with the consumption of FFs (Derrien and van Hylckama Vlieg 2015). The quantities of S. thermophilus and Lb. delbrueckii in commercial yogurts and fermented milk vary from 104 to 109 CFU/ml, while the abundance of lactobacilli in cheeses ranges from 109 to 103 CFU/g, decreasing during ripening (Rezac et al. 2018). The levels of LAB in fermented sausages were reported to vary according to the origin, with fermented sausages from Europe showing higher counts than those from the US (<106 vs 108 CFU/g), which is probably associated with the more artisanal manufacturing process used for European products (Rezac et al. 2018). Therefore, the real amount of LAB ingested through a specific FF may also be extremely variable according to the geographical origin, manufacturing process (e.g. artisanal vs industrial; presence, length, and conditions of ripening; etc.), time and type of storage, and use of inactivation steps before consumption. For example, bread and other baked goods are usually cooked, while several fermented vegetables are pasteurized before commercialization to improve stability. However, the low levels of live microbes in the final product do not preclude a positive functional role. Indeed, several LAB may produce vitamins or other bioactive molecules in situ or inactivate anti-nutritional factors, thus exerting a positive health effect even if not alive at the time of consumption (Linares et al. 2017; see above).

The gut microbiome is among the most complex known microbial communities and among the most well studied. It comprises a very large variety of microbial strains belonging to species of bacteria, archaea, fungi and viruses that live in close relationship with the human host and whose combined genome harbours at least 100 times as many genes as the human genome (Bäckhed et al. 2005; Belkaid and Hand 2014). Members of the gut microbiome can influence host health through the production of a wide variety of beneficial or detrimental metabolites, and such molecules can be derived from both metabolic intermediates of the host and dietary precursors (Holmes et al. 2012; De Filippis et al. 2018a; Roager and Dragsted 2019). The most recent research advances have shown a high potential impact of the gut microbiome on the regulation of the equilibrium between health and disease, which is due to both the composition and functions of the microbiome. Complexity in composition is one of the main features of the gut microbiome, and microbial richness in terms of both species and genes has been linked to health (Cotillard et al. 2013; Le Chatelier et al. 2013; Vangay et al. 2018). In addition to differences in microbial composition based on health, lifestyle and geography (Almeida et al. 2019; Nayfach et al. 2019; Pasolli et al. 2019), the gut microbiome is characterized by high inter-individual variability (Truong et al. 2017). However, a large proportion of bacterial species are present in each individual and likely constitute a resilient microbial community (Aguirre de Cárcer 2018). In light of these considerations, the possible role of probiotics appears even more challenging, as after overcoming the barriers presented by the stomach and small intestine, probiotics encounter an army of hundreds of different species and strains to compete with, which affects their chances of exerting their beneficial effects. While the host-specific microbial community can be considered a resident microbiome, the microbes that we ingest and that reach the colon can be regarded as a transient microbiome, the composition of which depends on the type of exposure and on the type of food in the case of food-borne microorganisms (Derrien and van Hylckama Vlieg 2015). Indeed, the gut microbiome is exposed daily to microbes from the external environment, which are mainly of food origin. Probiotic LAB strains can be part of such a transient community and are supposed to perform their activity during passage through the gut and in the presence of the other members of the gut community.

Currently, it remains unknown which fraction of the food microbiome is actively transferred to the intestine and what type of activity those strains can exert in such a complex ecosystem. In fact, there is little literature on the prevalence of LAB in FF consumers and non-consumers. In addition, the possibility that non-probiotic food-borne LAB can also be transferred to the gut to a certain extent is currently underexplored, as are the actual activities that LAB can carry out in the gut as a complementary transient microbial community.

LAB are also widespread in other nutrient-rich environments, among which the human host is of great interest due to the potential functional properties of these bacteria (Soomro, Masud and Anwaar 2002; Duar et al. 2017b). The human microbiome interacts continuously with microbes originating from external environments, including food-origin sources. Probiotic LAB species and strains can constitute a portion of this transient microbiome and perform their activities during their transition in the gut, in addition to non-probiotic LAB that can potentially be transferred into the gut to a certain extent. Despite the availability of abundant nutrients, LAB present in the gut have to deal with a challenging scenario that involves hundreds of different bacterial and non-bacterial species sharing the same habitat (Pessione 2012).

Notably, most of the previous research has been devoted to the characterization of lactobacilli, while less attention has been given to other LAB members (Van den Bogert et al. 2013; Mignolet et al. 2016). Additionally, there is a lack of research aimed at assessing the distribution of LAB in the global population. This gap may be bridged by taking advantage of the growing availability of HTS data, as we will show below.

Food and microbiome research can take advantage of the continuous improvement in HTS technology, which has revolutionized the microbial ecology field in the last two decades (Goodwin, McPherson and McCombie 2016). The continuous decrease in sequencing cost has been associated with exponential growth in terms of the number, diversity, and complexity of the sequenced data. Large international consortia have been established to mainly characterize the human microbiome (Human Microbiome Project (Human Microbiome Project Consortium 2012) and MetaHIT (Qin et al. 2010)), along with other initiatives such as the Tara Oceans Program (Sunagawa et al. 2015), the MetaSUB Consortium (MetaSUB International Consortium 2016), and the Earth Microbiome Project (Thompson et al. 2017), while such large efforts are still lacking in the food microbiome field.

Similar efforts to build databases for the human microbiome have also been conducted for shotgun metagenomics data. One example is the curatedMetagenomicData package (Pasolli et al. 2017), which currently includes more than 10,000 metagenomes from approximately 50 studies. This tool provides uniformly processed microbiome data, including bacterial, fungal, archaeal, and viral taxonomic abundances, in addition to quantitative metabolic functional profiles and standardized per-participant metadata. As in the case for HMP16SData, the data resources are accessible to users with minimal bioinformatic knowledge, and integration with the R/Bioconductor environment allows flexibility for researchers to perform novel analyses and methodological development and for integration of resources. Other similar resources that have been developed subsequently are Microbiome Learning Repo (ML Repo (Vangay, Hillmann and Knights 2019)) and Data Repository for Gut Microbiota (GMRepo (Wu et al. 2020)). ML Repo is a public, web-based repository of 33 curated classification and regression tasks from 15 already published datasets. GMRepo contains 58,903 human gut samples (17,618 from metagenomics and 41,285 from 16S rRNA data) spanning 253 datasets associated with 92 main phenotypes. In this case, the collected samples are organized according to their associated phenotypes. This tool is equipped with a graphical query builder, enabling users to make customized, complex and biologically relevant queries to obtain relevant information that is easy to access. Although such resources are related to the human microbiome in wide terms, at the same time they can be of interest for researchers interested in characterizing LAB in the human gut. Example of database developed for different biomes is the TerrestrialMetagenomeDB for terrestrial metagenomes (Corrêa et al. 2020), while similar products have not yet been developed for metagenomic studies from food microbiomes.

Along with the availability of databases to improve the accessibility to raw sequences and their integration with metadata information, access to genome assemblies is also of great relevance. The benchmark in this context is the NCBI Assembly database (Kitts et al. 2016), which provides stable accessioning and data tracking for genome assembly data. Data can be found for different structures, such as sets of unordered contigs or scaffold sequences, bacterial genomes, or more complex structures, such as human genomes. A particular version of an assembly is identified unambiguously, and track changes are kept to identify genome updates. Along with the nucleotide sequences, this resource provides metadata such as assembly names, statistical reports of the assembly, and assembly update history. Users can easily download sequences and annotations through the NCBI Genomes FTP site.

Along with the growing availability of reference genomes from isolated sequences, the number of MAGs retrieved from metagenomic datasets is continuously increasing, and these data can be combined for comparative genomics. To explore the availability of reconstructed genomes from LAB, we considered the large set of MAGs (N = 154,723) retrieved from 9428 human metagenomes that was clustered in 4930 species-level genome bins (SGBs) based on a 5% genetic diversity (Pasolli et al. 2019, 2020). Forty-nine of these SGBs belonged to LAB species, for a total of 830 reconstructed MAGs, grouped as follows: Lactobacillus (37 SGBs, 515 MAGs), Lactococcus (4 SGBs, 49 MAGs), Leuconostoc (3 SGBs, 7 MAGs), Pediococcus (2 SGBs, 5 MAGs), S. thermophilus (243 MAGs), and Weissella (2 SGBs, 11 MAGs) (Supplementary Table S3). These numbers are correlated with the occurrence of such species in the human gut, although the prevalence of low-abundance microbes is underestimated due to the technical impossibility of reconstructing MAGs from metagenomes in such cases. A large majority of the SGBs (44, 89.8%; for a total of 823 MAGs) represent at least partially known SGBs (kSGBs) that include one or more isolate genomes available in public databases. The most extensively reconstructed kSGBs were those of S. thermophilus (243 MAGs), Lb. ruminis (145 MAGs), Lb. mucosae (50 MAGs), Lb. salivarius (42 MAGs), and Lb. rhamnosus (32 MAGs). Only 7 MAGs spanning 5 SGBs were associated with unknown species (kSGBs), defined as SGBs lacking any publicly available genomes from isolate sequencing, which suggests the rarity of as-yet-uncharacterized LAB species in the human microbiome. Notably, reference genomes from human samples were almost entirely absent in the case of species with high prevalence in the gut, such as S. thermophilus and Lc. lactis (Fig. 3). Indeed, more than 90% of the S. thermophilus genomes were derived from FFs (mostly dairy products), while higher heterogeneity was observed for Lc. lactis, which was also found in insects, birds, fish and plant material (Fig. 3). Therefore, integrating isolated genomes with MAGs from large-scale metagenomic datasets can help overcome the lack of genomes from human hosts and represents an actual opportunity to advance the field through comparative genomic analyses of LAB, extensively taking into account different populations and environments of origin.

Several LAB species are GRAS, due to their centuries-long history of use and human consumption in FFs, and therefore include most of the probiotic species that are currently available on the market. This has boosted the search for and characterization of novel LAB strains with potential applications as probiotics. Indeed, a Scopus search for ‘probiotic’ and ‘Lactic Acid Bacteria’ returned approximately 4900 documents (December 2019).

Other interesting features that are potentially important for probiotic LAB are the presence of attachment factors, such as fimbriae and pili, and the production of antimicrobial compounds, such as acids, hydrogen peroxide or bacteriocins, which may enhance the ability of the bacteria to compete against other intestinal microbes and could potentially inhibit pathogens (Dobson et al. 2012; Sanders et al. 2019). Bacteriocins are small peptides synthetized ribosomally by a wide range of bacteria and archaea that exert antimicrobial activity against other taxa, either of the same species as the producer or across genera and against which the producer develops specific immunity-related mechanisms. Bacteriocins are a heterogeneous class of peptides with different structures, sizes, types of activity, immunity-related mechanisms, and target cell receptors (Dobson et al. 2012; Chikindas et al. 2018). More than 90% of the genomes of S. thermophilus, Lb. acidophilus, and Lb. helveticus showed genes involved in bacteriocin production, while these genes were present in approximately 40–50% of Lb. sakei, Lb. plantarum, Lb. johnsonii, and Lc. lactis genomes (Fig. 4). However, the importance of bacteriocin production in probiotic bacteria remains controversial (Dobson et al. 2012). Many bacteriocin-producing microorganisms can inhibit pathogens in vitro (Le Blay et al. 2007), but results regarding in vivo efficacy are scarce and often do not match the in vitro activity. For example, the antimicrobial peptide lacticin 3147 produced by an Lc. lactis strain was effective against Listeria monocytogenes in vitro but failed in a mouse model (Dobson et al. 2011). The same result was reported for a strain of Pediococcus acidilactici: a corresponding effect was not observed in vivo despite its activity in the reduction of L. monocytogenes viability by 3 logs in vitro (Dabour et al. 2009). In contrast, some LAB strains are able to synthetize bacteriocins in vivo, showing direct antagonistic activity against pathogens. For example, Corr et al. (2007) demonstrated that oral gavage of Lb. salivarius UCC118 into mice protected them from L. monocytogenes infection. However, we should note that bacteriocins usually show a limited spectrum of action against target bacteria that are phylogenetically close to the producer. Therefore, bacteriocins produced by LAB are usually active against only Gram-positive bacteria.

Several studies have reported the health-related functional properties of probiotic LAB. Anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory effects have been proposed for some LAB strains. For example, a strain of Lb. plantarum was suggested to play an anti-inflammatory role due to a specific structure of its teichoic acids (Grangette et al. 2005), while this role was attributed to EPS (Górska et al. 2016), pili (Lebeer et al. 2012) and S-layer proteins (Konstantinov et al. 2008) in strains of Lb. plantarum, Lb. rhamnosus, and Lb. acidophilus, respectively. A strain of Lb. salivarius was able to reduce inflammation and exert a preventive effect on colitis development in mice (Daniel et al. 2006), and the administration of a heat-killed strain of Lb. plantarum ameliorated inflammation and fibrosis in obese rats (Uchinaka et al. 2018). In addition, contact of the growth supernatant of one strain of S. thermophilus with immune cells reduced the release of the inflammatory marker TNF-alpha (Ménard et al. 2004).

*As reported in the original study.

As reported above, some LAB strains may exhibit health-promoting activity even if inactivated. Some clinical trials demonstrated that the consumption of fermented matrices in which probiotic bacteria were heat-inactivated may still have a positive effect on health (Table 1). For example, consumption of milk fermented by Lb. paracasei CBA L74 and subsequently heat-killed reduced the occurrence of infectious diseases in children and boosted the production of beneficial short-chain fatty acids (Berni Canani et al. 2017; Corsello et al. 2017). In another trial conducted in an adult population, the consumption of inactivated Lb. gasseri CP2305 in tablets reduced anxiety and stress (Nishida et al. 2019).

Growing evidence has been provided in the literature regarding the enhanced functional and nutritional properties of FFs. Notably, a large proportion of such foods contain living microorganisms, including LAB, which are genetically similar to the strains used as probiotics. Extensive clinical trials have been conducted to prove the human health-promoting activities of probiotics, as reviewed in the previous section. Epidemiological and clinical studies on FFs have also been similarly conducted, although there are considerably fewer such studies, and a large fraction of them have been well reviewed in (Marco et al. 2017; Fernandez and Marette 2018; Kok and Hutkins 2018).

Consumption of fermented dairy products was inversely correlated with overall mortality (Soedamah-Muthu et al. 2013) and impaired glucose metabolism (Eussen et al. 2016) and linked to overall improvements in health-linked biomarkers (González et al. 2019). Yogurt consumption was inversely associated with type 2 diabetes (Chen et al. 2014; Díaz-López et al. 2016), risks of metabolic syndrome (Babio et al. 2015), risk of colorectal cancer (Pala et al. 2011), and long-term weight gain (Mozaffarian et al. 2011). Multiple randomized, controlled trials showed a higher effectiveness of probiotic yogurts than conventional yogurts in the improving various health outcomes, such as fasting blood glucose levels (Ejtahed et al. 2012) and insulin resistance (Asemi et al. 2013; Nabavi et al. 2015). Different species and strain types present in fermented milk were related to reduced muscle soreness (Iwasa et al. 2013), improved intrinsic brain activity (Tillisch et al. 2013), reduced incidence of fever (Nagata et al. 2016), improved bowel movements (Nagata et al. 2016), reduced risk of cardiovascular disease (Sonestedt et al. 2011), beneficial effects on metabolism (Fernandez and Marette 2018), and positive changes in health and mood (Baars 2019). High consumption of cultured milk lowered the risk of developing bladder cancer (Larsson et al. 2008). Combined consumption of cheese, yogurt, and fermented milk was inversely associated with diabetes (Sluijs et al. 2012). Consumption of fermented kimchi decreased insulin resistance, increased insulin sensitivity (An et al. 2013) and reduced the prevalence of asthma and atopic dermatitis (Park and Bae 2016; Kim, Ju and Park 2017). In a randomized controlled study, kimchi also improved fasting blood glucose levels and other health outcomes (Kim et al. 2011; Choi et al. 2013). Kefir-fermented milk was associated with a large six-month increase in hip bone mineral density among osteoporotic patients (Tu et al. 2015), and Chungkookjang improved multiple parameters associated with obesity (Byun et al. 2016). The risk of high blood pressure was reduced by the consumption of fermented products such as miso and natto (Nozue et al. 2017). Total cholesterol levels were improved by consumption of fermented soy (Cavallini et al. 2016) and Kochujang (Lim et al. 2015). Signs of irritable bowel syndrome were attenuated by consumption of low-FODMAP rye bread (Laatikainen et al. 2016) and lacto-fermented sauerkraut (Nielsen et al. 2018). Clinical trials on FFs have also been conducted in animal models. Examples in mice are represented by the alleviation of atopic dermatitis through cream cheese (Kim, Kim and Kim 2019) and the recovery from antibiotic-induced gut dysbiosis with gut barrier function enhancement through a mixture of Lactobacillus species isolated from traditional FFs (Shi et al. 2018). Focusing specifically on the impact of FFs on gastrointestinal health, there is still limited evidence of the effectiveness of these foods (Mota de Carvalho et al.2018; Dimidi et al. 2019; Wu et al. 2019). Kefir is the FF most commonly investigated in this scenario, with evidence of a beneficial role for lactose malabsorption and Helicobacter pylori eradication (Dimidi et al. 2019). In addition, a recent observational study carried out in the frame of the American Gut project, highlighted that fermented plant consumers showed higher faecal levels of beneficial conjugated linoleic acid (CLA) compared with non-consumers, besides increased abundance of several LAB species and other health-associated taxa (e.g. Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, Prevotella spp., Eubacterium spp.) in their gut microbiome. Interestingly, CLA dietary intake was not different between the two groups, suggesting an effect of the gut microbiome in the biosynthesis (Taylor et al. 2020).

FFs are widespread worldwide and can be considered as primary reservoirs of live bacteria that can potentially reach the gut microbiome and eventually impact host health. Although many speculations about the food-gut axis exist, there is only limited evidence supporting a direct effect of FF consumption on the gut microbiome and on the possible transfer of LAB from FFs to the host gut microbiome. Well-designed clinical trials and broad population studies are necessary to understand whether ingested LAB are effectively able to engraft in the human gut and become permanent members of the gut microbiome. As discussed, the ability of certain strains to reach and colonize the human gut will strongly depend on their genomic capacity to counteract the barriers that they will face (i.e. low pH and bile salts), as well as the specific composition of the host gut microbiome. In future years, probiotic research will surely benefit from recent advances in genomics and metagenomics and the development of new bioinformatic algorithms and analysis tools. To develop a robust knowledge of the LAB-food-gut axis, comparative genomic studies will be needed to compare the diversity and functions of LAB from food and gut environments. In addition, improved availability of LAB genomes from gut isolates will also be important for better understanding the genomic features (if any) that can be pivotal for the adaptation of LAB to the gut environment. Meanwhile, FFs will continue to serve as inexhaustible sources of potential probiotic LAB strains and as natural dietary sources of live LAB cells with a promising role in human gut health.

This study was supported by the project MASTER (Microbiome Applications for Sustainable food systems through Technologies and Enterprise). This project has received funding from the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 818368. The study was also supported by the Italian Ministry of Agricultural, Food, Forestry and Tourism Policies, with the project JPI HDHL-INTIMIC—Knowledge Platform of Food, Diet, Intestinal Microbiomics and Human Health, granted by with ID 790.

This manuscript reflects only the authors’ views and the European Commission is not responsible for any use that may be made of the information it contains.

None declared.

