Syntrophy via Interspecies H2 Transfer between Christensenella and Methanobrevibacter Underlies Their Global Cooccurrence in the Human Gut



Across human populations, 16S rRNA gene-based surveys of gut microbiomes have revealed that the bacterial family Christensenellaceae and the archaeal family Methanobacteriaceae cooccur and are enriched in individuals with a lean, compared to an obese, body mass index (BMI). Whether these association patterns reflect interactions between metabolic partners, as well as whether these associations play a role in the lean host phenotype with which they associate, remains to be ascertained. Here, we validated previously reported cooccurrence patterns of the two families and their association with a lean BMI with a meta-analysis of 1,821 metagenomes derived from 10 independent studies. Furthermore, we report positive associations at the genus and species levels between Christensenella spp. and Methanobrevibacter smithii, the most abundant methanogen of the human gut. By coculturing three Christensenella spp. with M. smithii, we show that Christensenella spp. efficiently support the metabolism of M. smithii via H2 production far better than Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron does. Christensenella minuta forms flocs colonized by M. smithii even when H2 is in excess. In culture with C. minuta, H2 consumption by M. smithii shifts the metabolic output of C. minuta’s fermentation toward acetate rather than butyrate. Together, these results indicate that the widespread cooccurrence of these microorganisms is underpinned by both physical and metabolic interactions. Their combined metabolic activity may provide insights into their association with a lean host BMI.

Obesity was the first human disease phenotype to be associated with an altered microbial ecology of the gut (1, 2). The link between the relative abundance in the gut of the bacterial family Christensenellaceae and a low host body mass index (BMI) now stands as one of the most robust associations described between the human gut microbiome and host BMI (3,–15). Compared to other families of bacteria that comprise the human gut microbiome, the family Christensenellaceae was described relatively recently, when the type strain, Christensenella minuta, was reported in 2012 (16). Prior to the description of C. minuta, 16S rRNA sequences from this genus escaped notice in the gut microbiome, though these sequences accumulated steadily in small-subunit (SSU) rRNA gene databases. A positive association between a lean host BMI and the relative abundance in the gut of Christensenellaceae 16S rRNA genes was first reported in 2014 (4). The association was shown to have existed in earlier data sets (4) but was likely undetected, as this family had not yet been named. Goodrich et al. showed a causal link between the Christensenellaceae and host BMI in gnotobiotic mice: the addition of C. minuta to the gut microbiome of an obese human donor prior to transplantation reduced adiposity gains in the recipient mice compared to those of controls receiving the unsupplemented microbiome (4). The mechanism underlying this host response remains to be elucidated. One step toward this goal is a better understanding of how the members of the Christensenellaceae interact ecologically with other members of the gut microbiome.

Here, we explored the association between the Christensenellaceae and the Methanobacteriaceae in two ways. First, we analyzed metagenomes for statistical associations between the two families and their subtaxa. Compared to 16S rRNA gene surveys, metagenomes often can better resolve the taxonomic assignments of sequence reads below the genus level (30). Metagenome-based studies have so far been blind to the Christensenellaceae, however, because their genomes have been lacking from reference databases. Here, we customized a reference database to include Christensenellaceae genomes, which we used in a meta-analysis of >1,800 metagenomes from 10 studies. Second, to assess for metabolic interactions between members of the Christensenellaceae and Methanobacteriaceae, we measured methane production by M. smithii when grown in coculture with Christensenella spp. Our results show that (i) the positive association between the Christensenellaceae and the Methanobacteriaceae is robust to the genus/species level across multiple studies, (ii) these taxa associate with a lean host BMI, (iii) Christensenella spp. support the growth of M. smithii by interspecies H2 transfer far better than B. thetaiotaomicron does, and (iv) M. smithii directs the metabolic output of C. minuta toward less butyrate and more acetate and H2, which is consistent with reduced energy availability to the host and consistent with the association with a low BMI.

Both the Christensenellaceae family and the genus Christensenella had very high prevalences, as they were present in more than 99% of the 1,821 samples; both the family and the genus have a mean abundance of 0.07% ± 0.05% (Fig. 1b and
d and see Fig. S1 in the supplemental material). To correct for the influence of environmental factors on the relative abundances of members of the Christensenellaceae family and of the Christensenella genus, we first constructed null models in which we selected covariates (see Appendix 1 in Text S1) that explained a significant proportion of the variance of the transformed relative abundance of the family Christensenellaceae and in the same manner as that of the Christensenella genus. BMI and age were significantly correlated with the transformed relative abundances of members of the Christensenellaceae family and of the Christensenella genus (Cf-tra and Cg-tra, respectively, where the suffix “-tra” indicates transformed abundances) and were retained in the null models (Cf-null and Cg-null).

BMI was negatively correlated with both Cf-tra (type II analysis of variance [ANOVA], P value = 0.0002 and F value [339] = 14.46) and Cg-tra (type II ANOVA, P value = 0.0002 and F value [339] = 14.29), indicating that leaner individuals harbor higher relative abundances of Christensenellaceae and Christensenella. Age was negatively correlated with Cf-tra (type II ANOVA, P value = 0.01 and F value [1,468] = 6.56) and with Cg-tra (type II ANOVA, P value = 0.01 and F value [1,468] = 6.53), indicating that younger subjects carry greater relative abundances of Christensenellaceae and Christensenella. However, the interaction term between BMI and age was not significantly correlated with the transformed relative abundances (type II ANOVA, P values > 0.1), indicating that their effects are additive. These results show that regardless of their BMIs, younger subjects have higher levels of Christensenellaceae and Christensenella and that the lower a subject’s BMI, the more of these microbes they harbor, regardless of their age.

The Methanobacteriaceae family and Methanobrevibacter genus also had high prevalences, with 92% and 89% of people harboring them, respectively, and with mean abundances of 0.48% ± 1.55% and 0.49% ± 1.54%, respectively. As described above, we evaluated the association between the Methanobacteriaceae family and of the Methanobrevibacter genus by using models for BMI and age (models Mf-null and Mg-null). The transformed relative abundances of Methanobacteriaceae, Mf-tra, and of Methanobrevibacter, Mg-tra, were also negatively correlated with BMI (type II ANOVA, respective P values = 0.01 and 0.02, F values [341, 341] = 6.66 and 5.11, respectively). In contrast to the Christensenellaceae, both Methanobacteriaceae and Methanobrevibacter were positively correlated with age (type II ANOVA, respective P values = 0.001 and 4.27 × 10−4 and F values [1,468, 1,468] = 10.35 and 12.47), indicating that older people carry a greater proportion of methanogens. Moreover, M. smithii, the most abundant and prevalent methanogen species within the human gut, was also positively correlated with age and negatively with BMI regardless of age; i.e., the interaction term between age and BMI was not significantly correlated (see Appendix 2 in Text S1 for additional statistics).

Next, we looked into how the Christensenellaceae and the Methanobacteriaceae correlated with each other across subjects while controlling for BMI and age. We constructed a model where Mf-tra was included in addition to BMI and age (model Cf-Mf). This allowed us to test whether adding Mf-tra to the model improved its fit and, if so, how much of the variance of Cf-tra not explained by age and BMI could be explained by Mf-tra. We also evaluated the interaction terms between Mf-tra and BMI and between Mf-tra and age to assess whether the correlation between Cf-tra and Mf-tra was dependent on age and BMI. The interaction term for BMI and Mf-tra was not significant and was removed from the model; the interaction term for age and Mf-tra was significant and was retained (type I ANOVA, F value [339] = 8.30 and P value = 0.0042). We compared the log likelihoods of the null and full models (Cf-null and Cf-Mf) to confirm that the relative abundances of the Methanobacteriaceae and Christensenellaceae families were significantly correlated (χ2 test, P value = 1.78 × 10−59). Furthermore, the model Cf-Mf showed that Mf-tra was significantly positively correlated with Cf-tra (Fig. 1b) (type I ANOVA, F value [339] = 287.03, P value < 0.0001) and that the interaction term between Mf-tra and age was positively correlated with Cf-tra as well. These results indicate that the relative abundances of the Christensenellaceae and Methanobacteriaceae families are positively correlated across multiple populations/studies. In addition, although both families are enriched in low-BMI people, they are correlated regardless of a subject’s BMI. Moreover, their association is stronger in older people, suggesting that although elders are less likely to carry as much Christensenellaceae as youths, the more Methanobacteriaceae they have, the more Christensenellaceae they have.

A similar analysis at the species level indicated that C. minuta and M. smithii were the most abundant species of each of their genera, and similarly to the family and genus ranks, their relative abundances across samples were significantly correlated (Fig. 1d and Appendix 2 in Text S1). The less abundant Christensenella gut species C. massiliensis and C. timonensis also correlated with Methanobrevibacter smithii across the 1,821 metagenomes (see Appendix 2 in Text S1). C. minuta and C. timonensis’s transformed relative abundances were significantly negatively correlated with both BMI and age, while C. massiliensis’s transformed relative abundance was significantly correlated with BMI but not with age. Leaner people are thus enriched in members of the Christensenellaceae family, and C. minuta and C. timonensis are more abundant in young people than in older people.

To assess the physical and metabolic interactions of two representative species, we used C. minuta DSM-22607, previously shown to reduce adiposity in germfree mouse fecal transplant experiments (4), and M. smithii DSM-861, which is the most abundant and prevalent methanogen in the human gut (31). Confocal and scanning electron imaging of 2- to 7-day-old cultures revealed that C. minuta organisms flocculate in mono- and cocultures (Fig. 2a and
b and Fig. 3a to
c and
g to
j). M. smithii is present within the C. minuta flocs (Fig. 2d and Fig. 3g to
j) but does not aggregate in monoculture before 7 to 10 days of culture (data not shown). In contrast, B. thetaiotaomicron, used here as a positive control based on previous reports that it supports the growth of M. smithii via H2 production (25, 26), did not flocculate when grown alone (Fig. 2c) and, when cocultured with M. smithii, displayed very limited aggregation (Fig. 2e, Fig. 3k to n, and Fig. S2).

After 6 days in monoculture, C. minuta had produced 7 times more H2 than B. thetaiotaomicron (14.2 ± 1.6 mmol · liter−1 versus 2.0 ± 0.0 mmol · liter−1) (Fig. 4a and
d and Fig. 5a; Wilcoxon rank sum test, P value = 0.1). As expected, M. smithii did not grow in monoculture when H2 was not supplied (80:20, vol/vol, N2-CO2 headspace) (Fig. 4b). After 6 days, M. smithii had produced 9.0 ± 1.0 mmol · liter−1 of CH4 when H2 was provided in excess (i.e., 80:20, vol/vol, H2-CO2 atmosphere at 2 × 105 Pa) (Fig. 4b and Fig. 5b).

In accordance with the higher levels of H2 produced by C. minuta than by B. thetaiotaomicron, day 6 CH4 concentrations were higher for M. smithii cocultured with C. minuta than with B. thetaiotaomicron (respectively, 5.8 ± 0.5 mmol · liter−1 and 1.1 ± 0.0 mmol · liter−1; Wilcoxon rank sum test, P value = 0.1) (Fig. 4c and
e and Fig. 5b). For both coculture conditions, H2 concentrations were very low (on average, across time points and replicates, H2 concentrations were 0.5 ± 0.6 mmol · liter−1 in cocultures with C. minuta and 0.1 ± 0.1 mmol · liter−1 in cocultures with B. thetaiotaomicron), indicating that almost all the H2 that had been produced was also consumed (Fig. 4c and
e and Fig. 5a).

Gas-consuming microbes, including hydrogenotrophic methanogens, grow better in a pressurized environment (32,–34) due to a higher gas solubility at higher pressure, as described by Henry’s law. We compared levels of CH4 production by M. smithii in monoculture and in coculture with C. minuta under 2 different pressures (i.e., 2  × 105 Pa and atmospheric pressure). As with their flocculation at 2 × 105 Pa (Fig. 2d), C. minuta and M. smithii aggregated at atmospheric pressure (Fig. S3a and b). Accordingly, C. minuta supported CH4 production by M. smithii to similar extents under both pressure conditions (ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc test, adjusted P value = 1.0) (Fig. 4c and
5b), even though the putative H2 produced by C. minuta (estimated based on the monocultures) was much lower than the amount of H2 provided in the headspace for M. smithii (Fig. 5a).

We next sought to assess whether the mixed aggregation of M. smithii with C. minuta could be disrupted if H2 was pressurized in the medium, reducing M. smithii’s reliance on C. minuta as a H2 source. We observed that M. smithii aggregated with C. minuta (Fig. S3c and d) even though H2 was abundant. Total CH4 production was higher than in monocultures under the same headspace, reaching 14.2 ± 5.3 mmol · liter−1 in coculture versus 9.0 ± 1.0 mmol · liter−1 in monoculture after 6 days (ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc test, adjusted P value = 0.1) (Fig. 4b and
c). This indicates that interspecies H2 transfer occurs even when H2 is added to the headspace and leads to greater methanogenesis.

Regardless of headspace composition and pressure conditions, the only short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) detected as produced by C. minuta in monoculture were acetate and butyrate (among 10 short and medium-chain fatty acids analyzed) (see Appendix 1 in Text S1 and Fig. 5). To investigate if the consumption of H2 by M. smithii influenced the SCFA production profile of C. minuta, we compared acetate and butyrate concentrations between the cocultures and C. minuta’s monocultures under all conditions tested (i.e., cultures at 2 × 105 Pa or atmospheric pressure with an 80:20, vol/vol, N2-CO2 or H2-CO2 headspace (Table S1).

We observed, along with the reduced butyrate production, slightly but significantly higher acetate production in cocultures than in monocultures (Fig. 6d to
f and
5d) (ANOVA, F value [1] = 317.41 and adjusted P value = 3.2 × 10−9). This difference was also observed in three additional batches performed at 2 × 105 Pa (Fig. S4). The differences in acetate production between mono- and coculture conditions significantly varied with the headspace and pressure conditions (the interaction term between the mono- or coculture and the growth condition was significantly correlated with acetate production; ANOVA, F value [2] = 29.09 and adjusted P value = 3.0 × 10−5). The differences in final acetate production (after 6 days) ranged from +0.7 mmol · liter−1 at 2 × 105 Pa under a H2-CO2 (80:20, vol/vol) atmosphere to +2.2 mmol · liter−1 at atmospheric pressure under a N2-CO2 (80:20, vol/vol) atmosphere. Furthermore, we observed in coculture more CH4 than what M. smithii could have produced based on the H2 production in C. minuta’s monocultures (see Appendix 3 in Text S1). This observation implies that C. minuta likely produced a greater amount of H2 in the cocultures, along with greater acetate production, than in monocultures.

We performed similar coculture experiments of M. smithii with C. massiliensis and C. timonensis at atmospheric pressure. C. massiliensis and C. timonensis aggregated in monoculture, and M. smithii grew within its flocs in coculture (Fig. 7). The H2 produced by the bacteria in monoculture after 6 days of growth (6.9 ± 0.5 mmol · liter−1 for C. massiliensis and 0.6 ± 0.1 mmol · liter−1 for C. timonensis) (Fig. 8a and
d) was lower than the levels produced by C. minuta (Fig. 4a). CH4 production in the cocultures reached 4.0 ± 0.2 mmol · liter−1 with C. massiliensis and 1.5 ± 0.3 mmol · liter−1 with C. timonensis. These amounts of methane are significantly lower than what we observed for M. smithii with C. minuta (6.6 ± 0.8 mmol · liter−1; ANOVA followed by a Tukey’s post hoc test, adjusted P values = 6.8 × 10−2 and 1.7 × 10−3 for cocultures, respectively, with C. massiliensis and C. timonensis against C. minuta) (Fig. 4c and
8c and
e).

We observed less butyrate production in the cocultures than in the monocultures (Wilcoxon rank sum test, P values = 0.33 for C. massiliensis and 0.5 for C. timonensis) (Fig. 8f and
g), with butyrate measured barely above the detection limit in cocultures. While in monocultures, C. massiliensis and C. timonensis produced 0.93 ± 0.06 mmol · liter−1 and 1.10 ± 0.00 mmol · liter−1 of butyrate, respectively; in coculture with M. smithii, they produced 0.20 ± 0.14 mmol · liter−1 and 0.13 ± 0.15 mmol · liter−1, respectively. Acetate production by C. massiliensis was higher in coculture than in monoculture (7.83 ± 0.49 mmol · liter−1 of acetate produced in monoculture by day 6 and 9.75 ± 0.78 mmol · liter−1 produced in coculture with M. smithii), although this difference was not significant (Wilcoxon rank sum test, P value = 0.2). And in contrast with the cocultures of C. minuta with M. smithii, acetate production by C. timonensis was not higher in the cocultures than in monocultures: C. timonensis produced 5.05 ± 0.21 mmol · liter−1 in monoculture and 4.33 ± 1.21 mmol · liter−1 in coculture (Wilcoxon rank sum test, P value = 0.8) (Fig. 8h and
i).

The link between the relative abundance of the Christensenellaceae and host BMI now stands as one of the most reproducible associations described between the gut microbiome and obesity (4,–15). Here, we confirm in a meta-analysis of metagenomes across 10 populations the previously observed association between leanness and the Christensenellaceae family (4, 20,–22). We could also show that the Christensenella genus and Christensenella spp. also correlated with leanness. Similarly, we observed correlations between leanness and the Methanobacteriaceae family, the Methanobrevibacter genus, and M. smithii. These methanogens were positively correlated with members of the Christensenellaceae family. The relative abundances of the Christensenellaceae were higher in young people, whereas conversely, Methanobacteriaceae were enriched in older people. Despite these opposite patterns, the two families correlate with each other regardless of age and BMI.

Here, we confirmed an association of M. smithii and leanness based on metagenomes from 10 studies. In contrast, some studies have reported an association between M. smithii and obesity (2, 43). In this scenario, H2 uptake by M. smithii would promote the breakdown of nondigestible carbon sources by fermenters, such as acetogens, thereby increasing the amount of acetate or other SCFAs that can be absorbed and utilized by the host and promoting fat storage (2, 44). In contrast, and consistently with our results, M. smithii has also been repeatedly associated with anorexia and leanness (4, 45,–48). In this case, the production of CH4 would decrease the amount of energy available for the host via carbon loss, as has been observed in livestock (49,–52). Thus, our observation that the presence of M. smithii directs the metabolic output of the C. minuta toward greater H2 availability for methanogenesis via increased acetate production is consistent with their association with a lean phenotype. To assess quantitatively how the presence and activity of these microbes impact host physiology will require careful modeling of energy flow in vivo.

We generated 141 metagenomes from fecal samples obtained as part of a previous study (53) (see Table S2 in the supplemental material). Metagenomic libraries were prepared as described in Appendix 1 (additional methods) in Text S1.

We constructed a metagenome sequence collection from (i) the newly generated data (above) to complement the 146 metagenomes previously reported by Poole et al. in 2019 (53) and (ii) publicly available shotgun-metagenome sequences from stool samples included in the curatedMetagenomicData package of Bioconductor (54) for which BMI information was provided. For the latter, we restricted our analyses to individuals for which the following information was available: gender, age, country of origin, and BMI. Individuals with Schistosoma (n = 4) or Wilson's disease (n = 2) were excluded from the analysis, as were samples from two pregnant women. In all, 1,534 samples from 9 studies were downloaded from the sequence read archive (SRA) and further processed (Table S3), for a total or 1,821 samples with at least 1 million sequence pairs per sample.

A detailed description of the processing of the raw sequences is given in Appendix 1 in Text S1. To obtain a taxonomic profile of the metagenome samples, we built a custom genome database (55) for Kraken v2.0.7 (56) and Bracken v2.2 (57) using the representative genomes from the proGenomes database (as available on 24 August 2018) (58), to which we added genome sequences of C. minuta (GenBank assembly accession number GCA_001652705.1), C. massiliensis (GCA_900155415.1), and C. timonensis (GCA_900087015.1). Reads were classified using Kraken2, and a Bayesian reestimation of the species-level abundance of each sample was then performed using Bracken2. We obtained complete taxonomic annotations from NCBI taxon IDs with TaxonKit v0.2.4 (https://bioinf.shenwei.me/taxonkit/). The detection limit for the relative abundances in samples was 10−3%; in consequence, all relative abundances below this threshold were equal to 0.

Linear mixed models (R package nlme) were used to evaluate the correlation between the relative abundances of taxa while correcting for the structure of the population; the study of origin was set as a random effect. In some data sets, individuals were sampled multiple times, in which case the individual effect was nested inside the data set effect. Relative abundances were transformed using Tukey's ladder of power transformation (59) and are designated with the suffix “-tra” (e.g., the transformed relative abundance of the family Christensenellaceae is Cf-tra). Covariates in null models were selected using a backward feature selection approach based on a type II ANOVA (i.e., by including all covariates and removing the nonsignificant ones step-by-step until all remaining variables were significant [see Appendix 2 in Text S1). We made 4 null models predicting the transformed relative abundances of members of the family Christensenellaceae (Cf-null), the genus Christensenella (Cg-null), the family Methanobacteriaceae (Mf-null), and the genus Methanobrevibacter (Mg-null). To evaluate the correlation between taxa, we made model Cf-Mf by adding Mf-tra and its interaction with age to the covariates of Cf-null. Reciprocally, we made model Cg-Mg by adding Mg-tra and its interaction with age to the covariates of Cg-null. The same approach was performed at the species level, and it is described in Appendix 2 in Text S1.

We used the likelihood ratio test to compare the nested models via the χ2 distribution (i.e., Cf-null versus Cf-Mf and Cg-null versus Cg-Mg). To characterize the correlation of Cf-tra with Mf-tra and Cg-tra with Mg-tra, after correcting for BMI and age, we used a type I ANOVA to evaluate the importance of the variables in the order in which they appear in Cf-Mf and Cg-Mg. The F value, degree of freedom, and P value are reported for each variable. All analyses were performed using R (60).

We obtained M. smithii DSM-861, C. minuta DSM-22607, C. massiliensis DSM 102344, C. timonensis DSM 102800, and B. thetaiotaomicron VPI-5482 from the German Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures (DSMZ; Braunschweig, Germany). Each culture was thawed and inoculated into brain heart infusion (BHI) medium (Carl Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany) supplemented with yeast extract (5 g/liter), reduced with l-cysteine-HCl (0.5 g/liter) and Ti-NTA III (0.3 mM), and buffered with sodium bicarbonate (42 mM, pH 7, adjusted with HCl 6 M). Cultures (10 ml) were grown at 37°C without shaking in Balch tubes (total volume of 28 ml) under a headspace of N2-CO2 (80:20, vol/vol) in the case of the bacteria and H2-CO2 (80:20, vol/vol, with pressure adjusted to 2  × 105 Pa) for M. smithii. When initial cultures reached exponential growth and before floc formation, they were transferred into fresh medium, and these transfers were used as inocula for the experiments described below.

M. smithii was cocultured with C. minuta, B. thetaiotaomicron, C. massiliensis, or C. timonensis, and in parallel, each microorganism was grown in monoculture (Table S1). Prior to inoculation, 1-day-old cultures of bacterial species or 4-day-old cultures of M. smithii were adjusted to an optical density at 600 nm (OD600) of 0.01 with sterile medium. For the cocultures, 0.5 ml of each adjusted culture was inoculated into 9 ml of fresh medium. For the monocultures, 0.5 ml of the adjusted culture and 0.5 ml of sterile medium were combined as an inoculum. For negative controls, sterile medium was transferred as a mock inoculum. Headspaces were exchanged with 80:20 (vol/vol) N2-CO2 or H2-CO2 and pressurized at 2 × 105 Pa or atmospheric pressure (Table S1). Each batch of experiments was carried out once with 3 biological replicates per culture condition (Table S1).

For confocal microscopy, SYBR green I staining was performed as previously described (61) with the modifications described in Appendix 1 in Text S1. Imaging by confocal microscopy (LSM 780 NLO; Zeiss) was used to detect the autofluorescence emission of coenzyme F420 of M. smithii and the emission of SYBR green I (Appendix 1 in Text S1). Images were acquired with the ZEN Black 2.3 SP1 software and processed with FIJI (62). Micrographs are representative of all replicate cultures within each experimental batch. The preparation of the samples for scanning electron microscopy is described in Appendix 1 in Text S1. Cells were examined with a field emission scanning electron microscope (Regulus 8230; Hitachi High Technologies, Tokyo, Japan) at an accelerating voltage of 10 kV.

Headspace concentrations of H2, CO2, and CH4 were measured with a gas chromatograph (GC) (SRI 8610C; SRI Instruments, Torrance, USA) equipped with a packed column at 42°C (0.3-m HaySep-D packed Teflon; Restek, Bellefonte, PA, USA), a thermal conductivity detector (TCD) at 111°C, and a flame ionization detector (FID). The gas production and consumption were estimated from the total pressure in the vials (ECO2 manometer; Keller, Jestetten, Germany) and the gas concentrations in the headspace using the ideal gas equation. The concentrations are given in millimoles of gas in the headspace per liter of culture.

SCFA measurements were performed with liquid samples (0.5 ml) filtered through 0.2-μm-pore-size polyvinylidene fluoride filters (Carl Roth, GmbH, Karlsruhe, Germany). SCFA concentrations were measured with a CBM-20A high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system equipped with an Aminex HPX-87P column (300 by 7.8 mm; Bio-Rad, CA, USA), maintained at 60°C, and a refractive index detector. A sulfuric acid solution (5 mM) was used as the eluent at a flow rate of 0.6 ml/min (∼40 × 105-Pa column pressure). Calibration curves for acetate and butyrate were prepared from 1.25 to 50 mM using acetic acid and butyric acid, respectively (Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany). No other fatty acids were detected (see Appendix 1 in Text S1 [63,–69]). The SCFA concentrations were estimated with the Shimadzu LabSolutions software.

We used Wilcoxon rank sum tests to compare levels of gas production between cultures after 6 days of growth. We performed ANOVA tests when more than one culture condition (i.e., headspace composition and pressure) (Table S1) was included in the comparison. The conditions in the ANOVA tests (i.e., headspace composition and pressure in mono- or cocultures) were evaluated to explain the variance of CH4 production after 6 days of growth. A Tukey post hoc test was then performed to discriminate between the effects of the different conditions. SCFA concentrations were compared using a two-way ANOVA where the culture conditions (i.e., headspace composition and pressure) (Table S1) and the sample (mono- and cocultures) were evaluated to explain the variance of butyrate and acetate concentrations after 6 days of growth. P values were adjusted using the Benjamini-Hochberg method. Tukey’s post hoc test was performed to discriminate between the effects of the different conditions. All statistical analyses were done in R using the stats R package.

The metagenomic sequence data generated during this study have been deposited in the European Nucleotide Archive under accession number PRJEB34191 (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/data/view/PRJEB34191). The jupyter notebooks and associated data are available at https://github.com/Albabune/Ruaud_EsquivelElizondo.

Citation Ruaud A, Esquivel-Elizondo S, de la Cuesta-Zuluaga J, Waters JL, Angenent LT, Youngblut ND, Ley RE. 2020. Syntrophy via interspecies H2 transfer between Christensenella and Methanobrevibacter underlies their global cooccurrence in the human gut. mBio 11:e03235-19. https://doi.org/10.1128/mBio.03235-19.

