Establishing What Constitutes a Healthy Human Gut Microbiome: State of the Science, Regulatory Considerations, and Future Directions

On December 17, 2018, the North American branch of the International Life Sciences Institute (ILSI North America) convened a workshop “Can We Begin to Define a Healthy Gut Microbiome Through Quantifiable Characteristics?” with >40 invited academic, government, and industry experts in Washington, DC. The workshop objectives were to 1) develop a collective expert assessment of the state of the evidence on the human gut microbiome and associated human health benefits, 2) see if there was sufficient evidence to establish measurable gut microbiome characteristics that could serve as indicators of “health,” 3) identify short- and long-term research needs to fully characterize healthy gut microbiome–host relationships, and 4) publish the findings. Conclusions were as follows: 1) mechanistic links of specific changes in gut microbiome structure with function or markers of human health are not yet established; 2) it is not established if dysbiosis is a cause, consequence, or both of changes in human gut epithelial function and disease; 3) microbiome communities are highly individualized, show a high degree of interindividual variation to perturbation, and tend to be stable over years; 4) the complexity of microbiome-host interactions requires a comprehensive, multidisciplinary research agenda to elucidate relationships between gut microbiome and host health; 5) biomarkers and/or surrogate indicators of host function and pathogenic processes based on the microbiome need to be determined and validated, along with normal ranges, using approaches similar to those used to establish biomarkers and/or surrogate indicators based on host metabolic phenotypes; 6) future studies measuring responses to an exposure or intervention need to combine validated microbiome-related biomarkers and/or surrogate indicators with multiomics characterization of the microbiome; and 7) because static genetic sampling misses important short- and long-term microbiome-related dynamic changes to host health, future studies must be powered to account for inter- and intraindividual variation and should use repeated measures within individuals.

Microbial colonization of the human body begins postpartum (1–4) and proceeds in an incremental manner from infancy to adulthood, with the largest microbial community being found in the distal regions of the adult human gastrointestinal tract (5). Intestinal colonization occurs during infanthood (5–7) and is affected by mode of delivery (8, 9), diet (10–12), probiotic supplementation (13, 14), antibiotic use (15, 16), and possibly maternal microbiome during pregnancy (4, 17). The resilience of a microbiota—that is, the capacity to return to an equilibrium state in response to chemical (e.g., diet, antibiotic), physical (e.g., changes in rate of intestinal passage, pH), or microbial (e.g., probiotic supplementation, fecal transplants) perturbations—is a metric that seems to be associated with higher microbial diversity (18). Numerous published reports have described associations between altered microbiota composition and various diseases; however, there have been few consistent changes in microbiota stability, resilience, or diversity associated with a given disease across multiple cohorts.

Elucidation of other characteristics of a microbiome predictive of health would provide a target for interventions and microbial modifications in generally healthy populations and individuals exhibiting disrupted microbiota and associated diseases (19). Validated indicators for which a scientific consensus could be achieved could contribute to a framework to guide policymakers and regulators on marketing and product claims pertaining to a “healthy human microbiome.” This article summarizes the state of the science pertaining to the human gut microbiome and associated health benefits and identifies research gaps and opportunities.

In 2012, the International Life Sciences Institute (ILSI) North American Microbiome Committee commissioned a review on the question “what constitutes a healthy human gut microbiome” (19) that came to the following conclusions: 1) a healthy microbiome cannot be defined by a single idealized community composition, 2) a healthy microbiome is more resistant and resilient to disruption, 3) certain microbial distributions may increase susceptibility to infection and disease, and 4) it is unknown if dysbiosis, an imbalance in the types of microorganisms present in a given microbiota, is a cause or consequence of disease. For this article, we revisited the central question and evaluated whether the state of the evidence has changed substantially in the past 6 y.

The gut microbiota clearly influences the health of its host. It provides crucial benefits in the form of immune system development, prevention of infections, nutrient acquisition, and perhaps even brain and nervous system functionality (20). In addition, the microbiome does clearly play a causal role in the development of pathologies in animal models of human disease, such as obesity (and associated pathologies), autoimmune diseases, and neurological diseases (21–27). In humans, causality is much harder to establish, but environmental factors known to disrupt microbiome assembly [e.g., route of birth delivery (8, 9, 28), formula vs. breastfeeding (28, 29), and early antibiotics (30)] are linked with disease risk in epidemiological studies (31, 32). In addition, human diseases are often associated with a “dysbiosis” of the gut microbiota, meaning an altered composition or functionality compared with healthy controls. However, dysbiotic patterns are context and disease specific and often not consistently detected among different studies. In addition, for most diseases, it is unclear if dysbioses are the cause or the consequence of disease, and molecular mechanisms by which altered microbiomes cause disease are lacking (27). Due to these complications, it is extremely difficult to define what constitutes a healthy microbiome. Below we discuss the ecological characteristics of the gut microbiome in early life and in adults, as well as the associations that have been associated with health.

The composition of the human gut microbiota changes dramatically during the first few years of life (6, 33) and then remains relatively stable (34). Microbial diversity in an infant gut increases over time (6, 8, 33), and the assembly process is affected by delivery mode, with the gut microbiota of infants born by caesarian section being less diverse during the first 2 y of life than those born vaginally (8, 9). Development of intestinal microbiota in infants is influenced by feeding method (breastfeeding vs. formula) (10, 12), use of probiotics and antibiotics (15, 30), and the introduction of complex dietary substrates during weaning (5, 35). Although these deterministic factors have a clear, measurable impact on microbiome composition, community assembly is also driven by stochastic (nonpredictable) ecological processes (36, 37). Experimental studies in a mouse model where host and environmental factors are strictly controlled find early-life colonization order influences the outcome of the community assembly through priority effects (38). Since the order of arrival of early colonizers is to a large degree random (e.g., in infants born by caesarian section) and largely influenced by life events such as antibiotics that can also not be predicted, stochastic ecological processes might account for the >70% of the interindividual variation of the human microbiome that is currently unexplained (39, 40).

Differences in the trajectory of early-life microbiome assembly during the first years of life may have long-term effects on not only microbiome ecology but also the development of host gastrointestinal and associated lymphatic tissues, which would determine the risk of immune-mediated diseases (9, 41). Early-life events, including mode of delivery and type of feeding, siblings, and sex, shape the developing gut microbiota (28). The early gut microbiota of breastfed, vaginal-born infants is dominated by Bifidobacterium and Bacteroides species, which have evolved with humans and have specialized in the utilization of human milk oligosaccharides (42). These genera could therefore be considered characteristic for a healthy infant microbiota, and they are greatly reduced through cesarean sections and formula feeding (8, 9). However, in the absence of clinical data, there is insufficient evidence to define a universal standard for intestinal colonization and development of the infant microbiome (5), and this report will focus on defining the role of a healthy gut microbiome in adults.

The gut microbiome is a remarkably stable microbial community in healthy adults composed of highly adapted microbial species (43, 44) and shaped more by environment than host genetics (39, 45). Nongenetic and genetic factors each account for ∼10% of the variation in gut microbiota, whereas effects of specific environmental factors (diet, medication, specific genes, etc.) account for ∼20% (39, 40), making the majority of interindividual variation in the human gut microbiota unexplained. Ecological theory predicts that such unpredictable variation is driven by stochastic elements in the ecological processes that shape ecosystems (38).

Because of these challenges associated with identification and characterization of major gut microbiome patterns (73), enormous ecological gut microbial diversity among healthy adults (74), and ethnic origins and geographic locations (46, 68), it will likely prove extremely difficult to define a single, healthy microbiome.

The health benefits of eating a diet rich in dietary fiber were recognized in 430 B.C. by Hippocrates (75). Except for its use as a natural remedy for constipation, dietary fiber was once considered a negative index of diet quality until low-fiber intake was associated with large bowel diseases (76). All dietary fiber definitions around the world include nondigested carbohydrate (CHO) and lignin inherent in food, and most include nondigestible CHO when extracted from edible material, synthesized, or modified if they have at least 1 demonstrated health benefit (77). It is now accepted that type, quality, and food origin shape the gut microbiome and microbiota-host interactions that may affect host health (78, 79).

A dietary prebiotic is defined as “a substrate that is selectively utilized by host microorganisms conferring a health benefit” (91, 92), although the requirement of “selectivity” has been questioned (93). The addition of a prebiotic to the diet may have health benefits; for example, galactooligosaccharide, a prebiotic, decreases intestinal permeability (94), improves laxation when dietary fiber intake is low (95), and may protect from low-fiber diet-induced colonic mucus deterioration (83, 96). Not all dietary fibers are considered prebiotic (97–99) and dietary fibers differ in their physicochemical impact within the colonic ecosystem (85, 100). The ingestion of some prebiotics, but not all, significantly increases absolute fecal numbers of Bifidobacterium and the percentage of total fecal microbiota (89, 101–103). It is very difficult to establish a causative role for the gut microbiome in the health effects of prebiotics (104), partly because of differences among individuals to prebiotic treatments in the microbiome ecosystem (94, 102) and heterogeneity in host functional outcomes that were measured [e.g., number of bowel movements per day (55, 89, 94, 95, 105)] and the possibility that health effects of dietary fibers and prebiotics are microbiome independent (106).

A stable temporal core of species constitutes the majority (>75%) of the microbial community (73, 107), and these are not easily displaced (94, 108). In a study characterizing the effect of a Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG (LGG) intervention that achieved average fecal LGG counts 1000-fold higher than in the placebo group, the intervention was highly variable among individuals, did not alter the temporal stability of the microbiota, and did not correlate with changes in individual host functional measures [i.e., serum lipids (109)]. A systematic review of 7 randomized controlled trials testing the effects of administering probiotics to healthy adults did not find significant changes in fecal microbiota composition compared with control in any of the studies (110). Higher doses of multispecies probiotic formulations (70 billion CFU/d) seem to be necessary to achieve earlier, higher, and longer recovery in the feces (111). Persistence of probiotic strains in the human gut, in most studies, is temporal (only a few days) (112–115). When probiotics were administered as capsules, yogurt, or cheese, there was no effect on clinical chemistry (serum cholesterol, HDL, LDL, triglycerides, ALAT, ASAT, C-reactive protein, hemoglobin) or the composition of gut microbiota (51). However, one has to consider that probiotic strains are for the most part selected based on technological and not ecological criteria, and most probiotic strains belong to bacterial species that are not core members of the human microbiome (116). If an autochthonous core member of the gut microbiota is used (Bifidobacterium longum AH1206), stable persistence can be achieved for 6 mo after daily oral dosing but only in ∼30% of individuals (67). Baseline resident fecal B. longum abundance was inversely associated with B. longum AH1206 persistence, possibly because indigenous organisms blocked the nutritional niche for the incoming probiotic (67). Thus, resident microorganisms of the gut microbiota may outcompete ingested probiotic strains (94). The lack of impact of probiotics on gut microbiota composition can be explained using ecological principles. The gut microbiota is highly resistant to incoming microbes, a trait referred to as “colonization resistance” (117). To become established, the incoming bacterial species must be able to overcome habitat filters in the gut and successfully compete for resources with the resident microbiota (116) (Figure 2). Even if engraftment is achieved, the probiotic strain has to engage in ecological interactions with the microbiota to alter the community. When studies with probiotics have not altered the gut microbiota, it might be due to a failure to consider ecological criteria in strain selection, production, and application, leading to strains being used that lack adaptations to the human gastrointestinal tract (116). However, it is important to consider that probiotics may improve health without changing the gut microbiota (e.g., by direct immunological, metabolic, and neurological effects on the host or by affecting the function of the commensal gut microbes). Consistent with this concept, data suggest that LGG may influence the function of other members of the gut microbiota (118). In this clinical trial in healthy adults, LGG did not alter the composition of the gut microbiota but did modulate its transcriptional profile in a subset of subjects. Expression of genes involved in flagellar motility, chemotaxis, and adhesion from Bifidobacterium and the dominant butyrate producers, Roseburia and Eubacterium, were increased during probiotic consumption in this cohort, suggesting that LGG may influence the activity of certain beneficial commensal bacteria and, thereby, indirectly affect host physiology.

Measuring the human microbiome requires proper sample acquisition, handling, storage, and analysis. Procedures and analytical methods need to be reproducible and consistently applied across studies and populations to obtain accurate diet and dietary intake assessments (119, 120) and to minimize technical variation in metagenomic data (73, 121, 122). For the most part, samples are obtained from defecated stools (122). Before genetic sequencing, each physical, chemical, and biological step involved in the molecular analysis of a microbial sample can be a source of bias, which could lead to a distorted perspective of the “real” microbiome (123). When extracting microbial nucleotides (DNA and/or RNA), microbial proteins, or microbial metabolites, each step can induce species-specific bias (124–126). DNA extraction is a common source of variation among laboratories (73, 127), partially because Gram-positive bacteria cell walls are more difficult to lyse.

As suggested (27), there is a need to focus on establishing causation and molecular mechanism with an emphasis on phenotypes that are large in magnitude, easy to measure, and unambiguously driven by the microbiota to ultimately identify the health and disease implications to humans. Such information is difficult if not impossible to obtain in sequencing surveys, which can only establish associations between microbiome features with host function or disease risk but not assign causation or directionality. Even if such associations are found, they are often not consistent among studies because of a lack of consistent sampling protocols and standards in microbiome research (46). It is currently difficult to integrate microbiome research findings into large databases in a meaningful manner because of the diversity of data and sample collection processes, sequencing, and bioinformatic protocols being used within research communities. There is a need for consensus and the adoption of standardized experimental and computational methods across studies and populations to minimize technical artifacts.

With an expanding body of microbiome-related research that is stimulating widespread interest in prebiotics and probiotics, regulatory agencies are increasingly confronted with proposals for health claims relating to the effects of diet on the gut microbiota. Permissible claims for the purpose of food labeling vary widely across the globe, although product labels and claims are expected everywhere to be accurate, truthful, and not misleading. The Codex Alimentarius Commission (Codex) publishes standards for voluntary adoption by any country. Codex has published general guidelines on nutrition labeling based on 2 types of nutrient reference values (NRV): 1) NRV-Requirements (NRV-R) based on levels of nutrients associated with nutrient requirements and 2) NRV-Noncommunicable Disease (NRV-NCD) based on levels of nutrients associated with reduction in the risk of diet-related noncommunicable diseases not including deficiency diseases or disorders (128). However, individual countries are left to develop guidance for specific foods and ingredients as they deem appropriate, including claims (129) that might relate to effects on the gut microbiome. The extent to which international regulatory bodies have addressed the latter varies widely.

In the United States, nutrition-related claims made in labeling are regulated through the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, as amended (130). Within these regulations, nutrition-related claims consist of 4 types: 1) nutrient content claims, 2) structure-function claims, 3) health claims, and 4) dietary guidance claims (131–133). In Canada, nutrition-related claims consist of 1) nutrient content claims and 2) health claims, which are regulated through the Food and Drugs Act (134). In Europe, 1) nutrition and 2) health claims are options for food labeling (135).

Nutrient declarations describe the amount of a nutrient in a food product, thereby characterizing the nutrient profile of a food. In these regions, regulations mandate the nutrients that must be presented on a label and the format of the label. Reference values for labeling purposes have been established by Codex (percent NRV), United States and Canada (percent Daily Value), and the European Union [EU; percent Reference Intake] and are usually based on authoritative evaluations of nutrient requirements for the generally health population (e.g., DRIs in the United States). In the United States and Canada, claims that a food is a good or excellent source of a nutrient require the establishment of a reference value for labeling purposes and are authorized through regulations (131, 132, 136). Similarly, the EU regulates nutrient claims and lists them in the annex of the Claims-Regulation (EU Directive 1924/2006).

In the United States and Canada, statements can be made for a dietary ingredient that does not have an established reference value (e.g., 240 mg DHA per serving, 12 mg lutein per serving, or 1 million CFU Lactobacillus acidophilus) per serving, but these statements must include the substance and the amount and not imply that the product is a good or excellent source of the substance (131, 136). The EU provides an option to make claims for “other nutrients” when added in a “significant amount,” a term that is not well defined by the regulation, and each proposed claim must be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. For example, “containing Lactobacillus acidophilus” might be a possible claim in the EU.

Before a manufacturer can add and label an isolated or synthetic nondigestible carbohydrate as “dietary fiber” on a food product in the United States or Canada, US (137) and Canada (132) regulations require demonstration of “a physiological effect that is beneficial to human health.” These regulations are relevant when considering labeling a prebiotic. The FDA and Health Canada have published lists of dietary fibers that have been assessed and found acceptable as fiber sources (Table 1) (137, 138). If a synthetic or isolated nondigestible carbohydrate is not listed, a petition must be submitted requesting a review of the evidence of a physiological effect that is beneficial to human health. Examples of physiological effects that are beneficial to human health by the FDA and Health Canada are presented in Table 2 (139, 140). These lists do not include any reference to a “healthy gut microbiome.”

A structure-function (United States) or function (Canada and EU) claim is any statement linking the beneficial effects of a food or dietary ingredient with the normal functioning or biological activities of the body (e.g., dietary fiber to help maintain the health of the gastrointestinal tract). These claims cannot refer to a disease state or a reduction in disease risk (131, 141). In the United States and Canada, when requested by regulatory agencies, manufacturers must produce scientific substantiation describing the expected effect or benefit of the nutrient or ingredient and study design, and it must reflect the totality of the evidence (77, 142). In Europe, function claims must be authorized before they can be used (135).

A disease risk reduction claim is any statement linking the consumption of a food or constituent of food with a reduction in risk of developing a diet-related disease or condition. Regulatory agencies in the United States, Canada, and Europe authorize disease risk reduction claims that are supported by significant scientific agreement (142–144). In Canada, premarket review and approval of claims about diseases or health conditions not listed in Schedule A to the Food and Drugs Act are voluntary (133).

To date, disease risk reduction claims have been authorized for fiber-containing foods and reduced risk of some types of cancer as well as foods that contain fiber (with emphasis on soluble fiber) from certain foods and reduced risk of coronary heart disease (144, 145). In 2009, Canada approved nonspecies-specific claims for probiotics in foods with a restricted list of species (146), but none relate to the gut microbiome. In the United States, guidance was issued on the types of studies from which the FDA can draw conclusions for evaluating health claims (147), but neither the FDA or Canada has approved any microbiome-specific claims for foods containing prebiotics. The EU-issued draft guidance specifically related to gut and immune function and the characterization of claims referencing a “beneficial physiological effect” and disease reduction (148).

Claims related to the gut microbiome are more common outside of the United States, Canada, and Europe. In the Southeast Asia region, several examples of claims can be found (Table 3) (149–156).

Brazil is developing a technical dossier for the approval of new probiotic products. As of February 2019, the draft concept is to include 2 types of claims. The first are general claims, which are specific to a “general function” benefit of the probiotic in the body. An example would be “better gastrointestinal health,” which could include outcomes such as improvements in intestinal transit time or reduced abdominal pain. The second are specific claims, which include benefits related to a physiologic or metabolic function. Studies supporting all types of proposed claims must be conducted in humans and may include systematic reviews, meta-analyses, randomized clinical studies, and prospective cohort studies. Benefits must be strain related (160).

Despite the importance of the gut microbiota and diet-microbiome interactions for human health, North American and European regulatory agencies have not approved microbiome-specific health claims. This is likely due to the inherent challenges and complexities that surround the definition of a healthy microbiome and a lack of validated biomarkers or surrogate end points to define and measure microbiome-host interactions. For regulatory agencies to evaluate and enforce claims related to the microbiome and its impact on host health, critical information is necessary that requires a comprehensive, multidisciplinary research agenda. In addition to existing data, prospective and cohort studies are needed to elucidate relationships between the gut microbiome (species and function) and biomarkers or surrogate end points in the host that are accepted indicators of normal biological processes, pathogenic processes, or responses to an exposure or intervention, including therapeutic interventions (161), regardless of structure (gut epithelium, immune system, etc.) or biological sample (blood, feces, saliva, urine, etc.). Just as biomarkers have been identified and validated as surrogate end points for cardiovascular disease and diabetes (162), similar efforts are needed for the gut microbiome and host responses to the gut microbiome.

Consensus should also be achieved regarding mandatory baseline and follow-up data collection (biological samples, dietary data, health information, etc.), and processing of samples (collections, analysis, interpretation, and data analysis) should be standardized to understand microbiome-host relationships and allow microbiome studies to be compared and/or combined.

Researchers in the gut microbiome field are faced with a daunting complexity when trying to define a healthy gut microbiome interrelationship. As an ecological community, the microbiome is structured by hundreds of genetic, environmental, and clinical factors and likely by stochastic ecological processes, driving vast interindividual variation and biogeographic differences in human populations (39, 40, 164). All this complicates the identification of microbiome features that determine health. In addition, microbiome features might influence risk of disease years if not decades before pathologies arise. Neither cause-and-effect relationships nor the molecular mechanisms are currently sufficiently understood (27). Without this information, it will be difficult to make progress on what constitutes a healthy gut microbiome and translate this information into tangible nutritional or pharmaceutical strategies and regulatory policies.

Because of the dynamics of the human gut microbiome, static genetic sampling misses important short-term and long-term microbiome-related changes to host health. Future studies need to be conducted in larger human populations to address interindividual variability and use repeated measures within individuals to help overcome intraindividual variability.

Multicenter comparative studies and workshops are needed to develop best practices for microbiome-host health studies. Research is needed to develop standards for the collection of dietary information, subject demographics, biological samples (timing, frequency, site), laboratory processing, genetic analyses, and data manipulation/analysis. Based on these findings, metabolomic indices in blood, feces, and urine and host-specific indicators of health should be identified, validated, and agreed on so that forthcoming consensus statements can be used to guide regulatory agencies. Large prospective and cohort studies measuring lifestyle (diet, culture, antibiotic use) effects in diverse populations (age, sex, life stage, disease, socioeconomic status, education, geography) on the microbiome, measuring both microbiome characteristics and metabolic functions of the microbiome and host and systematically linking them to disease risk, are needed to elucidate microbiome-host relationships. More hypothesis-driven clinical research is needed targeting microbiome traits to determine causality between microbiome structure/functional changes and validated surrogate markers of host function, host physiology/function, and health. As suggested by Fischbach (27), this research agenda should focus on establishing causation and molecular mechanisms, with an emphasis on phenotypes that are large in magnitude, easy to measure, and unambiguously driven by the microbiota. If such studies are conducted in an equivalent way to studies that established the validity of clinical markers of human disease, it might be possible to determine what constitutes a healthy microbiome in the future.

At present, a mechanistic understanding of the host-microbiome relationship is lacking, and there is a need for more research (Table 4).

In conclusion, microbiome communities are known to be highly individualized, tend to be stable for years, and show a high degree of interindividual variation. Redundancy in microbiome features is common, and diversity is likely more important than the presence of specific taxa. Ecosystem functions are probably more important than specific individual members (which may even show functional redundancy). As efforts continue to define a “healthy microbiome,” it may be helpful to paraphrase the words of Curtis Huttenhower: “In a forest, a single tree species needn't be present for a forest to be considered ‘healthy’ (even if many do). The presence of every tree species isn't a requirement for a forest to be ‘healthy’. Not every ‘healthy’ forest occurs in a typical forest environment (even if many do).”

