Drivers of gut microbiome variation within and between groups of a wild Malagasy primate

Various aspects of sociality can benefit individuals’ health. The host social environment and its relative contributions to the host-microbiome relationship have emerged as key topics in microbial research. Yet, understanding the mechanisms that lead to structural variation in the social microbiome, the collective microbial metacommunity of an animal’s social network, remains difficult since multiple processes operate simultaneously within and among animal social networks. Here, we examined the potential drivers of the convergence of the gut microbiome on multiple scales among and within seven neighbouring groups of wild Verreaux’s sifakas (Propithecus verreauxi) — a folivorous primate of Madagascar.

Over four field seasons, we collected 519 faecal samples of 41 animals and determined gut communities via 16S and 18S rRNA gene amplicon analyses. First, we examined whether group members share more similar gut microbiota and if diet, home range overlap, or habitat similarity drive between-group variation in gut communities, accounting for seasonality. Next, we examined within-group variation in gut microbiota by examining the potential effects of social contact rates, male rank, and maternal relatedness. To explore the host intrinsic effects on the gut community structure, we investigated age, sex, faecal glucocorticoid metabolites, and female reproductive state. We found that group members share more similar gut microbiota and differ in alpha diversity, while none of the environmental predictors explained the patterns of between-group variation. Maternal relatedness played an important role in within-group microbial homogeneity and may also explain why adult group members shared the least similar gut microbiota. Also, dominant males differed in their bacterial composition from their group mates, which might be driven by rank-related differences in physiology and scent-marking behaviours. Links to sex, female reproductive state, or faecal glucocorticoid metabolites were not detected.

Environmental factors define the general set-up of population-specific gut microbiota, but intrinsic and social factors have a stronger impact on gut microbiome variation in this primate species.

Video abstract video file.(82M, mp4)

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s40168-021-01223-6.

The abundant and diverse microbial communities that live in and on humans as well as animals are key for their hosts’ physiology, ecology, and evolution. The gut microbiota include many types of bacteria and are among the most investigated microbial communities that, inter alia, are essential for host metabolism [1, 2], mediate its immune system [3, 4], and even impact its behaviour [5]. Thus, the interest in understanding socio-ecological drivers of the composition of gut microbiota is widespread.

Finally, on the individual level, we investigated if and how various intrinsic factors influence individual microbial diversity and composition, and thus gut community variation among group members. The majority of previous studies in different taxa, including Verreaux’s sifakas, found no or only weak effects of age and sex [18, 44, 60, 62, 89]. Therefore, we predicted to find similar patterns. Moreover, only a few studies of wild animal populations investigated potential links between physiological variables and microbiota variation [51, 52, 90]. Since female reproductive state and male dominance status in Verreaux’s sifakas are positively correlated with faecal glucocorticoid metabolite concentrations (fGCMs) [70], we explored potential links between female reproductive states, male rank, and individual fGCMs on gut microbial diversity.

This study was carried out during four field seasons (April to May 2016/2017 and September to October 2016/2017) in Kirindy Forest, western Madagascar (44° 39′ E, 20° 03′ S). The forest is a dry deciduous forest with pronounced seasonality, including a short hot, wet season (November to March), when food availability is high, and a longer, cooler dry season (April to October) when food availability is low (Fig.
1A) [58]. We observed 41 individuals belonging to seven social groups that are habituated to human’s presence and individually marked with unique collars. One group (M) only entered the study area by the end of 2016, so that data for this group were only available for the study year 2017.

To characterise the habitat structure of the different home ranges, we conducted forest inventories of 10 randomly selected square plots (~ 25 × 25 m; 6 plots for group F1) within the home range of each group in 2012 [91] and 2016 [92]. We identified all trees with diameters at breast height larger than 5 cm, resulting in a data set comprising 12,177 trees of 168 different species found in 66 phenology plots (for details, see [92]). We used the number of trees per species within a groups’ home range as a proxy for evaluating habitat dissimilarity between groups (see below). Estimates of food availability for the study area were based on monthly phenology scores for leaves, fruit, and flowers of 690 trees, which ranged from 0 (complete absence) to 4 (maximum abundance) (for details, see [91]).

In a previous study [92], we assed home range sizes of each group over the same four field seasons with data collected by GPS collars. On average, we recorded GPS data points for 651 days with 21,393 ± 3,119 GPS locations per group (mean ± SD; range 17,179–24,070). For estimating home range sizes, we used monthly 95% fixed kernels with the adehabitatHR package [93] in Rstudio (R Version 3.6.1, [94]). Home range overlap among groups per field season was calculated with the function kerneloverlaphr of the adehabitatHR package. Figure
1B illustrates groups’ average home ranges across the study period.

Between April 2016 and March 2018, we conducted focal animal sampling on all individuals except infants younger than 9 months. Observations lasted 1 h per individual and were conducted for 3 h in the morning and 3 h in the afternoon in a randomised but counter-balanced order. We continuously recorded social behaviours (i.e. allogrooming, play, body contact, proximity of < 1 m, and aggression), including the identity of involved conspecifics, and non-social behaviours, like feeding, locomoting, resting, and auto-grooming. In total, we collected 1812 h of behavioural data with 44 h ± 12 h per individual (mean ± SD; range 25–56 h). We additionally recorded the identity of feeding plants and parts. As our study required focal animal observations, it was not possible to record data blindly.

Faecal glucocorticoid metabolite (fGCM) concentrations were assessed non-invasively from faecal samples. During the four field seasons, we collected and analysed 1152 samples (3.45 ± 1.1 (mean ± SD) per animal per month). After extraction at the field site, we determined fGCM concentrations with a validated enzyme immunoassay (EIA) for the measurement of immunoreactive 11ß-hydrodroxyetiochoolanolone in the endocrinology lab of the German Primate Center. For more details on data collection and analysis, see Additional file 1 and [70].

We collected and analysed 519 faecal samples during four field seasons (12.7 ± 3.6 (mean ± SD) total samples per animal; 3.9 ± 0.7 (mean ± SD) samples per animal per field season). Samples were only collected when they could be assigned to an individual. We stored samples in 2 ml polypropylene tubes containing 1 ml RNAlater (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) at ambient temperature for 24h. Afterwards, samples were stored at − 20°C and shipped to Germany for further analyses.

We conducted DNA extraction with the PowerSoil DNA isolation kit (MoBio, Carlsbad, Canada). PCR reactions to generate bacterial 16S rRNA gene amplicons were performed in triplicates for each sample, then pooled in equimolar amounts and cleaned. Afterwards, we conducted dual-indexed paired-end sequencing with the Illumina MiSeq platform and v3 chemistry (see Additional file 1 for details on protocols).

Amplicon sequence variants (ASVs) were generated with VSEARCH version 2.15. We removed chimeric sequences with VSEARCH using UCHIME3 in de novo (--uchime3_denovo) and reference (--uchime_ref) mode against the SILVA SSU NR database (v138.1) [95]. We taxonomically classified ASVs with BLAST 2.9.0+ [96] against the SILVA SSU v138.1 database and removed chloroplasts and extrinsic domains from the data set. We used the following identity thresholds for taxonomical classification: species (≥ 98.7%), genus (≥ 94.5%), family (≥ 86.5%), order (≥ 82%), class (≥ 78.5%), and phylum (≥ 75%) [97]. Assignments with lower identities were marked as unclassified at the given taxonomic rank.

The following analyses were conducted in Rstudio (R Version 3.6.1). First, we normalised all sequences with geometric means of pairwise ratios (GMPR) (v0.1.3) [98]—a method we chose due to its robustness for zero-inflated sequencing data. To generate a phylogenetic tree all sequences of the filtered dataset were aligned with a maximum of 100 iterations using MAFFT [99]. The tree was calculated with FastTree 2.1.7 (OpeMP) [100] and then midpoint rooted and saved in newick format with FigTree (version 1.4.4) [101]. Alpha diversity was calculated with Faith’s phylogenetic diversities (PD) [102] with the picante package (v1.8.2). For beta diversity, we computed generalised UniFrac distances (GuniFrac) by utilising the GuniFrac function of the GuniFrac package (version 1.1) [103]. Relative abundances in the form of bar charts were generated with ggplot2 (version 3.3.3) using standard R packages. Heatmaps were built with the ampvis2 package (version 2.6.7) [104].

To identify ASVs that are significantly associated with certain “groups”, i.e. social groups, age classes, female reproductive stages, or rank, we conducted indicator species analyses using the package indicspecies (version 1.7.9) with the multipatt function [63, 64]. Therefore, samples were rarefied in ampvis2 to 11,895 reads, based on the lower threshold for the number of reads in a sample in rarefaction curves. We calculated point biserial correlation coefficient with the r.g function and set the significance cut-off to p < 0.05. Cytoscape (version 3.8.2) was used to visualise association networks, using the edge-weighted spring embedded layout algorithm, whereby “groups” were source nodes, ASVs were target nodes, and edges weighted positive associations between ASVs and source nodes.

ASVs were generated as described above for 16S rRNA genes. Quality-filtered sequences were mapped to chimera-free ASVs and an ASV table was created with VSEARCH. Finally, we taxonomically classified ASVs with BLASTn against the SILVA SSU NR database.

For more details on the gut microbiome analyses, see Electronic Supplementary Material (Additional file 1).

All statistical analyses were conducted in R (versions 3.6.1 and 4.1.1).

We examined the relationship between group membership and beta diversity with Mantel tests [105] using 1000 permutations, including the original data as one permutation. Unlike PERMANOVAs, the test restricts permutations such that non-independence due to repeated sampling of the same individuals is accounted for. We conducted four Mantel tests, each including only samples of one of the four field trips. The Mantel test was restricted such that samples selected from the same individual were always permuted as a block. The test statistic yielded the mean absolute differences in dissimilarities within and between the groups. We determined p-values as the proportion of permutations that resulted in larger test statistics than or equal to the test statistics of the original data. The unpublished functions for this analysis were kindly provided by Dr Roger Mundry.

We examined whether groups with ecologically more similar home ranges share more similar gut microbiomes. To estimate the differences in home ranges, we computed Bray-Curtis dissimilarities among groups (calculated with the vegdist function of the vegan package) based on tree species abundances within each group’s home range. Next, we averaged GuniFrac distances for each group dyad per field season. We then calculated the Mantel tests based on Pearson’s product-moment correlation, examining the link between dyadic GuniFrac distances and dyadic habitat dissimilarity between groups for each field season.

To investigate potential factors modulating Verreaux’s sifakas’ gut microbial composition, we computed linear mixed models (LMM) [106] using the function lmer of the lme4 package (version 1.1.26) [107] with the optimiser “bobyqa”. For all models, covariates were z-transformed (transformed to a mean of zero and a SD of one) to achieve easier interpretable models [108] and to facilitate model convergence. If data on predictors were missing, e.g. age, we excluded the sample from the model. We included random slopes to keep type I error rates at the nominal level of 5% [109].

We fitted the following models (for an overview of all models, see Tables S1 & S2).

We investigated whether samples from the same individual were more similar than samples from different individuals. We included only dyads of which both individuals were from the same group. The mean GuniFrac distances per ID dyad and per field season were used as a response, the factor “Same ID” (yes or no) was used as a predictor, individual dyads and group ID were used as random effects, and field season was used as a control factor and as a random slope.

In this model, we investigated whether groups with overlapping home ranges and groups with more similar diets share more similar gut microbiomes. The mean GuniFrac distances per group dyad per field season were used as a response, the mean home range overlaps per field season and the mean diet dissimilarity per field season were used as predictors, group dyad was used as a random effect, and field season was used as a random slope. To control for seasonal variation in ranging patterns (see [92]) and diet, we included field season as a control factor. We also compared fruit and leave intake rates between the groups and seasons in additional LMMs described in Additional file 1 (Tables S3 & S4; Fig. S1).

We investigated the potential effect of maternal relatedness on gut microbiome similarity among individuals. Maternal relatedness of older individuals was determined via genetic analyses in a prior study (1995–2005 [72]). For younger individuals, we used behavioural observations of mother-offspring dyads to determine relatedness [58]. We considered animals as maternally related if they were known to have one of the following degrees of kinship: RC = 0.50: mother-offspring and siblings; RC = 0.25: half-siblings, grandmother-grandchild, and aunt/uncle-nephew/niece. In case we could not determine whether individuals were full- or half-siblings, we assigned an RC of 0.375. Figure
1B illustrates all known degrees of maternal relatedness within the study population. The mean GuniFrac distances of individual dyads per field season were used as a response, the relatedness coefficient between these individuals and the interaction between relatedness coefficient and group membership (same or different) were used as predictors, individual dyad as a random effect, and field season as a control factor and random slope.

We examined potential correlations of microbiome similarity between group members and age, sex, seasonality, and time spent affiliating, including grooming and other activities in body contact (i.e. feeding, resting). The mean GuniFrac distances between group members per field season were used as a response, and age class dyad (e.g. adult-infant), sex dyad (e.g. female-female), field season, and time spent affiliating (in min/h) were predictors. We included maternal relatedness as a control factor. Individual dyads and group ID were used as random effects and field seasons, maternal relatedness, and time spent affiliating as random slopes.

To examine the potential effects of male rank on the microbiome similarity of adult group members, we divided the rank into three categories: dominant males, subordinate adult males, and adult females. Since female dyads consisted mainly of mother-daughter pairs, we did not discern dominance relationships among them. The mean GuniFrac distances between group members per field season were used as a response; rank dyad (e. g. dominant male—adult female) and residence time, i.e. number of years two group members spent together in the same group (range 0.21–14.2, mean ± SD 5.60 ± 3.45), were predictors, and field season was included as a control factor. Individual dyads and group ID were used as random effects and field seasons as a control factor and a random slope.

We applied four LMMs to examine the correlations of Faith’s phylogenetic diversity (PD) with field season, various intrinsic factors, affiliation, male rank, group ID, and diet. Models had to be separated to avoid issues with collinearity (e.g. between age and rank). In model VI, field season, sex, age, mean monthly measures of fGCMs, group ID, and mean proportions of consumed leaves per field season were predictors, animal, and group ID (except for model VI) were random effects and field season, leave intake and fGCM measures were used as random slopes. Additionally, we included age as a random slope within ID. Fruit intake rates were correlated and collinear to field season (Table S4) and therefore excluded from the model.

More details on the statistical analyses are provided in Additional file 1.

The 519 samples of the 16S rRNA gene-based analysis, contained 22,914,114 high-quality amplicon sequences (44,151 ± 19,080 reads (mean ± SD) per sample, range 11,941–192,639) and 6013 bacterial ASVs. A total of 90% of the ASVs could be taxonomically assigned at the phylum, class, and order level, while only 76%, 8%, and 0.4% of ASVs could be classified at the family, genus, and species level, respectively. Twelve phyla were identified in the samples: Bacteroidota (3179 ASVs), Firmicutes (1462 ASVs), Actinobacteria (159 ASVs), Proteobacteria (151 ASVs), Cyanobacteria (123 ASVs), Spirochaetes (118 ASVs), Synergistota (118 ASVs), Verrucomicrobia (57 ASVs), Fibrobacteres (34 ASVs), Desulfobacterota (25 ASVs), Campylobacterota (3 ASVs), and Armatimonadota (1 ASV). About 60% of all reads belonged to the five most common families: Prevotellaceae (23%), Lachnospiraceae (15%), Rikenellaceae (7%), Bacteroidaceae (6%), and Muribaculaceae (5%) (Fig.
2A).

We also conducted an 18S rRNA gene-based analysis to identify food plants contained in the faecal samples. The 519 samples contained 24,736,841 high-quality amplicon sequences (47,662 ± 32,579 reads (mean ± SD) per sample, range 2–199,773) within 6465 ASVs. Of those ASVs, 562 belonged to Tracheophytes (land plants) and contained 9,975,587 reads. After subsampling, 95 samples were removed due to low read numbers for Tracheophytes (< 1000 reads). The remaining 424 faecal samples of 41 different individuals contained 553 ASVs and 9,938,628 high-quality amplicon sequences. We identified 71 plant families. The five families with the highest numbers of ASVs were Apocynaceae (84), Solanaceae (58), Fabaceae (56), Ebenaceae (34), and Convolvulaceae (32). About 86% of all reads belonged to the five families Salicaceae (40%), Apocynaceae (17%), Fabaceae (14%), Phyllanthaceae (9%), and Convolvulaceae (6%) (Fig.
2B).

Samples from the same individuals were more similar than samples from different individuals of the same group (LMM I; likelihood ratio test comparing full and null/reduced model χ2 = 25.376, df = 1, p < 0.001, R2m/c = 0.14/0.89) (Table S5). Group membership impacted the gut microbiome as samples of group members for each field season were more similar to each other than to samples from individuals living in different groups (Mantel test: early dry 2016: nsamples = 92, nindividuals = 29,
x
¯
same group = 0.171,
x
¯
different group = 0.228, p < 0.001; late dry 2016: nsamples = 116, nindividuals = 29,
x
¯
same group = 0.172,
x
¯
different group = 0.225, p < 0.001; early dry 2017: nsamples = 155, nindividuals = 39,
x
¯
same group = 0.166,
x
¯
different group = 0.228, p < 0.001; late dry 2017: nsamples = 156, nindividuals = 36,
x
¯
same group = 0.155,
x
¯
different group = 0.220, p < 0.001; Table S6). However, visual inspection of Fig.
2A indicated that all groups have very similar gut compositions up to the family level, which is why larger differences between groups must appear at the genus level or beyond.

Indicator species analysis at the ASV level revealed that only 1.33% of all taxa (i.e. 80 ASVs) were uniquely associated with one social group (Table S7). In more detail, groups seemed to differ to a larger degree within taxa of the phyla Bacterioidota (42 ASVs) and Firmicutes (17 ASVs) and their most common families Bacteroidaceae (19 ASVs), Prevotellaceae (11 ASVs), and Lachnospiraceae (12 ASVs). Members of groups F and M differed most strongly in their microbiome compositions compared to the other groups (Fig.
2C).

Habitat dissimilarity and GuniFrac distances between the groups were not correlated (Mantel test: nsamples = 15, ngroups = 6, r = − 0.149, p = 0.553; late dry 2016: nsamples = 15, ngroups = 6, r = 0.008, p = 0.972; early dry 2017: nsamples = 21, ngroups = 7, r = − 0.154, p = 0.561; late dry 2017: nsamples = 21, ngroups = 7, r = 0.064, p = 0.776; Table S8). The model examining the effects of habitat overlap and diet dissimilarities on groups’ GuniFrac distances was also not significant (LMM II: χ2 = 3.264, df = 2, p = 0.196, R2m/c = 0.08/0.98) (Table S9).

The 18S rRNA gene analysis of the land plants found in faecal samples revealed that at least at the lower taxonomic levels, i.e. until the family level, diet did not seem to affect between-group variation in microbiome composition. Despite obvious between-group variation in food plant compositions, groups’ bacterial microbiome compositions did not reflect these differences when visually inspecting the respective graphs (Fig.
2A, B). We found, however, seasonal dietary patterns. During the early dry seasons in both study years, faecal samples contained a large proportion of plants from the families Combretaceae and Salicaceae, whereas during the late dry season Fabaceae and Sapindaceae were consumed in greater amounts (Fig.
2B).

We examined the effects of maternal relatedness coefficients on GuniFrac distances among all individuals, i.e. between both, group members and individuals from different groups. The interaction between the relatedness coefficient and group membership (same or different) was not significant (likelihood ratio test comparing the model with and without the interaction: χ2 = 0.105, df = 1, p = 0.746), which is why we excluded it from the model. The model without the interaction was highly significant (LMM III:χ2 = 122.079, df = 1, p < 0.001, R2m/c = 0.51/0.92) (Table S10). Maternal relatives had a more similar microbiome than unrelated individuals, and this effect was independent of whether these relatives lived in the same group or not (Fig.
3).

The model examining correlations of dyadic GuniFrac dissimilarity with seasonality, sex, age classes, and the time two group members spent affiliating was significant (LMM IV: χ2 = 30.759, df = 10, p < 0.001, R2m/c = 0.70/0.91) (Tables S11). Bacterial microbiomes of group members increased in similarity across the study period; they were least similar in the early and late dry season 2016 and most similar in the late dry season 2017. Samples of adults differed most from each other, whereas samples among juveniles and infants were more similar (Fig.
4A). Neither sex nor time spent affiliating significantly affected microbiome similarity.

Indicator species analysis on ASV level revealed that less than 1% of all taxa (i.e. 49 ASVs) were uniquely associated with one age class (Table S12). These taxa belonged mainly to the phyla Bacterioidota (22 ASVs) and Firmicutes (12 ASVs) and their respective families Bacteroidaceae (10 ASVs) and Lachnospiraceae (7 ASVs) (Fig.
4B). Only juveniles and infants had unique associations with taxa affiliated to the phylum Firmicutes.

The model examining correlations of dyadic GuniFrac dissimilarity with male rank was significant (LMM V: χ2 = 31.827, df = 4, p < 0.001, R2m/c = 0.68/0.92) (Table S13). Dominant males shared the least similar gut microbiota with their group members (Fig.
4C). The number of years two individuals spent together in the same group was not significantly associated with gut community similarity (Table S13).

Female reproductive stage did not appear to affect their community composition. In the indicator species analysis, we found that less than 1% of all taxa, i.e. 22 ASVs (total number of ASVs in adult female samples: 6000), were uniquely associated with one reproductive category (Table S15). Fourteen of these belonged to the phylum Firmicutes (Fig.
4E). Eight ASVs were associated with reproducing females (gestating and lactating) of which five belonged to Bacterioidota (Table S16). Non-reproducing females (not gestating and not lactating) shared 9 ASVs of which five belonged to Bacterioidota (Table S16).

The model examining correlations between PD and seasonality, sex, age, group ID, mean monthly fGCM concentrations, and monthly leave intake rates was significant (LMM VI: χ2 = 99.857, df = 13, p < 0.001, R2m/c = 0.31/0.38) (Table S17). PD decreased continuously throughout the field seasons. Group membership was correlated to PD with members of group F having the highest and members of group M having the lowest diversities (Fig.
2A). Yet, group size had no influence on between-group variation in PD. For example, while the largest group (F, meangroup size = 10) harboured the highest diversity, the second largest group (J, meangroup size = 7) was on the lower end, and the smallest group (F1, meangroup size = 3) ranged in the middle. Sex, age, mean monthly fGCMs, and monthly leave intake rates were not correlated to PD.

The models examining the correlations between PD and affiliation, male rank, and female reproductive state were not significant (affiliation: LMM VII: χ2 = 1.897, df = 1, p = 0.168, R2m/c = 0.10/0.30; male rank: LMM VIII: χ2 = 3.013, df = 2, p = 0.222, R2m/c = 0.22/0.37; female reproductive state: LMM IX: χ2 = 0.861, df = 4, p = 0.930, R2m/c = 0.18/0.35) (Tables S18, S19, and S20).

We examined social, environmental, and intrinsic drivers of between- and within-group variation in the gut microbiome of seven adjacent wild Verreaux’s sifaka groups on multiple scales. Throughout the 2-year-study period, bacterial diversity decreased for the whole study population, whereas microbial similarities between individuals and groups increased. However, none of our environmental predictors explained the causes for this population-wide pattern. As expected, throughout all field seasons group members shared more similar gut microbiota and groups differed in bacterial diversity. Between groups, neither home range overlap nor sharing of more similar habitats or diets explained variation in gut microbiome communities. Maternally related individuals shared more similar gut microbiota, both within and between groups. Interestingly, gut communities appeared to be even more similar in maternal relatives living in different groups than in maternally unrelated group members. Dominant males had significantly different gut microbiota compared to their group mates, independent of their residence time in the group. In contrast, variation in social interactions between group members was not correlated with microbial similarity. On the individual scale, despite groups sharing distinct gut communities, animals still harboured unique gut microbiota. Most variation between individuals occurred among adults and maternally unrelated group members but was independent of sex. Bacterial diversity was not correlated to any other factors but group and season.

Measures of individual physiological states, as the here used fGCMs or female reproductive stages, did not predict variation in inter-individual bacterial diversity or composition, confirming results of previous studies [49, 60, 89]. It has been suggested that, instead of relying on coarse physiological markers, more dynamic physiological measures of hormonal or immunological activity may offer a better understanding of host-microbiome relationships [51, 148, 149]. Future studies using such proximate physiological markers may therefore yield deeper insights.

We contribute to a more comprehensive understanding of the relative importance of environmental, intrinsic, and social factors shaping the social microbiome in wild primates at multiple scales, i.e. between groups, within groups, and among individuals. Our results indicate that environmental factors define the general set-up of population-specific gut microbiota, whereas more minor differences in microhabitat features or diet among local groups do not seem to inflict significant between-group variation. Kinship promotes microbial homogeneity both between and within groups, whereas male dominance rank, which is associated with a unique physiological phenotype in this species, drives inter-individual variation. Other physiological variables linked to stress and reproduction had no effects on gut microbiome similarity. Overall, intrinsic and social factors have a stronger impact on gut microbiome variation in this primate species than environmental factors.



Publisher’s Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

