Mutual Links between the Endocannabinoidome and the Gut Microbiome, with Special Reference to Companion Animals: A Nutritional Viewpoint

Dysbiosis, which is an imbalance of gut microbial composition and function, can be caused by several external as well as internal factors, contributing to the onset of human and animal disorders, not limited to the gastrointestinal tract. Accordingly, the mechanisms leading to disease development involve a crucial interaction between the gut microbiota, their metabolic products, and the host. The expanded endocannabinoid system, also known as the “endocannabinoidome”, includes endocannabinoids (e.g., anandamide) and endocannabinoid-like mediators (e.g., palmitoylethanolamide), their receptors and metabolic enzymes. Dysregulation of this newly recognized endogenous system is also involved in several diseases. It is becoming increasingly apparent that a link between the endocannabinoidome and the gut microbiome exists. Here, we review some of the latest discoveries related to the functional link between these two complex systems and the disorders emerging from the malfunctioning of such a mutual interaction: for example, idiopathic inflammation, chronic enteropathies, metabolic disease and certain neuroinflammatory disorders. It is expected that in the near future new nutritional tools will emerge based on the expanding knowledge in this cutting-edge field.

There is growing evidence that perturbation of the gut microbiome, known as “dysbiosis”, is associated with the pathogenesis of human and veterinary diseases that are not restricted to the gastrointestinal tract. In this regard, recent studies have demonstrated that dysbiosis is linked to the pathogenesis of central neuroinflammatory disorders, supporting the existence of the so-called microbiome-gut-brain axis. The endocannabinoid system is a recently recognized lipid signaling system and termed endocannabinoidome monitoring a variety of body responses. Accumulating evidence demonstrates that a profound link exists between the gut microbiome and the endocannabinoidome, with mutual interactions controlling intestinal homeostasis, energy metabolism and neuroinflammatory responses during physiological conditions. In the present review, we summarize the latest data on the microbiome-endocannabinoidome mutual link in health and disease, focalizing the attention on gut dysbiosis and/or altered endocannabinoidome tone that may distort the bidirectional crosstalk between these two complex systems, thus leading to gastrointestinal and metabolic diseases (e.g., idiopathic inflammation, chronic enteropathies and obesity) as well as neuroinflammatory disorders (e.g., neuropathic pain and depression). We also briefly discuss the novel possible dietary interventions based not only on probiotics and/or prebiotics, but also, and most importantly, on endocannabinoid-like modulators (e.g., palmitoylethanolamide) for intestinal health and beyond.

The gastrointestinal (GI) tract of mammals is inhabited by a complex ecosystem of microorganisms, collectively indicated as the gut microbiota, including bacteria, archaea, fungi, viruses and protozoa, whose collective genome (and ensuing proteome and metabolome) is indicated as the gut microbiome [1,2]. In recent years, research involving high-throughput DNA sequencing and shotgun metagenome, proteomics and metabolomics has experienced a true technological revolution and our knowledge about the gut microbiota as well as its role in animal health and disease has grown exponentially [2,3]. Indeed these molecular technologies have allowed the identification of both human and pet unculturable gut bacteria (by far the most abundant microbiota population), currently estimated to range between 1012 and 1014, outnumbering host cells by several times [4]. Moreover, although feline and canine gut microbiomes remain poorly characterized, the new molecular tools shed some light on phylogenetic and functional similarities between pet and human gut microbiomes [5].

In adult humans, the predominant bacterial phyla of the normal gut flora are Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, Proteobacteria and Actinobacteria, with the first two prevailing in healthy adults [28]; whereas the predominant bacterial genera are anaerobic genera, such as Bacteroides, Eubacterium, Clostridium, Ruminococcus and Faecalibacterium [23]. The core composition of the gut microbiota tends to remain stable in adulthood and change in old age. In fact, in a study carried out on 178 elderly individuals, Claesson and colleagues found a correlation between diet, microbiota composition and health status, indicating a role for diet-driven microbiota alterations in varying rates of health decline upon ageing [29]. The predominant bacterial phyla found in healthy feline and canine gastrointestinal (GI) tract and faecal samples parallel quite well those in humans, with Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes and Proteobacteria being among the co-dominant phyla [5] (Figure 1, top). Bacteroides, Fusobacterium and Prevotella 9 are the dominant genera of canine and feline gut microbiota [30]. The main observed difference is relative to Fusobacteria, which usually inhabits—albeit in low proportions—the canine and feline, but not human, healthy gut [5]. Interestingly, a trend toward age-related changes in microbiota is also observed in dogs [31], with lower acetate levels and decreased total SCFAs in faeces compared to adults [32], as well as lower alpha diversity (i.e., species abundance diversity in a given sample) [33]. In dogs, a significant decline in Fusobacteria with age was also found by some authors [34]. Of note, age-related gut microbiome composition has been related to short-term memory decline, with better memory performance being associated with a lower proportion of Actinobacteria [34]. Finally, although in a different way compared to human beings and dogs, the composition of the feline intestinal microbiota also changes with age [35].

Pathological perturbations of the gut microbial ecosystem balance (the latter known as eubiosis) are defined as dysbiosis [36]. Specifically, dysbiosis can result from the (i) loss of beneficial microorganisms, (ii) excessive growth of potentially harmful organisms, and (iii) reduced overall microbial diversity, with these changes being almost never mutually exclusive [37]. As a result, dysbiosis is able to induce and sustain an inflammatory condition through the predominance of pro-inflammatory microorganisms and the reduction of commensals, promoting immune tolerance mechanisms. The imbalance in the gut microbiota composition has been repeatedly shown to be associated with chronic GI disorders [38,39] and metabolic diseases [40]. In humans, for example, the two main subtypes of human inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), i.e., Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis, are associated with dysbiosis characterized by decreased biodiversity and reduced abundance of several types of bacteria belonging to phyla Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes [41]. This is far from the original hypothesis “one-microbe-one-disease”, while supporting the modern view of an imbalance between the entire gut microbiota and the host as the foundation of several GI (and extra-GI) disorders [37] (Figure 1, right side).

As it will be discussed below, an extensive amount of research is now linking the endocannabinoidome to gut health and microbiome homeostasis was recently reviewed [76]. Dietary interventions with endocannabinoid-like compounds may thus represent a breakthrough in the management of dysbiosis-driven disorders (Figure 1, bottom).

The endocannabinoid (eCB) system is a lipid-derived signaling apparatus composed of: (i) G protein-coupled cannabinoid receptors type 1 and type 2, CB1 and CB2; (ii) two main endogenous ligands of such receptors (the so-called endocannabinoids), derived from arachidonic acid, i.e., N-arachidonoyl-ethanolamine (AEA or anandamide) and 2-arachidonoyl-glycerol (2-AG), the latter being first isolated from the canine gut [77]; and (iii) the anabolic and catabolic enzymes for the endocannabinoids [78]. AEA and 2-AG are biosynthesized “on demand” through the action of lipases that are stimulated by elevation of intracellular calcium or activation of G proteins [79]. Although the aforementioned molecules are the main and historical components of the eCB system, a great number of other members have also been recognized. In fact, besides AEA and 2-AG, other putative endogenous ligands of CB1 and CB2 receptors have been discovered, such as O-arachidonoyl-ethanolamine (virodhamine), 2-arachidonoyl-glyceryl ether (or noladin ether), oleamide and N-arachidonoyl-dopamine [78].

With regard to the GI tract, cannabinoid and cannabinoid-related receptors showed wide distribution in several mammals, including mice, pigs, ferrets, dogs, cats, horses and human beings [85,86,87,88,89,90,91,92,93,94,95,96,97,98]. In canine and feline species, CB1 receptor immunolabeling is mainly observed on enteric neurons, nerve fibers, gastric parietal cells, epithelial cells (including goblet cells and enteroendocrine cells) [90,96,97,98]. On the contrary, immunoreactivity for CB2 is generally scanty in epithelial cells, while preferentially observed in perivascular immune cells, e.g., macrophages, B cells and mast cells [90,96,97,98]. GPR55 localizes in smooth muscle cells as well as in lamina propria macrophages, plasma cells, and mast cells [90]. PPARα immunoreactivity is mainly expressed in enteric glia and enteroglial cells [90,96,97], while there is no evidence of PPARγ expression in the canine and feline GI tract (Table 1). It is worth noting that recent studies revealed changes in the expression of some eCBome receptors, i.e., GPR55, CB1 and CB2, during intestinal inflammation and chronic colitis, thus suggesting that eCBome signaling is involved in gut homeostasis [98,99]. Some main aspects are briefly discussed below.

The eCBome has a key role in food intake and energy metabolism. The identification of OEA and other NAEs in the GI tract of reptiles and changes in the levels of these lipid compounds during fed compared to fasted conditions confirmed that the eCBome may represent an evolutionarily ancient system in the regulation of energy metabolism [101], as had been suggested by the findings of the role in food intake in invertebrate species (see [102] for review) and in fish [103]. According to several lines of evidence, the eCBome is involved in peripheral glucose and lipid metabolism by controlling the metabolic function of the adipose tissue, liver, endocrine pancreas and GI tract [1]. A dysregulation of the eCB system in these tissues promotes obesity and metabolic syndrome [104,105]. Accordingly, specific correlations between different eCBome players and markers of obesity as well as insulin and glucose homeostasis have been described [106]. For example, food deprivation and re-feeding affect peripheral levels of several eCBome ligands not only in reptiles and fish, but also in mammals, and today the eCBome is confirmed to regulate food intake and energy processing [107]. In human volunteers, plasma levels of NAEs and 2-monoacylglycerols (e.g., 2-AG) correlated with body fat mass and visceral adipose tissue [108]. In particular, NAE plasma levels were found to increase with increased fat mass, whereas circulating 2-AG levels increased with increased visceral fat mass [108]. Self-reported dietary intakes of fatty acids also correlated with plasma levels of 2-AG, omega-3-fatty acid-derived NAEs and 2-monoacylglycerol, irrespective of the body fat distribution [108]. Interestingly, it has been found that a 2-day Mediterranean diet intervention enhances plasma levels of NAEs and 2-monoacylglycerols derived from oleic acid and from omega-3-fatty acids [108].

Generally speaking, one may conclude that increased levels of AEA and decreased levels of OEA, PEA and SEA are associated with increased feeding behavior and reduced thermogenesis as well as increased markers of inflammation in adipose tissue and insulin resistance, as recently and extensively reviewed [140,141].

Accumulating evidence suggests the pivotal role exerted by the eCBome in the pathophysiology of GI disorders [142]. In particular, several ligands and receptors of the eCBome are involved in the regulation of GI motility and secretion, intestinal inflammation and mucosal barrier permeability, as recently reviewed elsewhere [142,143,144]. In this paragraph, description will be limited to the involvement of the eCBome in the so-called “leaky gut”, i.e., the impairment of the gut barrier which is associated not only to different enteropathies (including IBD), but also some of the metabolic disorders we have focused on in the above paragraph, e.g., obesity and diabetes mellitus.

Summarizing, AEA—like bacterial lipopolysaccharides and inflammatory cytokines—is considered a “gate opener” with regard to gut barrier function, while PEA exerts a beneficial effect on the permeability barrier and is considered a “gate keeper” [140,159].

Currently, it is becoming clear that the eCBome and gut microbiota mutually affect each other [1,117,140]. Several lines of evidence are recently suggesting that the altered eCBome tone featuring obesity and diabetes is correlated with gut dysbiosis [127]. Likewise, eCBome is increasingly being considered an important link between the gut microbiome and certain neuroinflammatory disorders [160]. A summary overview is given in Figure 2 and the available evidence is summarized below.

Taken together, the findings discussed above suggest the eCBome-gut microbiome axis plays a key role in intestinal and metabolic health [169], with gut microbiome controlling the eCBome tone and vice versa [170].

Currently, only few studies have investigated the possible link(s) between diet-induced perturbations of gut microbiota profile and changes in the eCBome tone. Lacroix and colleagues demonstrated that high fat-high sucrose diet not only lead to glucose intolerance, obesity and hyperinsulinemia in mice, but also altered the gut microbiota profile as well as the intestinal and serum eCBome tone [174]. In particular, they found that during high fat-high sucrose diet low abundance of metabolically beneficial genera correlated with increased ileal levels of AEA and plasma levels of both AEA and 2-AG [174]. Accordingly, ileal mRNA expression of AEA and 2-AG degrading enzymes was decreased, whereas the expression of 2-AG biosynthesizing enzyme was increased [174]. Moreover, decreased mRNA expression for either PPARα or CB2 was found [174]. Correlation analyses suggested that interactions between gut microbiome and eCBome not only exist but could also affect the development of dysbiosis as well as diet-induced metabolic disturbances [174].

In addition, Castonguay-Paradis and colleagues have recently demonstrated that the abundance of some gut microbiota taxa in human subjects is associated with increased plasma levels of NAEs and 2-monoacylglycerols, which, and particularly those derived from omega-3 fatty acids, in turn correlated positively with the dietary intake of the respective fatty acids, irrespective of fat mass [108]. According to the authors, the finding suggests that dietary interventions aimed at properly manipulating the eCBome tone may counteract metabolic disturbances linked to gut dysbiosis [108].

Accumulating evidence is suggestive of the eCBome linking the gut microbiome to central nervous system pathophysiology. One excellent example is pain perception in vitamin D deficient mice [175]. It has recently been found that these animals concurrently present marked dysbiosis, with lower microbial diversity, together with tactile allodynia and neuronal hyperexcitability [175]. Most notably, vitamin D deficient mice also showed changes in the eCBome at both spinal and colon level (e.g., increased AEA levels) [175]. Interestingly, treatment with ultramicronized PEA reversed chronic pain and neuronal excitability normalized spinal eCB changes and increased some specific commensal gut bacteria, in particular A. muciniphila [175], known to exert intestinal protective effects [113,166,167]. More importantly, the results suggested that, at least in part, the analgesic effects of ultramicronized PEA were peripheral in nature and dependent on gut microbiota [175].

The eCBome tone may thus play unexpected roles not only in gut homeostasis and energy metabolism, but also in the CNS consequences of dysbiosis.

An expanding theme is the potential capability of commensal microorganisms to affect eCBome signaling by directly producing NAE-like molecules able to bind the host G-protein–coupled receptors. N-acyl-3-hydroxypalmitoyl-glycine, called Commendamide, is the first of these molecules to be identified [184,185]. N-oleoyl serinol is a further member of microbiota-encoded NAE family. In particular, it is produced by commensal bacteria and acts as GPR119 agonist, sharing a similar structure as well as mechanism with OEA which actually activates GPR119 [186]. N-oleoyl serinol has been found to regulate metabolic hormones and glucose homeostasis as efficiently as OEA [186]. Additionally, it has been discovered that some microbiota-derived molecules may also act through the host TRPV1 (the 2021 Nobel Prize-winning receptor). In particular, a linoleic acid metabolite produced by gut lactic acid bacteria, i.e., 10-oxo-12(Z)-octadecenoic acid also referred to as KetoA, was able to augment energy metabolism through the activation of TRPV1 channels, thus protecting mice from diet-induced obesity and ameliorating obesity-associated metabolic disorders [187]. Finally, gut Clostridia were very recently shown to conjugate some neurotransmitters or neurotransmitter-like molecules, such as dopamine, tyramine and tryptamine, with diet- and human-derived fatty acids to produce long chain fatty acid amides that modulate the activities of host GPCRs, including some eCBome receptors [188].

In summary, the data reviewed in this article clearly point to the existence of an eCBome-gut microbiome axis. The malfunctioning of this axis may be involved in a variety of disorders wherein intestinal dysfunction plays a role, such as obesity, chronic inflammatory enteropathies as well as neuroinflammatory disorders. Mediators of the eCBome and their receptors appear to influence the complex and still largely unexplored communication between the host and its gut microbiome. The design and development of eCBome receptor agonists, antagonists and allosteric modulators as well as anabolic/catabolic enzyme inhibitors may thus represent future therapeutic interventions for gut dysbiosis-driven diseases. Likewise, targeting gut microbiome with dietary interventions (e.g., prebiotics, probiotics) may be of potential use for the prevention and treatment of disorders related to eCBome dysfunction. In this scenario, food for special medical purposes and dietetic complementary feeds (for human and veterinary use, respectively) containing ultramicronized PEA—alone or in combination with probiotics and prebiotics—may be readily available nutritional tools to keep pathological alterations of the eCBome-gut microbiome axis under control. It is expected that in the near future new nutritional tools will emerge based on the expanding knowledge in this cutting-edge field. In particular, balanced diets containing amounts of fatty acid precursors for eCBome mediators with different biological activities (such as PEA and AEA, for example), could be designed, based on the increasingly accepted concept that dietary fatty acids are a strong determinant of plasma and tissue levels of such mediators [108,189]. These options will hopefully represent valuable and safer alternatives to current treatments, such as antibiotics for chronic enteropathies, which not only cause long-term negative alterations of gut microbiota but are also a global concern (i.e., because of the development of antibiotic resistance), both in human and veterinary medicine [190,191,192].

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

