The Influence of Gut Dysbiosis in the Pathogenesis and Management of Ischemic Stroke

Recent research on the gut microbiome has revealed the influence of gut microbiota (GM) on ischemic stroke pathogenesis and treatment outcomes. Alterations in the diversity, abundance, and functions of the gut microbiome, termed gut dysbiosis, results in dysregulated gut–brain signaling, which induces intestinal barrier changes, endotoxemia, systemic inflammation, and infection, affecting post-stroke outcomes. Gut–brain interactions are bidirectional, and the signals from the gut to the brain are mediated by microbially derived metabolites, such as trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO) and short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs); bacterial components, such as lipopolysaccharide (LPS); immune cells, such as T helper cells; and bacterial translocation via hormonal, immune, and neural pathways. Ischemic stroke affects gut microbial composition via neural and hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) pathways, which can contribute to post-stroke outcomes. Experimental and clinical studies have demonstrated that the restoration of the gut microbiome usually improves stroke treatment outcomes by regulating metabolic, immune, and inflammatory responses via the gut–brain axis (GBA). Therefore, restoring healthy microbial ecology in the gut may be a key therapeutic target for the effective management and treatment of ischemic stroke.

Stroke is the second and third leading causative factor for death and disability, respectively [1], and imposes huge socioeconomic and medical problems [2]. Ischemic stroke causes a major burden on society, with an annual rate of 24.9 million cases worldwide [3]. Clinically, stroke is defined as a brain tissue injury caused by a lack of blood supply to a specific region(s), which results in permanent neuronal impairment or death [3,4,5]. Cerebral ischemic stroke, which accounts for 85% of all strokes, is caused by vascular occlusion or stenosis of an artery, whereas haemorrhagic stroke, which accounts for 15% of strokes, is triggered by vascular rupture, resulting in intraparenchymal and/or subarachnoid hemorrhage [1].

Stroke causes gut dysmotility and increases gut-barrier permeability and translocation of the microbes and microbially derived products, such as lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and trimethyl amine-N-oxide (TMAO), into the bloodstream. These changes accelerate systemic inflammation and the worsening of symptoms, often contributing to poor prognosis [29]. Notably, gut dysbiosis exerts chronic inflammatory responses both peripherally and centrally that accelerate stroke pathology [30]. Collectively, gut microbial dysbiosis is considered a major risk factor that correlates positively with poor post-stroke outcomes. In this review, we summarize preclinical and clinical evidence that demonstrates the pathogenic influence of gut dysbiosis in cerebral ischemic stroke. We also explore the potential of the gut microbiota as a novel therapeutic target for ischemic stroke.

The human gastrointestinal (GI) tract constitutes trillions of microorganisms, such as viruses, bacteria, fungi, and protozoa [31,32]. Microbes residing in the GI tract are commonly termed gut microbiota and, combined with their functional characteristics and genetic materials, are termed the gut microbiome [16,33,34]. Gut microbes are known to maintain body homeostasis by regulating digestive, metabolic, immune, and neurological functions [8,35,36] via the highly interconnected complex physiological pathways called the gut–brain axis or GBA [37,38]. Gut microbes maintain the integrity of the intestinal epithelial barrier and stimulate intestinal cell regeneration and production of mucin and other metabolites, including bile acids, ethanol, acetaldehyde, acetate, and other SCFAs [39]. The GI tract is considered a major immune organ, containing the largest pool of immune cells, constituting more than 70% of the entire immune system. The majority of gut bacteria belong to either Bacteroidetes or Firmicutes phyla (about 51% or 48%, respectively), whereas Actinobacteria (including the Bifidobacteria genera), Spirochaetes, Proteobacteria, Cyanobacteria, Leptosphaeria, Fusobacteria, and Verrucomicrobia phyla are found to be at relatively lower abundance [35,40]. In addition, the gut microbiota is a central regulator of T-cell homeostasis and plays a crucial role in the maturation of the immune system [41,42,43]. The pathological alterations in the composition (or diversity) and abundance of gut microbes, leading to altered gut-immune and neuroimmune status, is termed gut dysbiosis or gut microbial dysbiosis [44]. Gut dysbiosis, frequently associated with elevated intestinal-barrier dysfunction and local inflammation [45,46,47], usually contributes to disrupted GBA signaling, which results in pathophysiological consequences [48]. Increased translocation of bacteria and their toxic products into systemic circulation predisposes to a vast array of GI, metabolic, endotoxemia, cardiovascular, and neurological disorders [46,48,49].

Gut microbes produce essential bioactive metabolites that play a crucial role in the maintenance of homeostasis, immune maturation, mucosal integrity, and host energy metabolism [39,50]. Short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), such as butyrate, acetate, and propionate, are the main metabolites found in the colon produced by anaerobic fermentation of dietary fibres and resistant starch [27,51]. These SCFAs serve as an important energy source and also possess immunomodulatory and neuroactive properties [14,50]. The SCFAs regulate host cell physiological functions via a variety of mechanisms, including histone acetylation-related epigenetic alteration, cell proliferation, and G-protein-coupled receptor activation. Additionally, SCFAs maintain glucose metabolism [52,53], inflammation [54], and blood pressure [55], and regulate the maintenance of the blood–brain barrier (BBB) [56] and the physiology of microglia [57]. Reduced abundance of SCFA-producing bacteria is observed in metabolic diseases, as well as cardiovascular and neuropsychiatric disease models, including stroke, hypertension, insulin resistance, obesity, and T2DM [58,59,60]. These intestinal microbes are involved in the production of vitamins B and K, as well as the absorption and metabolization of essential substances, such as bile acids, sterols, and drugs. Gut bacteria are also known to synthesize and/or stimulate a number of neurotransmitters, such as acetylcholine; γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA); serotonin (5-HT); melatonin and its precursor, N-acetyl serotonin; glutamate; dopamine; and noradrenaline [61,62,63], and to modulate activation of the immune system [43,57]. In addition, SCFAs interact with G-protein-coupled receptors on enteroendocrine cells (specialized intestinal cells) and trigger the secretion of gut hormones, such as glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1), cholecystokinin (CCK), and peptide YY (PYY), either indirectly (via systemic circulation) or directly (via the vagus nerve) through the GBA. Gut bacterial metabolites, such as SCFAs, nitrites, TMAO, indoles, and hydrogen sulphide, are found to have profound effects on the cardiovascular and cerebrovascular systems. For example, SCFAs and hydrogen sulphide possess vasorelaxant properties, and the abundances of bacterial species, such as Gram-positive Firmicutes [64], which produce these beneficial compounds, are found to be decreased in hypertensive animal models and human studies compared to healthy counterparts [15,65]. In contrast, higher levels of TMAO, a metabolite that can increase endothelial reactive oxygen species (ROS) production and impair endothelially mediated vasodilation [66], are found to be positively correlated with adverse cardiovascular events, including ischemic stroke [67,68] in patients with atherosclerosis [69], thrombosis due to enhanced platelet hyperactivity [70], and atrial fibrillation [71]. Thus, TMAO is considered a novel predictor of stroke. LPS, a component of the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria, often called an endotoxin, can enter blood circulation when the intestinal-barrier integrity is disrupted by bacterial translocation and gut dysbiosis, leading to systemic inflammation [72,73] (Table 1).

The gut–brain axis (GBA) refers to the bidirectional link between the GI tract and the central nervous system (CNS) [16,79]. Recent studies in the field of neuroscience and neuroimmunology [79,85] have revealed that the functional crosstalk between the gut microbiota and brain through GBA signaling is mediated by complex and multiple pathways. The top-to-bottom pathways from the brain to the gut influence sensory, motor, and secretory modalities of the GI tract [86,87], whereas the bottom-to-top signals from the gut to the brain impact cognitive and neurobehavioral functions [8,88]. The precise pathways involved in the GBA remain to be fully determined. However, recent studies have shown that the GBA includes both neuronal and non-neuronal pathways through which the gut microbiota affect brain functions and vice versa [17,89,90].

In the top-down pathway, the brain influences the gut wall via both direct and indirect pathways. (i) Direct pathways include (a) the extrinsic parasympathetic and sympathetic branches of the autonomic nervous system and (b) the endocrine system (HPA axis signals from brain to gut are altered, particularly in response to a variety of stressful stimuli) [91,92,93]. Furthermore, activation of the afferent fibres activates the HPA axis, which in turn stimulates the brain areas, such as hypothalamic neurons that regulate pituitary secretions and the nucleus tractus solitarii, with its downstream projections [39,94]. (ii) Indirect pathways include (a) the intrinsic branches of the enteric nervous system (a highly developed system of neuronal connections located in the submucosa and myenteric plexus of the gut wall) [56,95] and (b) the immune system—the immune cells of the central nervous system (such as microglia and astrocytes). These neural connections regulate nutrient absorption; metabolism; peristaltic movements; permeability changes; mucus secretion from goblet cells; microbiome composition and abundance; secretion of neurotransmitters or neuropeptides, such as dopamine, serotonin (5-HT), norepinephrine, and epinephrine; stress hormones (release of CRH, ACTH, and cortisol); and resident immune cell activation by secreting various cytokines and chemokines [78].

Bottom-up signals are carried by afferent vagal branches to the brain [96]. Primarily, the vagus nerve (made up of 80% afferent and 20% efferent fibres) serves as a major neural bidirectional communication route between the gut and brain (both directly and indirectly) [97,98]. The hepatic and celiac branches of the vagus nerve are stimulated by microbially derived substances (e.g., LPS, an endotoxin from the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria; nitric oxide; indoles; and bile acids), metabolites (e.g., SCFAs and TMAO), and hormones [99,100] released from enteroendocrine cells of the gut epithelial layer [27,101,102]. These bacterial metabolites, which are secreted into the systemic circulation, travel to the brain and modulate the function of neurons, astrocytes, microglia, and the BBB [57,103,104]. Bottom-up signaling regulates gut-barrier integrity via tight junctions, such as occludin; release of neurotransmitters, such as 5-HT, GABA, and catecholamines; as well as gut hormones, such as CCK, PYY, and GLP-1. It also regulates immune and inflammatory responses by controlling the innate and adaptive immune cell responses.

Altogether, these bidirectional interactions highlight the crucial role of GBA in regulating host health and its involvement in association with the plethora of diseases, ranging from cardiovascular complications to neurologic illnesses [79] and neuropsychiatric disorders [105]. As a result, dysregulated GBA signaling, either due to altered composition of the gut bacteria or metabolites, influences stroke pathogenesis and impairs post-stroke outcomes. Hence, the gut microbiota in the GBA represents an attractive target for the development of novel treatment approaches in the form of special nutritional and other interventions, such as prebiotics, probiotics, faecal microbial transplantation (FMT), and synbiotics [30,79].

The prominent role of gut dysbiosis in stroke can be explained by answering three important questions.

Altogether, these results explain the pathogenic role of gut dysbiosis in the onset, progression, and outcomes of stroke; therefore, potential therapeutic approaches targeting gut dysbiosis can be considered in the treatment and management of stroke.

The key inflammatory and immune cells involved in stroke and gut dysbiosis are:

The pathophysiology of stroke-induced gut dysbiosis includes a series of inflammatory responses induced by the activation of gut immune cells, increased gut permeability with elevated endotoxin levels, and their trafficking pathways to the brain. After stroke, the innate immune response is produced by innate immune cells, such as neutrophils, macrophages, microglia, mast cells, lymphocytes (γδ T-cells), and natural killer T-cells, followed by the activation of the adaptive immune response, which is mainly mediated by T and B lymphocytes [78]. The pathological cascade following stroke begins with the release of damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs), cytokines from the infarct area, and activated microglia combined with elevated levels of proinflammatory cytokines and/or chemokines produced from the gut immune cells. In the presence of proinflammatory microbiota (i.e., increased abundance of pathogenic microbes, such as Bacteroidetes, Proteobacteria, and clostridia), these DAMPs; pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), such as IFN-1; and cytokines trigger innate and adaptive immune responses both in the ischemic brain region and in the periphery through the specialized pattern-recognition receptors (e.g., Toll-like receptors (TLRs)]. These processes in turn trigger the endothelial cells to express adhesion molecules, with the subsequent translocation of a large number of inflammatory and peripheral immune cells, such as macrophages or monocytes, neutrophils, dendritic cells, Th17 cells, Th1 cells, and regulatory T (Treg) cells (cells regulating the secretion of the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10, which suppresses post-ischemic inflammation) from the Peyer patches in the small intestine to the stroke-injured sites [120,121,122] (Figure 1).

During stroke-induced gut dysbiosis, reinforcement of chronic inflammation by the excessive recruitment or infiltration of peripheral immune cells (Th1 cells, Th17 cells, and monocytes from the Peyer’s patches to the infarct region), gut-derived toxic metabolites, and bacterial translocation suppresses the polarization of anti-inflammatory Treg cells [123]. Notably, dendritic cells migrate to mesenteric lymph nodes to drive differentiation of T cells into Treg cells under the influence of pro-inflammatory microbiota [44]. Reduced migration of Treg cells to the lamina propria also promotes γδ T-cell differentiation. Pro-inflammatory Th17, Th1, and γδ T-cells originating from the lamina propria of the small intestine migrate to the meninges, accelerate inflammatory damage, and increase the infarct size [78,124]. Additionally, brain-injury-derived DAMPs and the cytokine storm from activated microglia with increased amounts of IL-6, TNF-α, and IFN-γ stimulate the vagus nerve, which, in return, causes gut dysmotility, dysbiosis, increased permeability, intestinal injury, and sepsis [118].

These toxic changes in the GI tract can lead to the excessive translocation of pathogenic bacteria, bacterial toxins, and toxic metabolites, all of which in turn leak more gut inflammatory and immune cells into circulation and then to the stroke-injured sites. Furthermore, breakdown of the intestinal epithelial barrier and BBB, a decrease in enteric nerves, loss of goblet cells, and thinning of the mucus barrier bolster chronic systemic inflammation [125]. Thus, gut dysbiosis creates a vicious proinflammatory loop, which worsens the post-stroke treatment outcome.

Gut dysbiosis influences stroke pathology or prognosis mainly by affecting the key immunological signaling pathways. The three most important pathways that have serious implications in gut-dysbiosis-associated neurological diseases are:

In both humans and rodent models of ischemic stroke, NF-κB signaling was shown to play a major role in tissue viability and recovery from ischemic insult [136]. In a rat model of hypertension, increased activity of matrix metalloproteinase indicated the hyper activation of NF-κB [137], thus suggesting that inhibition of the NF-κB cascade by anti-inflammatory drugs may be a promising target for the treatment of ischemia-reperfusion injury. Preclinical studies have shown that potential inhibitors of the NF-κB pathway lead to desirable outcomes in rodent models of ischemic stroke, such as reduced infarct size and inflammatory biomarkers [138,139,140].

Several experimental studies in stroke-related animal models have demonstrated a direct association between dysregulated GBA signaling and gut motility, dysbiosis, intestinal permeability, inflammation, and altered immune response [44,100,141]. Multiple reports also showed that disturbance in the gut microbiota (i.e., dysbiosis) promoted the abundance of intestinal T cells that aggravates ischemic lesions [44,78]. Bacteria originating from the small intestine have been found to be a major cause of post-stroke infections in both stroke patients and mouse stroke models [142]. Unlike primary autoimmune diseases of CNS, transient brain ischemia triggers a rapid, local neuroinflammatory reaction and peripheral immune activation [117,143,144].

Acute ischemic stroke in mice was shown to upregulate the protein expression of autophagy markers, such as light-chain 3-II Beclin-1 and autophagy-related gene (Atg) 12, with increased levels of ROS, NADPH oxidase 2/4 (NOX2/4), lipid peroxide malondialdehyde, homocysteine, and free fatty acids (triglyceride and cholesterol), reflecting ischemia-induced neuronal damage [155,156,157,158]. However, the levels of total antioxidant capacity and activity of superoxide dismutase (SOD) and reduced glutathione (GSH) were found to be decreased in brain tissues of the stroke mice [158]. Altogether, these preclinical studies reveal that the gut microbiota can be manipulated in a manner to either improve or worsen post-stroke outcomes. In general, a healthy gut microbiota (eubiosis) stabilizes the gut wall and regulates low-degree inflammation, providing a protective defence against intestinal-barrier dysfunction and infections. However, conditions that produce inflammation and/or dysbiosis in the gut are found to accelerate brain injury and negatively affect the prognosis in stroke models through the GBA.

Recent studies have revealed that changes in gut microbiota ecology are related to many diseases states, including cerebrovascular diseases [159,160]. Although a few clinical investigations have been reported on stroke-induced gut dysbiosis, they unambiguously showed the occurrence or presence of gastrointestinal symptoms following the onset of stroke [2,110]. Furthermore, clinical studies conducted to delineate the crucial link between gut microbiome and stroke have confirmed the significant changes in the diversity and abundance in faecal microbial samples of stroke patients [111].

Taken together, these clinical studies suggest that toxic changes in gut microbial composition and their abundance correlate directly with the magnitude of stroke severity. However, the timing of microbial changes and their impact on the onset of ischemic stroke in patients remain poorly understood.

The complexity of neural, immune, hormonal, and (neuro) endocrine interactions between the GI tract and gut microbiota, cardiovascular system, and the brain presents therapeutic challenges. The results of animal and human clinical studies reveal that gut dysbiosis can be a potential risk factor for onset, severity, and outcome in stroke patients. Thus, new therapeutic strategies seek to restore a healthy gut microbiome for the prevention and treatment of stroke [164,165]. Modulation of gut microbiota towards a healthy state by nutritional interventions using prebiotics, probiotics, synbiotics, and antibiotics, and by FMT from normal donors is likely to help prevent the pathogenesis of stroke [166,167,168] and cognitive and behavioral impairments associated with aging and stroke [169,170].

Clinical studies showed that treatment with broad-spectrum antibiotics reduced the risk of infection in stroke patients [118,171]. However, antibiotic treatment studies on mouse stroke models have produced inconsistent and discrepant results. Oral administration of a non-absorbable antibiotic (polymyxin B at dose of 1 mg dissolved in 0.2 mL of distilled water once daily given via oral gavage for one week) improved gut microbiome and improved stroke outcomes. These beneficial effects are concordant with a reduction in LPS levels and neuroinflammation in the ischemic brain [77]. In contrast, other experimental studies demonstrated that usage of broad-spectrum antibiotics caused significant damage to gut microbiota and worsened stroke outcomes. The results of the Preventative Antibiotics in Stroke Study (PASS) in adult patients with ischemic or haemorrhagic stroke did not support the preventive use of antibiotics (e.g., 2 g of ceftriaxone given intravenously every 24 h for 4 days). Although the rate of infection was reduced, there was no improvement in functional outcome, duration of hospitalization, or reduction in mortality [172]. Thus, the beneficial effects of using antibiotics against post-stroke outcomes need further studies.

Probiotics and prebiotics have been shown to help establish eubiosis in stroke patients. However, the precise mechanisms for their beneficial effects remain largely unknown and are the topic of intense study. Probiotics refer to the living microorganisms that, when ingested by humans or animals, can confer a health benefit [90,173]. Prebiotics refer to non-digestible fibres or antioxidant compounds that are selectively metabolized in the small intestine and promote the growth of symbiotic species [90]. Synbiotics are defined as synergistic mixtures of probiotics and prebiotics that confer benefit to the host by selectively promoting the growth of beneficial microbes [174]. Supplementation with probiotics or prebiotics may improve post-stroke outcomes by reducing gut leakiness and plasma LPS levels [175,176], as these supplements improved lipid and glucose metabolism in overweight people and those with diabetes mellitus [177].

Prebiotics help restore the gut microbiota and negatively correlate with risk of cardiometabolic diseases. Diets rich in fibre and plant polyphenols alter gut microbial ecology to eubiosis [45]. Fibres and polyphenols are converted into biologically active compounds by gut microbes and maintain colon-metabolic homeostasis while they serve as antioxidants to neutralize ROS and reactive nitrogen species (RNS). For instance, plant-derived polyphenols, which are rich in antioxidants, provide ameliorative effects on vascular endothelial cells via reducing oxidation of low-density lipoproteins [186,187]. Emerging evidence shows that high intake of dietary fibre reduces blood pressure in patients with hypertension [188]. A high-fibre diet increases the number of acetic-acid-producing bacteria, which leads to a reduction in blood pressure in hypertensive mice [189]. The latter diet also enhances the abundance of butyrate-producing bacteria, which were associated with reduced gut leakiness, endotoxemia, systemic inflammation, and susceptibility to atherosclerotic lesions in a murine model [190]. A mouse model of stroke (induced by photothrombotic stroke surgery) showed that lower plasma SCFA levels are correlated with worse outcomes, whereas supplementation with SCFAs reduced motor deficits by modulating systemic and brain resident immune cells [191]. Overall, these results clearly show that greater dietary fibre intake inversely correlates with the development and treatment outcome of cardiovascular diseases and stroke [192]. Nonetheless, it should be acknowledged that there is significant methodological heterogeneity across studies describing the impact of probiotics, prebiotics, and synbiotics on stroke. The use of different species, methods of administration, and dosages can lead to different clinical effects, and thus, future studies will be required to standardise methodologies in well-designed large randomised controlled trials.

FMT therapy refers to an administration of stool from healthy donors via enema, nasoenteric, nasogastric, or endoscopic (upper endoscopy, sigmoidoscopy colonoscopy) routes or oral capsules [193,194] that allow establishment of a new gut microbiota community. Studies have reported that the effects of FMT can be variable, depending on the study design, the usage of different donors (i.e., quality control), delivery routes, and the use of different antibiotics. FMT can, however, be used as an adjuvant therapy or in combination with other treatment methods to modulate the gut microbiome toward a healthy eubiosis state. Combined treatment methods are found to promote healthy gut microbiota and also repair gut damage, including intestinal permeability. Moreover, FMT methods are cost-effective [195,196,197]. FMT has evolved as a new potential strategy for restoration of gut microbial dysbiosis, involved in complex pathologies of several clinical conditions, including metabolic syndrome, alcoholic liver disease, autoimmune disorders, and cardiovascular and neurological diseases [195,196,198]. Recent studies in animal models also showed the benefits of FMT in improving post-stroke outcomes [2,199].

Microbial transplantation studies have shown a positive correlation between gut-microbe-dependent TMA/TMAO production atherosclerosis plaque formation and elevated susceptibility for vascular thrombosis [70]. Although the aforementioned studies suggest potential benefits of FMT-mediated reprogramming of the gut microbiota for cerebrovascular disease, the rationale for the clinical application of FMT is mainly based on animal models. Large-scale randomized double-blind controlled clinical trials are still needed to clarify the role of FMT in preventing or treating patients with stroke and other neurological diseases [201].

Several preclinical and clinical studies have clearly stated that natural bioactive compounds, such as legumes, fruits, vegetables, wine, olive oil, and whole grains, consumed as food in diet or as dietary supplements, or other plant-derived compounds, possess cardioprotective effects. Many in vitro studies have suggested that several molecules with distinct chemical structures, such as polyphenolic compounds, peptides, oligosaccharides, vitamins, and n-3 fatty acids, are found to be potent cardioprotective agents [202,203]. Among them, the most efficient bioactive compounds exhibiting significant cardioprotective effects are long-chain omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids, including plant-derived α-linolenic acid, and fish-oil-derived eicosapentaenoic acid and docosahexaenoic acid [204,205,206,207].

Among the fruit-based bioactive compounds, Lycium barbarum fruits (known as Goji berries) contain monoterpenes, flavanols, phenolic acids, and lyceum amides [224]. Lycium amide A provided protective effects against stroke [225]. In vivo studies investigating plant-based bioactive compounds showed that treatment with a dichloromethanic fraction of mango leaves (100 mg/kg twice daily for 30 days) (Ronchi et al.) reduced cardiac hypertrophy and increased the ratio of heart weight to body weight in spontaneously hypertensive rats [226]. Mangiferin in mango and papaya improved neurological score and decreased infarct volume and edema in rats subjected to cerebral I/R injury [227]. Interestingly, both in vitro astrocytic cultures and experimental stroke models, preconditioning with resveratrol, present in grapes, revealed neuroprotective effects [228]. Procyanidin B are the predominant polyphenols found in berries, cereals, legumes, nuts, chocolates, and wines [229]. Specifically, procyanidin B2 in cocoa, grapes, and apples was found to reduce infarct size, brain edema, and neurological deficits after MCAO by preventing BBB damage, attenuating tight junction degradation, and counteracting oxidative stress through the Nrf2 pathway [230]. The antioxidant properties of these natural bioactive polyphenols provides neuroprotection directly or indirectly by potentially improving the gut dysbiosis associated with stroke models. The main compounds, such as polyphenols and flavonoids, restore the commensal microbes and thereby have been shown to improve post-stroke health.

In the present review, we have briefly discussed the association of gut dysbiosis with the pathogenesis and treatment outcome of stroke. Clinical and preclinical studies over the last decade have demonstrated a compelling link between gut dysbiosis and the development of well-known stroke risk factors, such as dyslipidemia; insulin resistance; obesity; hypertension; T2DM; and cardiovascular, cerebrovascular, and neurological disorders. Recent research findings have confirmed a positive correlation between gut dysbiosis and poor post-stroke outcomes. The pathophysiological mechanisms underlying stroke-induced gut dysbiosis include breakdown of the intestinal epithelial barrier, tight and adherent junction proteins, gut dysmotility, altered mucus secretion, loss of goblet cells, alterations of local immune homeostasis, elevated LPS levels, and intestinal inflammation. Consequently, immune-driven systemic inflammation or endotoxemia takes place, and this event leads to elevated inflammation, breakdown of BBB, and neurotoxicity, marked by increased production of ROS, RNS, TMAO, and NOX2/4 and neuroinflammation. The damaging consequences are caused by high levels of LPS, C-reactive protein, TLR4, bacterial toxins, toxic metabolites, abnormally activated immune cells, and pro-inflammatory cytokines in the ischemic brain region. These changes result in larger infarct size, neuronal death, synapse loss, and glial dysfunction, which accounts for poor outcomes. Inflammatory signals from the infarct site further enhance gut dysbiosis, thus resulting in a proinflammatory loop. To break the vicious proinflammatory cycle, the gut microbiome has been considered a promising target in the treatment and prevention of stroke in experimental and clinical studies. Deleterious effects of gut dysbiosis can be prevented by pharmacological and non-pharmacological methods, such as dietary interventions, antibiotics, prebiotics, probiotics, and synbiotics, as well as FMT. Several studies have confirmed that gut microbiome dynamics can be regulated toward a healthy state by restoring the beneficial microbial population and elevated levels of SCFAs (especially butyric acid). In cerebral ischemic stroke, supplementations rich in SCFA-producing bacteria have been shown to significantly reduce intestinal leakage and inflammation; decrease the abundance of pathogenic bacteria (e.g., Bacteroides, Klebsiella, and Haemophilus); and increase the population of beneficial bacteria (e.g., Lactobacillus, Butyricicoccus, and Meganonas), which in turn inhibit the apoptosis of neural cells, oxidative stress, and cerebral infarction volume, leading to prevention of neurobehavioral impairments. Conclusively, FMT with enriched SCFA-producing bacteria and butyric acid supplementation is found to be an effective treatment for cerebral ischemic stroke, although additional large-scale randomized clinical studies are needed in the future to demonstrate the efficacy and safety of FMT in treating patients with stroke or other cardiovascular complications. It will be important to identify conserved and reliable biomarkers of the gut microbiome to help with the design of next-generation microbiome-based therapeutics for the early prevention of neurodegenerative diseases, stroke, and post-stroke neurobehavioral deficits or dementia, as well as the monitoring of disease progression and the efficacy of therapeutic agents. These efforts will be greatly facilitated by longitudinal human clinical trial work, which shuld assess the effects of these microbial drugs on stroke through the gut-microbiota–brain axis.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

