Precision Nutrition and the Microbiome, Part I: Current State of the Science

The gut microbiota is a highly complex community which evolves and adapts to its host over a lifetime. It has been described as a virtual organ owing to the myriad of functions it performs, including the production of bioactive metabolites, regulation of immunity, energy homeostasis and protection against pathogens. These activities are dependent on the quantity and quality of the microbiota alongside its metabolic potential, which are dictated by a number of factors, including diet and host genetics. In this regard, the gut microbiome is malleable and varies significantly from host to host. These two features render the gut microbiome a candidate ‘organ’ for the possibility of precision microbiomics—the use of the gut microbiome as a biomarker to predict responsiveness to specific dietary constituents to generate precision diets and interventions for optimal health. With this in mind, this two-part review investigates the current state of the science in terms of the influence of diet and specific dietary components on the gut microbiota and subsequent consequences for health status, along with opportunities to modulate the microbiota for improved health and the potential of the microbiome as a biomarker to predict responsiveness to dietary components. In particular, in Part I, we examine the development of the microbiota from birth and its role in health. We investigate the consequences of poor-quality diet in relation to infection and inflammation and discuss diet-derived microbial metabolites which negatively impact health. We look at the role of diet in shaping the microbiome and the influence of specific dietary components, namely protein, fat and carbohydrates, on gut microbiota composition.

The human gastrointestinal tract (GIT) is considered one of the most densely populated ecosystems on our planet, purported to harbour ~1013 microorganisms [1] referred to as the gut microbiota, whose activities have significant consequences for the host in terms of health and disease. This is unsurprising given that the entire genetic content of the human gut microbiota, commonly referred to as the gut microbiome, is estimated to exceed human genomic content by a factor of ≥100 [2], with vast genetic potential to contribute to host physiology. It is composed of the three domains of life, Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya (fungi, protozoans and metazoan parasites), as well as eukaryotic and prokaryotic viruses (bacteriophages).

In Part I, we describe the development of the gut microbiota throughout life along with the factors that shape its composition and how it contributes to host health. We look at dietary practices and specific dietary components that influence the composition and functionality of the gut microbiota and the consequences for human health with a focus on infection, inflammation and metabolic disease. In Part II, we focus on the potential use of the microbiome to prevent disease and promote health. We present research regarding opportunities to modulate the microbiota for prevention of over- and under- nutrition through probiotics, prebiotics and fibre and we look at the impact of environment and life-stage on the gut microbiota and health and dietary strategies and interventions for optimising health. Finally, in Part II, we provide evidence from recent research that the gut microbiome has potential to serve as a biomarker of human responsiveness to diet and assess where this current knowledge-base places us in terms of putting precision microbiomics into everyday practice and discuss the value of present-day commercial microbiome testing.

Humans encounter their initial gut microbiota in very early life with most studies focusing on colonisation after birth and the microbial assembly that ensues. Some studies have led to the hypothesis that colonisation begins in utero by providing evidence of a placental microbiome in healthy pregnancies, the presence of microorganisms in the amniotic fluid and meconium. These studies have been presented and critically assessed in a recent review by Perez-Muňoz et al. [13]. The authors concluded that there is insufficient evidence to date to support the ‘in utero colonisation hypothesis’, since the studies lacked appropriate controls for contamination, the molecular approaches used were incapable of studying low-biomass microbial populations and evidence of bacterial viability was not provided. Thus, for the purpose of this review, we have focused on gut microbiota development from birth onwards.

In certain regions of the world, “healthy” ageing is the norm and the average lifespan of residents surpasses general averages. Goatian village in Liuyang city of Hunan province in mid-South China is such an example, which boasts an average lifespan of 92, much higher than the average 74.83 years for China in general, along with a lack of chronic diseases amongst its people. An analysis of the gut microbiota in its long-living elderly residents (ages spanning from 50 to >90 years) revealed much greater species diversity than that observed in the control group (healthy subjects from other areas in China, average age of 50 years) [63]. Similarly, Bian et al. [64] reported that the overall gut microbiota composition of healthy aged Chinese subjects was similar to that of much younger people, reporting little differences between individuals from 30 to >100 years which the authors speculate may be a consequence of the healthy lifestyle and diet of the study subjects.

The gut microbiome is integral to the health of its host, serving a myriad of functions. It provides essential nutrients and bioactive metabolites, which can be produced directly by the microorganisms or indirectly by microbial conversion of host or environmental molecules. It is involved in energy regulation (as discussed in Section 5). It prevents pathogen colonisation directly or indirectly through a phenomenon referred to as colonisation resistance. It sustains the integrity of the mucosal barrier and is an essential component in the orchestration of immune functioning within the gut. The bidirectional interactions within the brain-gut-microbiome axis, in which the gut microbes communicate to the central nervous system, have been demonstrated largely by preclinical and some clinical studies [65]. Alterations in brain-gut-microbiome communication have been implicated in various disease states, from irritable bowel syndrome to psychiatric and neurologic disorders, and this is an area of research that has the potential for identification of novel therapeutic targets and therapies [66]

Fruits, vegetables and cereals are major components of the human diet providing essential carbohydrates and dietary fibres, although digestion of the latter is beyond the scope of the human genome [67]. Cantarel et al. [68] identified only 17 enzymes within the human genome to breakdown carbohydrate nutrients which included starch, lactose and sucrose. Thus, plant cell wall polysaccharides and resistant starch, which constitute most dietary fibres and cannot be digested or absorbed in the small intestine, enter the large intestine and undergo microbial breakdown and subsequent fermentation [67]. The microbiota also feeds on animal-derived dietary carbohydrates (glycosaminoglycans and N-linked glycans from cartilage and tissue), host epithelial glycome, and microbe-derived carbohydrates from resident gut microbes or foodborne microbes [69,70]. Collectively, the carbohydrates consumed by the microbiota have been termed “microbiota accessible carbohydrates” (MACs) [70].

Metabolism of tryptophan in the gut results in tryptophan catabolites which have profound effects on the host [120]. Direct transformation of tryptophan by intestinal microbes results in the formation of several molecules, including ligands for the ligand-activated aryl hydrocarbon receptors (AhRs) [117]. AhRs, which are transcription factors, are expressed by several cells of both the adaptive and innate immune systems [121]. Upon binding of AhR to its ligand molecule, the activated transcription factor translocates into the nucleus of the cell where it mediates cell-specific transcriptome changes [122]. Thus, AhR signalling plays a key role in immune functioning in health and disease. Lamas et al. [123] showed that intestinal inflammation in mice harbouring a microbiota incapable of metabolizing tryptophan was attenuated following treatment with Lactobacillus strains capable of activating AhRs through the production of tryptophan metabolites. In the same study, faecal samples from healthy subjects induced significantly greater AhR activation compared to faecal samples from IBD subjects, the latter of which harbored significantly less tryptophan and tryptophan metabolites. The tryptophan-metabolising strain Peptostreptococcus russellii provided a protective effect against colitis in mice, which the authors suggest is linked to its ability to produce the tryptophan metabolite and AhR ligand, indoleacrylic acid which mitigates inflammatory responses and promotes intestinal barrier function [124]. The authors also noted a diminishment of tryptophan-metabolising capacity in stool samples of IBD patients. The metabolite indole has been shown to enhance epithelial barrier function and attenuate indicators of inflammation [125,126].

The intestinal microbiota protects its host against colonisation by exogenous pathogens and prevents the overgrowth of potentially pathogenic endogenous members, referred to as colonisation resistance [127]. This phenomenon is elicited through competition for nutrients and colonisation sites, direct inhibition of pathogens through the production of antimicrobial substances, and indirectly through modulation of the luminal environment and via host-commensal interactions involving the epithelial barrier function, modulation of the host cell surface and the host immune system [128].

Other antimicrobials generated by the gut microbiota can also aid colonisation resistance. For example, a single bacterial species, namely Clostridium scindens, was shown to confer colonisation resistance against C. difficile infection in vivo [144]. In this instance, secondary bile acids generated by C. scindens from host-derived bile cells were found to inhibit the pathogen.

Commensal interactions with the host promote immune system maturation and immune homeostasis through complex microbiota-host networks although much of our understanding of these mechanisms today have been extrapolated from animal or in vitro studies [145,146,147]. We have already seen how several microbial metabolites play essential roles as signalling molecules for the immune system, such as the SCFAs and tryptophan metabolites. More specifically, a polysaccharide (PSA) produced by Bac. fragilis was shown to promote cellular and physical maturation of the developing immune system in mice [148]. Interestingly, this species is an early colonizer of the infant gut [149] and plays an important role in the development of the infant immune system. A 15 kDa protein produced by F. prausnitzii, a commensal microbe deficient in Crohn’s disease patients, was shown to have anti-inflammatory properties, decreasing activation of the NF-κB pathway and also prevented colitis in an animal model [150]. M-cells are specific phagocytic epithelial cells which sample particulate antigens [151]. Rios et al. [151] showed that efficient induction of IgA is brought about by M-cell sampling of commensal microbes. Paneth cells (a specialized intestinal epithelial lineage) sense enteric bacteria through activation of the MyD88-dependent toll-like receptor which results in the induction of several antimicrobial factors that are essential for controlling bacterial translocation across the intestinal barrier [152]. Colonisation by segmented filamentous bacteria was shown to induce the maturation of T-cell responses in a gnotobiotic mouse model, suggesting these microbes could play a role in the postnatal maturation of the gut immune system [153]. These studies provide a snapshot of how commensals modulate host immunity. The importance of the microbiota for host immunity can also be appreciated from the consequences of its absence in germ free animals. Indeed, germ free animals exhibit reduced expression of IgA and antimicrobial peptides and are deficient in Peyers’ patches [128,151,154,155].

Goblet cells are specialised epithelial cells that secrete mucus, composed primarily of O-glycosylated proteins called mucins, resulting in the formation of a mucus layer whose composition and density is influenced by the commensal microbiota [128,156,157]. The mucus layer creates a protective barrier for the epithelial cells making it difficult for pathogens to gain access to epithelial cell receptors [127]. Germ free mice have been shown to have an extremely thin colonic mucus layer which can be restored to levels observed in conventional mice following exposure to bacterial products, including peptidoglycan and lipopolysaccharide [158]. Mice treated with the antibiotic metronidazole were shown to have a thinning of the mucus layer which correlated with an increased attachment of the mouse pathogen Citrobacter rodentium [159]. Certain commensals have been shown to modulate mucin gene expression and glycosylation patterns [160,161,162]. This may be achieved through the activity of SCFAs which have been shown to increase expression of mucin-associated genes [163]. Furthermore, the SCFA butyrate provides energy for the epithelial cells and has also been implicated in enhancing the intestinal barrier by up-regulating the tight junction protein, Claudin-1 [87].

Dysbiosis is a term used to describe imbalances in gut microbiota communities and is linked with disease when these imbalances negatively impact microbiota functions required for health or when they promote disease occurrence [164]. For a number of these diseases, the dysbiotic state is manifested as a reduction in microbial diversity and often an increase in facultative anaerobes relative to the ‘healthy’ gut microbiota [164], such as IBD [165,166,167], cancer [168], liver disease [169,170] and recurrent C. difficile infection (CDI) [171]. Such diseases tend to primarily inflict those living a Westernised lifestyle and consuming a Western diet which is characterised by low fruit and vegetable intake and high consumption of animal-derived protein (meat and processed meat), saturated fats, refined grains, sugar, salt, alcohol and corn-derived fructose [172,173,174,175] (Figure 1). Whether these changes in microbial diversity are the cause or consequence of these diseases is as yet unconfirmed, although having reviewed a number of studies, Mosca et al. [176] suggest the argument for a causal effect is strong in the case of several human conditions, a stance we concur with in terms of inflammation and infection based on the body of research presented here.

The Winning the War on Antibiotic Resistance (WARRIOR) project which is being undertaken by researchers from the University of Wisconsin aims to investigate the relationship between dietary fibre intake, the gut microbiota and colonisation by multi-drug resistant microorganisms using 600 randomly selected Wisconsin residents over the age of 18 of which the main results will be published in a peer-reviewed journal [215]. The results of this study should help us to further delineate the role of diet and the microbiota in protecting against pathogen invasion.

Metabolic disease refers to any disease in which the normal metabolic processes in the body are disrupted and examples include obesity, type 2 diabetes and metabolic syndrome, all of which are risk factors for cardiovascular disease. Obesity and overweight are described as abnormal or excessive fat accumulation that negatively impacts health [216] and according to the WHO, obesity has tripled since 1975. Indeed, in 2016, 39% of adults aged 18 years and over were described as overweight and 13% as obese [216]. A recent study found that body mass index (BMI) had a J-shaped association with overall mortality among 3.6 million adults in the UK [217]. Obesity results from ingestion of excess energy which does not get expended and is a strong risk factor for type 2 diabetes, the latter of which is characterised by high blood sugar levels, insulin resistance and relative lack of insulin [218]. In 2014, the WHO [219] estimated that 422 million adults had diabetes, of which the majority were inflicted with type 2 diabetes. Diabetic dyslipidaemia which describes high levels of triglycerides in blood plasma, increased levels of small, dense, low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol and decreased levels of high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol is associated with insulin resistance and is a risk factor for cardiovascular disease in diabetic individuals [218,220]. Metabolic syndrome describes the abnormal metabolism of glucose and lipids and is characterised by abdominal obesity along with two or more of the following factors: reduced HDL cholesterol, elevated triglycerides, high blood pressure and increased fasting blood glucose [218]. Metabolic syndrome is also a risk factor for type 2 diabetes along with cardiovascular disease [221].

As we have seen from these studies, metabolomics alongside metagenomics is a powerful tool towards identifying diet-derived microbial metabolites involved in human disease. These metabolites not only serve as biomarkers of disease occurrence and disease risk but may provide new routes towards disease management through modulation of the intestinal microbiota.

The Mediterranean diet is characterised by high intake of non-refined grains, legumes, and a large diversity of fresh vegetables and fruits daily; yogurt and milk are consumed only a few times per week; there is reduced intake of fish and seafood, eggs, white meat and high fat dairy products (a few times per week); red meat is consumed only a few times per month; alcohol intake is also minimised; dietary lipids are mainly derived from olive oil [277]. Epidemiological studies and randomized clinical trials have shown that consumption of a Mediterranean diet bestows protective effects against several diseases, including obesity, diabetes, hypertension, cardiovascular disease, stroke, numerous cancers, allergic diseases, as well as Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s disease (recently reviewed by Tosti et al. [278]). Based on evidence to date, Tosti et al. [278] concluded that the health benefits of the Mediterranean diet are due to its lipid-lowering effects, protection provided against inflammation, oxidative stress and platelet aggregation, modulation of growth factors and hormones involved in cancer pathogenesis, inhibition of nutrient sensing pathways by specific amino acid restriction and gut microbiota metabolites which influence host metabolic health. Indeed, the accumulating evidence suggests that the Mediterranean diet modulates gut microbiota composition and functionality resulting in microbiome and metabolome which differs from that of the Western diet and reduces risk of disease. For example, consumption of the Mediterranean diet for one year by obese men (n = 20) significantly decreased the genera Prevotella and increased Roseburia and Oscillospira [279]. Roseburia is a known butyrate-producer with immune maintenance and anti-inflammatory properties [280] and Oscillospira is positively associated with leanness and health [281]. Long-term consumption of the diet also increased the abundance of Parabacteroides distasonis [279], a strain recently shown to block colon tumor formation in high fat diet-fed azoxymethane-treated mice [282]. Faecal metabolite changes linked to amino acid, peptide and sphingolipid metabolism were reported on the Mediterranean diet and an improvement in insulin sensitivity was noted [279]. The same group investigated the effect of chronic consumption of the Mediterranean diet for 2 years in obese patients with severe metabolic disease (n = 33), obese patients without metabolic dysfunction (n = 32) and non-obese subjects (n = 41) [283]. Obese patients with severe metabolic disease showed a marked dysbiosis in their gut microbiota which was reversed following consumption of the Mediterranean diet; furthermore, there was a significant reduction in plasma triglyceride levels and a trend for glucose depletion in the same group. In this case, consumption of the Mediterranean diet for two years increased the abundance of Bacteroides and Prevotella which make up the Bacteriodetes phylum, which has previously been reported to be reduced in obese people [228]. In addition, genera with saccharolytic activity, including Faecalibacterium, Roseburia and Ruminococcus were also increased. Interestingly, such changes were not observed for non-obese individuals or obese individuals without metabolic syndrome. De Filippis et al. [284] reported that adherence to the Mediterranean diet in a cohort of Italian individuals (n = 153) was associated with increased levels of faecal SCFAs which correlated with enrichment of members of Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes. In contrast, low adherence to the diet (particularly observed in omnivores) was associated with increased levels of urinary TMAO which correlated with L-Ruminococcus (Ruminococcus genus assigned to Lachnospiraceae family). Interestingly, the mucin-degrading bacterium Ruminococcus torques has been shown to be increased in transgenic mice representative of Crohn’s disease and receiving a high fat/high sugar Western diet [285]. These mice had decreased mucus layer thickness and increased intestinal permeability. Higher adherence to the Mediterranean diet in a Spanish cohort (n = 74) was also associated with higher levels of Clostridium cluster XVIa and F. prausnitzii [286]. Clostridium cluster XVIa contains the Blautia coccoides group which are known butyrate producers [287], are involved in secondary bile acid production [288], as well as in the formation of T-regulatory cells [289]. F. prausnitzii is now recognised as one of the most abundant butyrate producers in the human gut microbiota and has anti-inflammatory properties [194]. Interestingly, Mitsou et al. [290] reported that fast food consumption in an adult population resulted in a microbiota with suppressed representation of Lactobacillus and butyrate-producing bacteria while adherence to the Mediterranean diet led to lower faecal E. coli counts, a higher Bifidobacterium: E. coli ratio and greater molar ratio of acetate (n = 120). The study also reported increased levels and prevalence of Candida albicans due to the Mediterranean diet which the authors suggest could be linked to the ingestion of foodstuffs that are carriers of yeast. Overall, the studies presented here strongly indicate that increased SCFA production as a result of gut microbiota modulation on the Mediterranean diet plays a key role in its beneficial health effects.

Another “trendy” diet type that shapes the microbiome is the gluten-free diet. De Palma et al. [291] showed that a 30-day gluten-free diet decreased populations of Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus while increasing unhealthy bacteria, such as E. coli and Enterobacetriaceae that could further increase the risk of infection by opportunistic bacteria. Others, such as Bonder et al. [292] found reductions in R. bromii and Roseburia faecis coupled to increased Victivallaceae and Clostridiaceae in individuals consuming a gluten-free diet. Whilst a gluten-free diet is an effective therapy for treating patients diagnosed with celiac disease it is often associated with a number of health issues and nutritional deficiencies. Interestingly, over the last 5–10 years, there has been an increasing number of healthy, non-celiac individuals following gluten-free diets and do so under the impression that such a diet is healthier for them when paradoxically it may be increasing their risk of the similar health issues and nutrient deficiencies as those commonly seen in those with celiac disease.

Protein, carbohydrate and fat are macronutrients required in large amounts to maintain bodily functions and to provide energy for the body. FAO/WHO recommends that daily dietary fat should not exceed 30% of total energy intake, protein should account for 10–15%, and carbohydrate should account for the remainder (between 55–75%). Dietary fibre intake is recommended at 25 g/day for women and 38 g per day for men [293]. However, the proportions of these macronutrients in the typical Western diet are skewed towards high-energy and low nutrient-dense foods containing large amounts of saturated fat and sugar, and fibre intake has been reported to be as low as 15 g/day in 90% of the population in developed countries [294]. Furthermore, each of these macronutrients contains different types and studies have shown that these differences along with quantity consumed can dramatically influence gut microbiota composition and functionality.

Dietary fat is composed mainly of triglycerides where each triglyceride molecule contains a glycerol backbone with three fatty acids attached [295]. Some dietary fats reach the colon after escaping absorption in the small intestine. Indeed, we have already seen that an animal-based diet high in fat and protein alters the gut microbiota resulting in an increase in the abundance of bile-tolerant microorganisms, such as Bilophila, Alistipes and Bacteroides [178] and long-term consumption selects for a Bacteroides enterotype [33]. Recently, Agans et al. [296] directly investigated if typically consumed dietary fatty acids alone could sustain the growth of the human gut microbiota using an in vitro multi-vessel simulator system of the human small intestine. Switching from a balanced Western diet type medium to one lacking carbohydrates and proteins resulted in substantial changes to the microbiota and metabolites produced. Several specific genera increased in abundance, including Alistipes, Bilophila and several genera within the class Gammaproteobacteria. Increased abundance of Alistipes has been correlated with a greater frequency of pain in paediatric patients with irritable bowel syndrome [297], has been found in patients with major depressive disorder [298] and has been associated with type 2 diabetes [236]. We have already seen that Bil. wadsworthia was increased in humans consuming the animal-based diet [178] and is associated with inflammation owing to its hydrogen sulfide-producing capabilities [187]. E. coli is a member of Gammaproteobacteria which also harbours many pathogenic members, including Salmonella, Yersinia, Vibrio, and Pseudomonas [299]. The abundances of well known glycan and protein degraders, including Bacteroides, Clostridium and Roseburia decreased in the fats-only medium and there was also a decrease in the production of antioxidants and SCFAs, a concomitant decrease in the abundance of glycan-degradation genes, and an increase in the abundance of genes coding for fatty acid degradation enzymes and anaerobic respiratory reductases [296]. Overall, the results show that the gut microbiota is capable of utilising dietary fats typical of the Western diet but the resulting changes may negatively impact human health. In mice, Murphy et al. [300] showed that high fat feeding of mice was more influential for altering gut microbiota composition than genetically induced obesity, generating a progressive increase in Firmicutes which reached statistical significance. In another study, high fat feeding of mice was shown to decrease the proportion of Ruminococcaceae, which are known to utilise plant polysaccharides, and to increase the proportion of Rikenellaceae [301], of which the genus Alistipes is a member. The results also suggested that high fat feeding altered overall cellular composition within the abundant bacterial groups, namely, Bacteroidales and Lachnospiraceae based on cecal chemical fingerprints analysis. Metaproteome analysis revealed a decrease in proteins involved in carbohydrate metabolism and a shift towards amino acid and simple sugar metabolism. This is in agreement with Yatsunenko et al. [24] who reported that metagenomes associated with the Western diet are enriched in amino acid and simple sugar degrading enzymes relative to African populations consuming diets rich in complex carbohydrates. More recently, Vaughn et al. [302] reported that a high fat diet fed to Sprague-Dawley rats increased the Firmicutes: Bacteriodetes ratio and increased proliferation of pro-inflammatory Proteobacteria which were found to be toxic to vagal afferent neurons in culture. Overall, the results suggest that high fat-diet-induced shifts in gut microbiota could disrupt vagal gut-brain communication ultimately leading to increased accumulation of body fat.

The ketogenic diet, defined as a high fat and low carbohydrate diet, has been effectively used as a therapeutic treatment for a number of neurological disorders, including epilepsy, Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, depression, autism, traumatic brain injury and depression, as examples [330]. Recently, researchers have revealed that the protective effects of the ketogenic diet could be mediated via the gut microbiota based on studies in mice [331,332]. The ketogenic diet administered by Ma et al. [331] consisted of 75.1% fat composed of SFAs, MUFAs and PUFAs. Following 16 weeks on the diet, mice revealed several neurovascular enhancements with potential to reduce the risk of Alzheimer’s disease which could be associated with the observed gut microbiota changes which included an increase in beneficial bacteria, including Akkermansia muciniphila and Lactobacillus and a reduction in pro-inflammatory microbes Desulfovibrio and Turicibacter. The gut microbiota changes observed by Olson et al. [332] in mice receiving the ketogenic diet were found to be required for the protective effects of the diet against acute electrically induced seizures and spontaneous tonic-clonic seizures. In this case, Akkermansia and Parabacteriodes were significantly increased and enrichment of, and gnotobiotic colonisation with these microorganisms were capable of restoring seizure protection in germ-free mice or mice treated with antibiotics. Additionally, in a mouse model of glioma, mice fed the ketogenic diet had slightly increased survival compared to mice fed the control diet and showed significant differences in several key microorganisms [333]. The ketogenic diet generally includes fats of all chain lengths [334] thus increases in blood ketone levels could be responsible for the observed gut microbiota changes [331].

It has been estimated that up to 25 g of protein, peptides and free amino acids enter the colon on a daily basis [335,336,337]. Colonic microbial digestion of these materials generates a range of end products, including SCFAs, indoles, amines, phenols, thiols, hydrogen sulfide, CO2 and H2, some of which are essential for health maintenance and some of which are detrimental [337]. Studies investigating the direct impact of protein on gut microbiota composition and functionality have shown that protein quantity, quality, processing history (which impacts on protein digestion, presentation and overall function) and source must be taken into consideration. For example, a high protein diet (45% protein, 30% carbohydrate) fed to Wistar rats had detrimental effects on the colonic microbiota compared to a normal protein diet (20% protein, 56% carbohydrate) [338]. Streptococcus, E. coli/Shigella, and Enterococcus increased by 5.36 fold, 54.9-fold, and 31.3 fold, respectively, on the high protein diet, whose abundances correlated positively with genes and metabolites associated with disease pathogenesis, including the metabolite cadaverine, which is derived from decarboxylation of lysine and in high amounts has been shown to induce oxidative stress and DNA damage [339]. Sulfate-reducing bacteria increased by 2.59 fold which correlated with increased sulfide. There was also an increase in spermine which has been shown to be extremely toxic in rats [340]. The following bacteria, which are generally regarded as being beneficial, decreased in abundance on the high protein diet, including the butyrate producer F. prausnitzii (by 3.5 fold), Ruminococcus (by 8.04 fold) which contains butyrate producers, and the mucin degrader Akkermansia (not detected in high protein diet group). A. muciniphila is considered to be a health promoting bacterium [341,342,343,344,345,346]. On the high protein diet, butyrate decreased by 2.16 fold. This diet was also associated with a decrease in genes involved in innate immunity, O-linked glycosylation of mucin, and oxidative phosphorylation.

Interestingly in humans, a three-week isocaloric supplementation with casein, soy protein or maltodextrin, which served as control, had no impact on the gut microbiota but altered bacterial metabolite production [361]. Compared to maltodextrin, both soy protein and casein caused a decrease in faecal butyrate which the authors suggest may be due to the combination of an increase in protein intake and a decrease in indigestible carbohydrate intake. Amino acid metabolites increased on the high protein diet owing to protein degradation by the gut microbiota. These metabolites included the faecal concentration of 2-methylbutyrate and the urinary concentration of the host-microbiota co-metabolites phenylacetylglutamine and indoxyl sulfate. Casein specifically increased p-cresol sulfate. Transcriptome analysis of rectal biopsies revealed changes in gene expression associated with mucosal homeostasis maintenance on the two protein diets, albeit the transcriptome profiles differed between the two, which the authors suggest is due to exposure to different bacterial metabolites resulting from the different proteins. However, mucosal inflammation was not induced on these diets and faecal water cytotoxicity was not altered either. The authors suggest that high protein diets should be considered with some caution given the changes observed in gene expression in the rectal mucosa and that protein source must also be taken into account. More recently, a low protein diet (0.6 g/kg/day) for six months was reported to reduce serum uremic toxin levels, including p-cresol sulfate, in non-dialysis, chronic kidney disease patients [362]. DGGE indicated a change in the intestinal microbiota profile. The low protein diet was also associated with an improvement in renal function and a reduction in total and LDL cholesterol. A position paper by the MyNewGut Study group analysed PubMed-referenced publications involving human intervention studies to clarify beneficial versus deleterious effects of high protein diets on metabolic and gut related health parameters, including interactions with the gut microbiota [363]. The study concluded that high protein diets are generally associated with decreased body weight and improvement in blood metabolic parameters but they also modify various bacterial metabolites and co-metabolites in faecal and urinary contents. The effects on the gut microbiota were heterogeneous depending on the type of dietary intervention. The effects of high protein diets on the gut microbiota were dependent on protein source (plant versus animal) and this should be considered for future investigations and some caution should be exercised around high protein diets, particularly as long-term or recurrent dietary practices. Note: Processing of protein, including thermal processing, and its impact on protein function, including modulation of the microbiome is not fully understood and requires further investigation.

The quantity of dietary carbohydrates entering the colon each day has been estimated at approximately 40 g [364]. We have already seen that a carbohydrate-rich diet (fibre and plant-derived polysaccharides) results in a microbiota which is dominated by the Prevotella enterotype [33] and is enriched in polysaccharide degrading members with increased SCFA production [180,365,366,367,368,369]. However, dietary carbohydrates which enter the colon can be categorised as resistant starch, non-starch polysaccharides, oligosaccharides, as well as some di- and monosaccharides [370], and as with the other macronutrients, amount and type of carbohydrate has an impact on the gut microbiota. Resistant starch is an important non-digestible carbohydrate, of which there are four types, (RS1 to RS4) [371,372]. A diet high in type 3 resistant starch for 10 weeks was found to stimulate the growth of Firmicutes bacteria related to R. bromii and Eub. rectales in human volunteers [181], both of which possess amylolytic activity [373,374], and Eub. rectales members are major butyrate producers [375]. Bifidobacterium spp. were found to increase dramatically in one volunteer in response to the resistant starch used in this diet. In contrast, non-starch polysaccharides (wheat bran) presented little evidence of changes to the faecal microbiota, which the authors state may be attributable to the smaller increase achieved for non-starch polysaccharides (1.5 fold) compared to a 4.8 fold increase in resistant starch [181]. Interestingly, of the 14 volunteers, >60% of the resistant starch remained undigested in two compared to <4% in the remaining 12 volunteers highlighting the significance of the initial microbiota composition. Martínez et al. [376] revealed that resistant starch types 3 and 4 differentially affected the microbiota in human volunteers following consumption of each for three weeks in a double-blind cross-over study. In this case, resistant starch type 4 induced changes at the phylum level resulting in a decrease in Firmicutes and an increase in Actinobacteria and Bacteroidetes. At the species level, resistant starch type 4 increased Bif. adolescentis and Para. distasonis. In three subjects, resistant starch type 4 induced a 10-fold increase in bifidobacteria. Resistant starch type 2 significantly increased R. bromii and Eub. rectales compared to resistant starch type 4. Importantly, the responses to the resistant starches and their magnitudes varied between individuals but were reversible and tightly associated with resistant starch consumption. This interindividual variation was also reported by Venkataraman et al. [377]. In this case, resistant starch type 2 increased faecal butyrate in a cohort of 20 young healthy individuals but responses varied widely such that individuals could be categorised into three groups based on butyrate levels before and during resistant starch consumption: enhanced, high, and low. In the enhanced group, faecal butyrate increased by an average of 67% which coincided with a dramatic increase in the relative abundance of resistant starch-degrading organisms, including Bif. adolescentis or R. bromii in most individuals (increasing from 2% to 9%) and Eub. rectales in almost half of these individuals. In the high group, levels of butyrate remained the same before and during resistant starch consumption. In this group, resistant starch-degrading microorganisms increased in abundance, suggesting the resistant starch was degraded, but there was no concomitant increase in butyrate levels which the authors suggest may be due to these individuals experiencing a plateau effect owing to the fact that they are performing well in terms of butyrate production. In the low group, butyrate levels were low before resistant starch consumption began and did not improve during the trial. The resistant starch degrading bacteria in the low group did not increase from an initial abundance of ~1.5% suggesting their microbiota did not degrade the resistant starch which the authors state may be due to the presence of antagonistic microbes or lack of synergistic microbes. More recently, Vital et al. [378] reported that distinct parts of the microbiota work together to degrade resistant starch (type 2 in this study) and successively form health-promoting end products. In this case, resistant starch degradation was governed by Firmicutes whereby R. bromii degradation of the resistant starch provided fermentation substrates and increased acetate concentrations to support the growth of major butyrate producers. H2-scavenging sulphite reducers and acetogens also increased. Again, the individual responses varied with the observed pattern reported for seven of the twelve participants, while four showed mixed responses and one individual remained unresponsive.

Few studies have investigated the impact of high sugar containing diets on the microbiota. However, recently, Sen et al. [381] investigated the impact of high fat/high sugar (sucrose), low fat/high sugar and low fat/low sugar diets on Sprague-Dawley rats. As expected, both the high fat/high sugar and low fat/high sugar diets for four weeks caused significant increases in body weight and body fat compared to the low fat/low sugar diet. The high sugar and high fat diets resulted in gut microbiota dysbiosis which was characterised by an overall decrease in microbial diversity, a bloom in clostridia and bacilli and a marked decrease in Lactobacillus species. There was also an increase in the Firmicutes: Bacteriodetes ratio. Specifically, the low fat/high sugar diet caused an increase in two Proteobacteria members, namely Sutterella and Bilophila. The high sugar diet also induced gut inflammation and triggered a remodelling of the gut brain axis [381]. In mice, a high sugar (sucrose) diet increased Clostridiales belonging to the Firmicutes phylum which was also observed for the high fat diet [382]. The high sugar diet also caused a decrease in the order Bacteroidales which belongs to Bacteroidetes. Lactobacillales was also significantly increased on the high sugar diet. Thus, overall the high sugar diet altered more bacterial orders and genera than the high fat diet. The increase in Clostridiales and decrease in Bacteroidales on the high sugar diet was related to poor cognitive flexibility. Di Luccia et al. [383] reported that a high fructose diet induced markers of metabolic syndrome, inflammation and oxidative stress in rats, but these were significantly reduced when the animals were treated with antibiotics or faecal samples from control rats fed a standard diet. Since the number of members from the genera Coprococcus and Ruminococcus were increased by the high fructose diet but reduced by antibiotics and faecal transplant, the results suggest a correlation between their abundance and metabolic syndrome.

The link between nutrition, the gut microbiota and health has been expounded in the multitude of studies published in recent years. Long-term dietary habits appear to have the most profound influence on the quality of the gut microbiota and hence its efficacy to the human body. In this regard, healthy eating patterns with adequate fruits and vegetables, ensuring a rich source of dietary fibre, along with healthy fats (MUFAs and PUFAs) and a trend towards more plant-derived proteins should help promote gut microbiota diversity and functionality enabling it to effectively serve its host. But as countries become more industrialised and range of choice expands, including foods available for consumption, consumers tend to eat for taste-satisfaction and/or convenience at the cost of nutritional value in many instances. Furthermore, not everyone responds effectively to dietary interventions aimed at improving health. The consequence of this has been an alarming surge in non-communicable diseases, including cancer and metabolic-related diseases. Understanding the specific role of the gut microbiota in the diet-health sequence has enabled scientists and nutritionists to further comprehend how diet specifically impacts health at the individual level and why dietary interventions do not always serve everyone equally. Thus, modification of the gut microbiota through diet, probiotics and prebiotics may offer viable opportunities for preventing many of these ‘Western-associated’ diseases, particularly in the case of metabolic-related diseases for which microbiota quality and quantity can be an essential aspect. Indeed, Part II of this review looks at the efficacy of such interventions in terms of over/under nutrition. We also explore opportunities for optimising health at different life stages (elderly in nursing homes, during pregnancy, physically active individuals and those in high stress environments) through improved diet and interventions. In this regard, microbiome testing at the individual level has a significant role to play in interpreting how an individual responds to dietary components and what interventions should be undertaken to improve those responses for a healthier outcome, thus underpinning the very goal of precision nutrition. In Part II of this review, we also look at specific examples of how the microbiota is already being used as a biomarker to predict responsiveness to specific dietary constituents and highlight further research which is necessary to make precision nutrition through the microbiome a reality.

